closing argument mr. geraghty: good morning, ladies and gentlemen. we have been together now for two weeks. so i probably do not need to introduce myself, but you know that i'm bill geraghty and along with hassia diolombi, we represent philip morris usa in this case. and i think it goes without saying it is been a long trial. right? i think we are all happy that we are getting close to the end. and i want to start my closing with what i said to you two weeks ago. and, that is, we want to thank you for your jury service. we understand it is a tremendous sacrifice for you-all to have spent the last two weeks or so with us, and we really appreciate it. and the judge made the comment, but there is no question we all know you have been very attentive. you have been extremely patient with all the questioning, even when it went beyond 5:00 at night. and, frankly, ladies and gentlemen, you asked some of the more insightful questions of the witnesses. so no question you were paying a lot of attention. we appreciate that all very much. so let me just say thank you at the very start. we are getting very close to the end of the case. and pretty soon, you are going to go off and retire to deliberate. and the judge is going to give you a verdict form and a set of instructions that will give you the issues that you will be asked to decide in this case. but before you head off to deliberate, this is my last opportunity to summarize the evidence that we have seen and heard over the last two weeks. and when i spoke to you two weeks ago, i told you the plaintiff would spend a lot of time talking about statements and ideas expressed by philip morris, many of which were made 30, 40, and in some instances more than 50 years ago. and we told you two weeks ago we would not try to defend all of those statements. philip morris made statements and had ideas that today no one would say or think. but i also told you that if that is all this case were about, if all this case were about was whether cigarette company executives made inappropriate statements, we would not have spent the last two weeks here together. but we did. and we did, ladies and gentlemen, because this case is not about all cigarette smokers. this case is not about whether we think people should or should not smoke cigarettes. this case is about lamar danielson. it is about his life and the decisions that he made. and that is why, when you ultimately get the verdict form from judge jones, you will see that every single question on that verdict form asks you specifically about lamar danielson. not about all cigarette smokers and not the general public. now, mrs. danielson brought three expert witnesses: dr. hurt, dr. cummings, and dr. burns. each of whom has been testifying against philip morris, you now know, for decades. dr. cummings told you he is made over $1 million, and dr. burns told you he is made $3 1/2 million testifying in cases like this against philip morris. and dr. cummings showed you the same documents and the same videotapes that he is shown in the 100 other trials in which he has testified. and he tried to tell you that the dangers of smoking were somehow hidden from lamar danielson, but what did lamar danielson's family and friends tell you? not a single person who knew lamar danielson walked into this courtroom and testified that he did not know that smoking was dangerous, that he was somehow confused about the health risks of smoking. no one told you that. instead, what they told you was the exact opposite of that. they told you that lamar danielson was strong, intelligent, and well-educated. a man who lived his life the way he wanted to live it. you heard that micah danielson was trained as a nurse at the age of 19 in 1972. lamar danielson was trained as a funeral home director and an embalmer at the age of 20 in 1973. he knew smoking was dangerous for many years. he saw firsthand the difference between the dark and blackened lungs of heavy cigarette smokers compared to the pink, healthy-looking lungs of nonsmokers. nobody told you that he ever heard or read or saw any statement about cigarette smoking and health made by a tobacco company. and i apologize, again, for drinking water; but, otherwise, i'm not going to be able to get through this if i do not. you will learn that mr. danielson was the kind of person who made his own decisions in life. he did what he wanted to do no matter what anyone told him and that included smoking cigarettes. you heard what he said to his family members and friends when they told him cigarette smoking is dangerous. you need to quit. these are the things that mr. danielson told his sister-in-law, his mother-in-law, and his mother. "come on, sis. get out of here. stop being holier than thou. "this is what i do. "i'm going to smoke cigarettes." that is what he told his family and friends. so ask yourself why mr. schultz spent nearly an hour trying to persuade you that mr. danielson was tricked into smoking cigarettes for 20 or 25 years. that is not the evidence that you have heard in this case. now, you are going to hear about certain findings from an earlier class action. judge -- the judge will instruct you about those, and there is no dispute about this, ladies and gentlemen. those findings that you will see in the instructions do not tell you how to answer any of the questions on the verdict form. that is because by your verdict and your answer to some of the specific questions on that form you will get to decide whether those findings -- mr. schultz: your honor, i object to this line of argument. the court: okay. i'll overrule the objection. thank you. mr. geraghty: that is because by your answers to specific questions on the verdict form judge jones will give you, you will get to decide whether those findings apply in this case and to the lifestyle choices that mr. danielson made. after all, this case is about lamar danielson. mrs. danielson has now asked you to award her and her family millions of dollars in damages for her husband's decision to smoke cigarettes. something that you all now know he enjoyed doing for years. i told you in my opening statement that this case presents a very simple question: are we going to hold philip morris responsible -- legally responsible for lamar danielson's decision to smoke cigarettes and award mrs. danielson millions of dollars in damages for that when the evidence clearly demonstrates that they lived their life exactly the way they wanted to live it, that they smoked cigarettes because that is what they wanted to do, and they had no interest -- no real interest in quitting smoking until the very end. you are the only jury who has heard the evidence in lamar danielson's case, and you get to decide the issues in this case. now, in a moment we are going to walk through the significant events in mr. danielson's life, and i'm going to show you that everything we told you about mr. danielson in our opening statement has proved to be true. i talked to you about the sources of evidence, and i asked you to pay close attention to the important sources of evidence. so what did i mean by that? well, what i meant by that was that everything that we showed you during this course of the trial came from something that mr. danielson told one of his own doctors; something that mr. danielson, himself, wrote down in one of his own insurance application forms; or it comes from something that one of his close family members, friends, or coworkers told us about him. those are the sources of evidence. and i also told you in my opening statement two weeks ago that many of the things that mrs. danielson would tell us during the course of this trial would be contradicted by what her husband told his own doctor many years ago back in 1994, by what he wrote down in those insurance application forms, and by what other friends and family members told us. and i told you, ladies and gentlemen, that you would get to be the judges of the facts, and judge jones told you that at the very beginning this morning. you get to decide what testimony you choose to believe. judge jones will give you this instruction on the believability of witnesses. here's what it will say: "in evaluating the believability of any witness and the weight you will give the testimony of any witness, you may properly consider" -- and you will be given a series of factors, but these are two of those. "you can consider any interest the witness may have in the outcome of the case." and by "interest," we mean a financial interest in the outcome of the case. "you can also consider the reasonableness of the testimony of the witness considered in the light of all the evidence in the case and in the light of your own experience and common sense." we encourage you, we ask you, we implore you use your common sense when you evaluate the evidence in this case. "you can accept or reject any testimony you hear in this case, in whole or in part." that is your job, ladies and gentlemen, and your job alone. now, let me give you an example of when mrs. danielson told us one thing -- told us one thing that was contradicted by all of the other evidence that you had heard in this case. you heard about him quitting in the late 1980s. this is mrs. danielson's trial testimony. this was last friday: "question: so then you do not recall your husband ever quitting for longer than four days to maybe -- i think you said seven or eight days, perhaps in 1993 or thereabouts? "that is what i recall." mrs. danielson does not recall her husband ever quitting for longer than that. what was the other evidence you heard? her son billy danielson, he told you his father quit smoking for a couple of months to a year. lamar danielson himself told his doctor, dr. williams, in 1994 that he quit for four months. ray danielson, his older brother, said, "my brother quit, and he gained 25 to 30 pounds after he quit smoking." but mrs. danielson told you, "i do not remember that. i do not remember any of that." what did she tell you about what she knew about whether cigarette smoking was dangerous? well, i asked her flat out, and she said -- again, this was on thursday. she said she really was not sure what she knew. here's the question and the answer. "you knew when you met your husband, lamar danielson, that smoking was bad for your health?" this is the answer she gave to you from the witness stand under oath: "honestly, i do not know that i really had thought about it that much. i knew that -- that in the course of the nurse's training that i probably had heard stuff about it." well, then i confronted her, ladies and gentlemen, with what she had said under oath in her deposition back in 2009 before the trial started. this is what she said: "question: you knew when you met lamar that smoking was bad for your health? "yes." unambiguous, unequivocally, but this is what she tried to tell you when she testified on thursday. ladies and gentlemen, judge jones will instruct you that you get to use your common sense and personal life experiences to decide whether or not you are going to believe some of the things mrs. danielson and the other witnesses have told you. that, again, is your job, and your job alone. now, i did tell you this case was about two words in my opening statement. i told you it was about control and responsibility. and we are going to walk through all the significant events in mr. danielson's life here in just a few moments. and as we do that, i would encourage you, once again, to ask yourself the following series of questions: who was in control of his lifestyle choices and his decision to smoke cigarettes for 25 years? who was in control of his efforts to quit smoking? who controlled his motivation to quit? was mr. danielson addicted? and if so, was he someone whose addiction was so strong, so substantial -- to use the words of the court's instruction -- that he was robbed of his free will? and, finally, did mr. danielson rely on anything that philip morris said or failed to say about the health risks of smoking? after hearing the evidence in this case, you know that lamar danielson was not paying attention to anything the cigarette companies were saying. he was not waiting for philip morris to tell him cigarette smoking is dangerous; you need to quit. mr. danielson was the only person making those decisions in his life. the truth is, and the evidence has now shown over the last two weeks, that he enjoyed smoking cigarettes. everyone agreed with that. mr. schultz just told you that 25 minutes ago; and for many years he was not interested in quitting smoking. and in this country we all have the right to make decisions for ourselves. even decisions that today sitting in this courtroom, with the benefit of hindsight, we might say were not in his best interests. we believe in free will. that is a fundamental principle upon which our country was founded. you do have the right to make your own decisions in life. but with that right comes the obligation to accept personal responsibility for the consequences of those decisions. ask yourself: have you heard any evidence that nicotine robbed lamar danielson of his free will? you have heard no evidence of the sort. everybody told you he was strong, hard-working, intelligent, well-educated. that he made his own decisions in life. just look at how he lived his life and the things he accomplished. now, let me talk briefly about the burden of proof and then we are going to get right into the facts that you have heard. you have seen documents and medical records and insurance forms and you have heard testimony. micah danielson bears the burden of proof of every issue in this case by what is called the "greater weight of the evidence." so what does that mean? that means she was required to prove -- produce more persuasive and convincing evidence to outweigh the mountain of evidence that we have presented during the course of this trial; that mr. danielson was always in control of his own lifestyle choices; that he was not some hopeless addict; that addiction to cigarettes was not the legal cause of his lung cancer and death; and the plaintiff has failed to meet her burden of proof on these issues and i'll explain that to you as we walk through all the evidence. so with that in mind, let us get started and let us review what you have heard about mr. danielson over the last two weeks. and, ladies and gentlemen, this is a disclaimer or whatever you want to call it; but this is the same exact timeline, the same exact timelines that i showed you two weeks ago when i gave my opening statement. and i'm going to show you that everything we put on these boards we have proven to you. so let us start at the beginning. mr. danielson, as you know, was born in 1953 right here in pensacola. his parents are norman and myrtle danielson. he is the youngest of three children. you heard he was raised in a very strict baptist family. you also heard that his mother for many, many, many years has been strongly opposed to cigarettes and alcohol. and she told everyone, her husband, her children, anyone who would listen that she did not think people should smoke or drink. in fact, you heard that his father, norman danielson, senior at one time smoked cigarettes and drank alcohol; but he quit in 1957 when lamar danielson is just four years old, because his mother, his wife told him she did not want him to smoke or drink. that is all undisputed, ladies and gentlemen. now, mr. schultz tried to suggest to you that somehow philip morris hid the fact that cigarette smoking could cause lung cancer; that cigarette smoking could be addictive for the american public. well, ladies and gentlemen, you know after the evidence you have heard, that is simply not true and certainly not the case as far as lamar danielson is concerned. we can go all the way back -- dr. cummings told you that in 1899, 1899, the state of florida banned the sale of cigarettes in this state because it was known at that point in time that cigarette smoking could be dangerous and addictive. he told you as far back as 1907 -- we showed the documents; they are in evidence -- that the florida department of health declared cigarettes to be the worst form of tobacco addiction. the worst form of tobacco addiction in 1907. you heard that 100 years ago people used terms like "coffin nails" and "cancer sticks" to refer to cigarettes. they said that cigarette smokers were nicotine fiends and they suffered from nicotine fits. that is the evidence you heard. dr. cummings told you all of that when he testified. years later you now know mr. danielson used the same exact terms to describe cigarettes and to refer to his own cigarette smoking. here's the testimony from his coworker, lawana joyner. this was ms. joyner's testimony. she testified a week ago friday. "now, in talking to mr. danielson about smoking and just your general conversations, the two of you would use slang terms like 'coffin nails'? "answer: yes. "you had also used the term 'cancer sticks'? "yes. "you also use the term 'nicotine fit'? "yes. "and he was -- when he was waiting on families sometimes mr. danielson would joke with you that he was having a nicotine attack, correct?" her answer is, "yes." lawana joyner remembers all of this. but remember mrs. danielson? "ma'am, you do not recall a single conversation you ever had with your husband in the 18 years you were married where you discussed the health risks of smoking?" her answer was: "no. i do not remember any details. i'm not saying it did not happen; i just do not remember." but that is what lawana joyner told you, ladies and gentlemen. you know, in the 1930s, '40s, and '50s, we showed you all the articles from magazines like reader's digest that said that cigarette smoking could cause cancer, that cigarette smoking can cause people to become addicted. dr. cummings agreed with that. as we move into the early 1950s, we showed you this mouse skin painting study and the article from life magazine in 1953. dr. cummings agreed that these articles, this news was front page in newspapers and magazines all across the country. and dr. cummings agreed that in 1954, when lamar danielson was just an infant, based on all of these studies, ninety percent of the people in a poll said that they had heard about recent studies saying that cigarette smoking was a cause of lung cancer in 1954. that is the evidence you have heard. that is what dr. cummings told you. so the fact that nicotine could be addictive and the fact that smoking could cause lung cancer were not secrets known only to philip morris. now, let us move forward to the next page of the timeline. and let us go to 1964. you know that in january of 1964 the surgeon general issues a report that says cigarette smoking causes lung cancer. lamar danielson is ten years old when this report comes out. and you have seen the article. we have showed it to you. this is the front page of the pensacola news journal from january the 12th, 1964. report links cancer in cigarettes. he is ten years old. we showed you the news report from cbs news and harry reasoner, every american was told in 1964 that cigarette smoking causes lung cancer. that is the undisputed evidence in this case. dr. cummings told you the 1964 report was historic. the medical event of the century. and mr. schultz just showed you that cigarette consumption chart. 1964 is the peak and it has continued to go down ever since. that is what the evidence shows in this case. now, let us move back up above the blue bar. you know that norman danielson, his father, is a funeral home director at other funeral homes and in 1965 he opens faith chapel funeral home; and this is the business that just a few years later lamar danielson himself is going to join. that brings us to 1966. you heard that congress passes a law that requires the very first warning label on cigarettes and that warning says "caution: cigarette smoking may be hazardous to your health." this is 1966. lamar danielson, at this point, is about 12 years old when that warning first appears on packs. ladies and gentlemen, there is no dispute in this case that every single cigarette that lamar danielson ever smoked came from a pack that had a federally-mandated warning label. there is no dispute about that in this case. now, let us go back up above the blue bar and here we are in this period of time. his father, norman danielson, senior does not need to be told that cigarette smoking is hazardous. he quit years ago; but he sees the difference -- his father sees the difference between the dark and blackened lungs of heavy smokers and the pink, health-looking lungs of nonsmokers when he does embalming of bodies that had been autopsied. he explained that to you, ladies and gentlemen. you also know, based upon everything you have heard, his mother continues to be a strong advocate telling everyone, do not smoke and do not drink. 1967, lamar danielson begins high school. and somewhere in this period of time -- we do not really know when; it is not very clear in the evidence -- 1969, 1970, 1971 -- mr. danielson begins to experiment with cigarettes and alcohol. that is what you heard from jerry pate. jerry pate told you they would hang out at faith chapel funeral home on friday nights and they would drink beers, smoke cigarettes, and watch television. that is what mr. pate told you. now, the plaintiff wants you to believe that lamar danielson was somehow constantly smoking as a 14-, 15-, 16-year-old; that he was a chain-smoker. that is what they have told you. that is what they have told you. well, remember what lawana joyner told all of us about lamar danielson's mother. a very strict baptist person. now, remember, this is -- she is talking about the 1980s here. this is lawana joyner. "question: while you were working at faith chapel, you had an opportunity to meet mrs. danielson? and this is mrs. danielson, lamar danielson's mother. "answer: yes, i did. "question: i think you described her as a force to be reckoned with. a force to be reckoned with. "answer: yes, she was. "question: did she ever say anything about her son's smoking? "answer: oh, yes. she hated it. hated it." remember what lawana joyner told you. when lamar danielson is an adult in his 30s and working at the funeral home, if they knew that mrs. danielson was coming, they hid all the ashtrays and they pulled out the air freshener and they sprayed because they did not want her to know that they were smoking. so, ladies and gentlemen, ask yourself: if she talked to her son and told her son not to smoke when he was a 30- or 35-year-old adult, what do you think she was telling him when he was 15 or 16 or 17? do you really think that lamar danielson was chain-smoking marlboro red cigarettes in front of his mother at the age of 15 or 16? use your common sense. use your common sense and apply your life experiences to the evidence that you have heard. now, this is what lawana joyner told you, but remember what -- what did mrs. danielson say? micah danielson. well, she thinks her mother-in-law might have been opposed to smoking, but she does not really recall her mother ever -- her mother-in-law ever saying anything. but this is what lawana joyner remembers. now, you also heard testimony from beverly milsted. this is his older sister. what did she tell you? she was just two years older than lamar danielson. she lived in the same home with him the whole time he was in high school. "question: and you also never saw him smoking in high school; is that right? "answer: yes. "question: the first time that you noticed your younger brother smoking was when he came back from mortuary school down in miami, florida? "answer: when i saw him at the funeral home, yes." so, ladies and gentlemen, while mr. danielson likely tried cigarettes and alcohol when he was in high school, he was not smoking on a regular basis. the evidence is clear on that point. so that brings us to 1970; and in 1970, when lamar danielson is 16 years old, there is a new warning and the warning now says the surgeon general has determined that cigarette smoking is dangerous to your health. that is when he is 16 years old. this is 25 years before he is diagnosed with cancer. one year later, all cigarette ads are taken off of the television and radio. they are banned. and a year after that, in 1972, this warning label is required to appear on all cigarettes. that is the undisputed evidence that you have heard in this case, ladies and gentlemen. now, let us go back up above the blue bar. in june of 1971, lamar danielson graduates from high school, and he travels to miami, and he attends the miami-dade college of mortuary science for two years, from 1971 to 1973. you heard he takes science classes, anatomy, chemistry and pathology. and just like his father before him, he learns how to embalm bodies. it is a process by which you make incisions in the body, you remove all the blood, and then you replace that blood with embalming fluid to preserve the body for purposes of the funeral and the viewing. and we know, ladies and gentlemen, lamar danielson saw the same thing that his father saw. he saw the dark and blackened lungs of heavy cigarette smokers compared to the pink, health-looking lungs of nonsmokers. jen, could you put that up on the screen, please? can everybody see that? i'm going to pull this down so you can see that better. am i blocking you from seeing that? okay. we showed this picture during the testimony of dr. cummings. he said, "yeah, i've seen this in an autopsy. on the left is the healthy-looking lung of a nonsmoker. on the right is the darkened, diseased lung of a heavy cigarette smoker." that is what he told you. and you heard the process. initially, the medical examiner would open up the chest cavity and remove all the organs, including the lungs, during the medical examination. and then they would put it all back inside the chest cavity and send it to the funeral home. and the embalmer, in this case lamar danielson, would have to reach into the chest cavity and remove all the organs, including the lungs, during the course of the embalming process. later the process changed. and what happened was the medical examiner, after the autopsy, would take these organs and put them in biohazard bags and send the body and the bags, with the lungs, to the embalmer, to the funeral home director. and the funeral home director would have to remove the lungs from those biohazard bags and put them back into the chest cavity so the body could be embalmed and then prepared for the viewing in the funeral. that is the evidence you have heard in this case, ladies and gentlemen. there is no debate, no dispute that lamar danielson would have seen these lungs this frequently as an embalmer. this is the testimony of his father. you remember his nickname was swede, swede danielson. "question: as part of his work here at the funeral home, do you know whether lamar ever saw, i guess, a body come in where the person had had lung cancer, for example, and you could see that the person had been a smoker and it had caused his death? "answer: oh, yes. i mean, that is the one thing that would really throw you for a loop, because, first of all, they used to do autopsies at the funeral home. and the lungs we would look at. a lot of times the fingers would be just coated. "question: so their fingers would be actually discolored? "oh, yes. but, i mean, the lungs, you could sure tell it on the lungs." that is his father, swede danielson, a funeral home director and embalmer himself telling you, "of course my son saw this. of course my son saw the difference between the lungs of a smoker and the lungs of a nonsmoker." so, ladies and gentlemen, there is no question that lamar danielson regularly sees the difference between the healthy lungs of a nonsmoker and the dark and diseased lungs of a heavy cigarette smoker. he sees the fingers and nails of smokers that are coated with years of nicotine. he learns to fill out death certificates after the physician has determined the cause of death. you heard all of that from several witnesses during the course of this case. and mr. danielson learns all of this when he is at mortuary college; when he is 18, 19, 20 years old; around the same time he is smoking cigarettes on a more regular basis, because he is no longer living in the same home with his mother. so let us move to the next page of the timeline. you know that in 1973, he graduates from mortuary college. he comes back to pensacola and starts working as a funeral director with his father at faith chapel funeral home. he becomes the youngest certified funeral home director and embalmer in the state of florida. you heard the testimony, because of the unique nature of lamar danielson's job, he is reminded every single day that life is short. death can come unexpectedly. and the choices we make in life can indeed affect how long we live and how we die. mr. danielson takes death calls. he goes to the hospital and the nursing home to pick up the bodies of recently deceased. he meets with families to make the funeral preparations. he embalms the bodies of the deceased. he prepares obituaries to be printed in the newspaper, and he fills out and completes death certificates after, again, the physician has determined the cause of death. and, ladies and gentlemen, this is what he does day in, day out as a funeral home director. so the evidence is overwhelming that based on his education and his work as a funeral home director, lamar danielson sees the damage that cigarette smoking can cause at a young age, and he sees it firsthand every single day as a funeral home director. now, you know, in 1976, he meets his future wife, micah danielson. i've already shown you her testimony where she said she knew smoking was dangerous before she ever met her husband. but after the evidence you have heard, how could there be any dispute? before she ever met lamar danielson, her father was diagnosed with emphysema that she attributed to cigarette smoking. she was taught in nursing school that cigarette smoking causes disease. she worked in the cardiac care unit at sacred heart hospital treating patients with heart disease, many of whom smoked cigarettes. she told you it was common knowledge, common knowledge that cigarette smoking was bad for your health before she ever met her husband. but remember what she said in the courtroom when she was on the witness stand? she refused to admit that she or her husband really knew -- really knew smoking was dangerous. she said -- and this a direct quote, "hearing and believing are two different things." that sounded like something you would have heard dr. cummings say. mr. schultz: your honor, i object to that one. the court: overruled. mr. geraghty: she said, "i do not know if my husband knew that smoking was dangerous. i never told him that." she said a doctor told her in 1986 that it was okay if she smoked 10 cigarettes when she was pregnant with her daughter. and in response to one of the questions that, ladies and gentlemen, one of you asked, she said that gave her assurance that it was okay for her and her husband to smoke cigarettes. so how do you square the facts you heard about lamar danielson with the testimony that his wife gave? it is really very simple, ladies and gentlemen. she said all of these things on the witness stand after she filed a lawsuit in which her lawyers have now asked you to award her and her family more than $17 million in damages. based on all of the evidence you have heard, ladies and gentlemen, it should be painfully obvious at this point that lamar danielson and his wife enjoyed smoking cigarettes. they loved smoking cigarettes. mrs. danielson flat out told you she enjoyed smoking. but despite that, despite that, despite being married to lamar danielson for 18 years, she did not want to admit that she knew that he enjoyed and loved smoking cigarettes. she said, "i assume he enjoyed smoking. he appeared to enjoy smoking. it seemed to me that he enjoyed smoking." but, ladies and gentlemen, use your common sense. she is one hundred percent confident that her husband was addicted; one hundred percent confident that she saw him experience all these withdrawal symptoms you have heard about. but she is not sure whether her husband of 18 years really enjoyed smoking cigarettes? and that is why i asked her, ladies and gentlemen, if her husband enjoyed drinking coffee and drinking beer, going boating and fishing, hanging out in his backyard and grilling with his friends, watching his favorite college football team, because the truth is -- and the evidence now shows -- you cannot live with someone for 18 years and not know what they enjoy, what they love doing. that is what being in a relationship is all about. but she finally did admit she would buy him marlboro red cigarettes when she went to the grocery store because she acknowledged she knew that would make him happy. ladies and gentlemen, that is not addiction. that is pleasure. that is enjoyment. that is knowing what it is that will make a loved one happy. think about that. think about that. mr. danielson loved smoking cigarettes when he drank coffee in the morning. he worked long hours at the funeral home. it was very stressful. smoking helped him cope with that stress. when he came home after work, he liked to unwind and relax by smoking cigarettes and drinking beer. lawana joyner had no problem telling you straight up, "mr. danielson enjoyed marlboro cigarettes. he enjoyed the taste of marlboro red cigarettes." coworkers said he liked to blow smoke rings. but ms. danielson did not want to admit what your common sense tells you must be true. mr. danielson drank about a six-pack of busch beer almost every night, again, not because he was addicted to alcohol, but because he enjoyed it. ricky stokes called him his three-beer helper. and, ladies and gentlemen, smoking and drinking helped mr. danielson relieve stress, relax and unwind after a long day at work. that is what lamar and micah danielson wanted to do, and that is what he enjoyed doing for many, many years. now, both dr. hurt and dr. cummings told you in this period of time when lamar danielson begins smoking cigarettes, there is a strong anti-smoking movement in this country. remember what dr. burns told you. dr. burns told you that way back in 1975, 40 years ago, he said -- he was quoted as saying, "more americans know smoking is dangerous than know the name of the president of the united states." dr. burns said that 40 years ago. of course, mr. and mrs. danielson knew. mr. schultz has tried to tell you that all of these warnings and health messages were somehow being drowned out by statements made by the tobacco institute or other cigarette companies. but the evidence you heard has shown just the opposite. smokers in america are quitting by the millions because of the same messages, the same warnings that mr. and mrs. danielson received. you heard dr. cummings tell you between 1964, when that very first surgeon general's report came out, and 1979, this period here (indicating), 30 million americans quit smoking. 30 million. that is two million people every single year. they have heard the same information as mr. danielson. it may take some of them more than one try, but millions make the decision to quit, and they quit for good. and you heard dr. hurt and dr. cummings tell you, almost all of them quit cold turkey with absolutely no assistance of any kind. now, that brings us to 1979 here, and we are going to talk about this period of time. and i mentioned mark twain earlier during this trial. he is also quoted as saying that "there are lies, damn lies, and then there are statistics." that was his way of saying that statistics can be misleading. and plaintiff's experts have tried to use statistics in this case to persuade you that no one can quit smoking, and that the most misleading statistic of all you have heard is this one that only 3 to 5 percent of smokers successfully quit. that is what they have told you. ladies and gentlemen, again, use your common sense. look at the evidence you have heard in this case. swede danielson; jerry pate; dr. hurt, himself; ray danielson; becky wiggins; lorraine sanders; micah danielson, one hundred percent of them quit permanently. the quit rate in this case, 100 percent. that is the evidence that you have heard. use your common sense, ladies and gentlemen. there are several former smokers among you. now, you know that in 1979, ray danielson quit smoking around that same period of time. micah danielson's sister, becky wiggins, quits. around the same period of time, maybe a little bit later, lorraine sanders quits. and you know that during this period of time both lorraine sanders and becky wiggins begin to talk to lamar and micah danielson about quitting. you heard that becky wiggins was a nurse herself. she worked on the oncology floor treating cancer patients. she was taught in her nurse's training that smoking could cause lung cancer. let me show you her testimony. this is becky wiggins. this was read to you, ladies and gentlemen. ms. wiggins said -- was asked the following question: "while you were a student studying to become a nurse, do you recall learning that smoking could cause lung cancer? "oh, yes. yes. "question: that was something that was taught to you in school? "answer: yes." ms. wiggins remembers this. one of you asked ms. danielson a question, "well, what were you taught in nursing school? what were the courses you were taught? were you taught this?" she did not remember. she could not recall. ms. wiggins refers to herself as a reformed smoker, and you heard the testimony. she got up on a soapbox, and she started to talk to mr. danielson. she began to tell him about her experience as a nurse treating cancer patients, and she would tell him, "you need to quit. you need to quit." and so how did mr. danielson respond? is he shocked or surprised to hear his sister-in-law tell him that cigarette smoking can cause lung cancer? of course not. does he tell her that he wants to quit? no. that is not the evidence you heard. this is the testimony that you heard. he told becky wiggins, "get out of here. this is what i do. "stop being holier than thou." that is what lamar danielson told his sister-in-law. and he would say the same thing to his mother-in-law when she would encourage him to quit smoking. so the evidence, ladies and gentlemen, is, at this point in time, he has no interest in quitting. he and his wife continued to enjoy smoking and drinking, and that is what they want to do. now, mr. schultz mentioned to you yesterday that he may have told his sister-in-law, "well, i'm hooked on cigarettes." well, remember he is tried to take that one passage -- that one passage and put it in front of dr. dorce yesterday, but ms. diolombi said, "well, read the entire passage." and when the entire passage was read, ms. wiggins said, "well, you know, we were joking. and he and my father -- my father would joke that he was hooked." but what you never heard in that passage was that he ever told becky wiggins, "i want to quit. i'm trying to quit, but i cannot." because that conversation never took place. that never happened. this is what he told her (indicating). now -- so the truth is, ladies and gentlemen, and the evidence will show, that for many years mr. danielson had no real interest in quitting. he enjoyed smoking cigarettes, and he loved marlboro red. marlboro red was his brand, and he would crack jokes with people and say, "hey, i'm the marlboro man. call me the marlboro man." that was the only brand he would ever smoke. one of you asked this question, very interestingly. you asked, "did he ever bum cigarettes from anyone else?" and the answer you know is he never did. ask yourself this question. if he was truly an addict and just needed nicotine to feed that addiction, why did not he ever smoke other people's cigarettes? so unlike the 30 million people who quit as of 1979, lamar and micah danielson are not interested in quitting at this point. and that is not because philip morris is somehow kept the health risks of cigarettes hidden from them. every pack he smoked has a warning label on it. he knows the difference between the dark and blackened lungs of a heavy smoker and the pink, health-looking lungs of a nonsmoker. his wife is a nurse, and people are telling him he should quit smoking. in fact, dr. burns, again, was quoted in 1981 as saying, "95 percent of people are thoroughly aware of the health dangers, and ninety percent believe that their own health will be affected." now, that brings us to 1985. and you know there is now a rotating series of warnings. one of which that says: "smoking causes lung cancer, heart disease, emphysema, and may complicate pregnancy." we know mr. danielson read these warnings. you heard dr. cummings tell you that he was reading one of the warnings out loud at the funeral home and commenting that the warning label was different than on the pack of someone else there. but these warnings do not tell mr. danielson anything he did not already know. in fact, you heard from ms. joyner, his smoking buddy, they were calling cigarettes "coffin nails" and "cancer sticks" and joking about having "nicotine fits" and "nicotine attacks." ms. joyner also testified that she told mr. danielson that she had several family members who were cigarette smokers who had developed throat cancer. that she was concerned about her health, and that she had decided to quit smoking. that is what she told him. does mr. danielson tell lawana joyner, "you do not need to be concerned about your health; cigarette smoking has not been proven to cause cancer; that is what the tobacco institute says"? ms. joyner testified -- she told you he knew, he was aware that cigarette smoking was harmful to health. he simply asked ms. joyner, "is it going to bother you if i continue to smoke around you?" so he is courteous, of course. but he wants to smoke, and he continues smoking, despite these conversations they had about throat cancer. now, that brings us to the late 1980s. you know their daughter sandi is born in '86, but here we are in the late 1980s. i've got '87 here. mr. schultz has seemed to quibble with the idea of whether he quit smoking in '87 or the late '80s. ladies and gentlemen, i do not think it really matters. micah danielson said the first time she recalls him ever quitting was 1987. that is what she said. that is why we have got that on the board. if it was 1988 or 1989, i do not really think it makes a whit of difference. what is important is what actually took place. mrs. daniel -- mrs. danielson admitted to you, ladies and gentlemen, that up until this point in time her husband never told her, "i want to quit smoking. i do not want to smoke cigarettes anymore." that is what she told you. that is the evidence that you have heard. and even when he decides to quit in the late 1980s, it is not because he is concerned about his health. mrs. danielson told you it was because of costs. they were building a new home. now, mrs. danielson claimed her husband only quit smoking for a few days, but the evidence shows it was four months or longer. let us review the evidence that you have seen and heard. i told you her son, billy danielson -- told you about him earlier. now, remember -- here's what i want to remind you. interestingly enough, when ms. gilmer was asking the question, "do you remember how long your father quit smoking," he said, "no, i do not really recall." that is what he said when plaintiff's counsel was asking the question, but then ms. diolombi showed him his deposition under oath before the trial. and this is what mr. danielson, then, said: "you have testified that you thought your father actually did quit for several months, maybe even a year, and then started back up, correct? "correct." that is what billy danielson said on the witness stand last thursday. we know what lamar danielson told his doctor in 1994. you have seen this medical record a gazillion times at this point, but mr. danielson told dr. williams he stopped for a period of about four months but had started again to smoke for some period of time. this had to have been in the late 1980s because no one other than mrs. danielson recalls lamar danielson even trying to quit in 1992 or 1993. that is the evidence you have heard, ladies and gentlemen. the plaintiff says, "do not believe what lamar danielson said to his own doctor. do not believe this. he never quit for four months." the fact that he quit for four months or more is important because you heard what the plaintiff's own experts told you. no. 1, all the nicotine is out of your system in 72 hours. right? the withdrawal symptoms you heard about. the withdrawal symptoms subside within two to three weeks after a cigarette smoker quits. no. 3: those so-called permanent brain changes that you heard about, the upregulation or increase in the nicotinic receptors, well, even mr. schultz told you, dr. hurt and dr. dorce -- they both told you they revert back to normal in six to eight weeks. only dr. cummings tried to tell you something different. only dr. cummings, who is not a medical doctor. you heard that lamar danielson told his older brother ray that he was unhappy about the amount of weight he had gained. he gained about 25 or 30 pounds, according to his brother. and he thought that if he went back to smoking that might help him to lose it. we also know during this period of time that mrs. danielson does not quit smoking. she keeps smoking. we also know that mr. danielson continued to drink beer. and dr. hurt told you that if you continue to drink alcohol, if your spouse continues to smoke around you, it is going to be that much more difficult to ultimately quit for good. he told you that about his own situation. he said whenever my wife and i ever tried to quit smoking separately, we failed. when we went together, when we tried to quit smoking together, we succeeded. mrs. danielson told you on friday morning that she was relieved that her husband decided to resume smoking in 1987. and that, ladies and gentlemen, tells you all you need to know about their collective attitude about smoking. it is the late 1980s. they know smoking can cause lung cancer and other diseases. but at this point, they do not really want to quit smoking. now, let us go to the last page of the timeline. mr. danielson continues to receive warnings that cigarette smoking is dangerous to his health but does not make an effort to quit. you heard in 1990 he went to see a dermatologist to have a lesion removed from his nose. the doctor tells him, "you need to quit." no evidence that he tries to quit. now, between 1987 and 1994, when he quits for good, you did hear that he may have been given the patch. that is on this very same record we have here. we know that he was diagnosed by dr. crosswright with a case of bronchitis in 1993 and may have been given the patch at that point in time. mrs. danielson does not recall the details. she is not exactly sure when. so that is about all we really know. so, ladies and gentlemen, that brings us to november of 1994. you know that mr. danielson is starting to feel bad. he goes to see dr. williams, that is the record we have up there on the right. and he is told that he has lung cancer. and told that he has a potentially fatal diagnosis, lamar danielson quits smoking for good in november of 1994. and he quits drinking at the same point too. you heard what ms. joyner and mr. stokes said. i'm not going to show you their testimony, but ms. joyner told you, after he came back from the doctor and was told that he likely had lung cancer, he takes his pack of marlboro reds and he hands them to ms. joyner and says, "i'm done. i'm done." two days later, he is called down to baptist hospital. ricky stokes drives him to the hospital. and ricky stokes says, "he was smoking a cigarette in the car when we were driving to the hospital. and when we turned onto i-10, he flicked that cigarette out the window, and he said, 'i'm never having another.'" "i'm never having another." shortly after her husband is diagnosed, you heard that micah danielson, herself, quits smoking. that is what she told you. and, unfortunately, ladies and gentlemen, lamar danielson passes away on november the 17th, 1995. and that is the story, ladies and gentlemen. that is the story that we have seen and heard over the last two weeks. now, in the time that i have left, i'd like to talk to you about the questions you are going to be asked to decide on the verdict form. let me show you the first question that you are going to be asked to decide. the first question on the verdict form will say: "was addiction to marlboro cigarettes containing nicotine a legal cause of the death of norman lamar danielson?" and you will see in the instructions the judge gives you that question can be broken down into two subparts. "no. 1: was lamar danielson addicted? and if so, was his claimed addiction a legal cause of his lung cancer and death?" if you answered "no" to this question, ladies and gentlemen, that is a verdict for philip morris. if you answer "yes," that is a verdict for the plaintiff, and you have decided that you are going to award mrs. danielson and her family damages. so was lamar danielson addicted to cigarettes? let me remind you -- and you heard mr. schultz say this -- the court has not and will not give you a definition of what it means to be addicted or a set of medical criteria that you use to determine whether mr. danielson was addicted. so what is the evidence you have heard? well, again, somebody asked a very important question that was lost on all of us lawyers. one of you said did any of his own doctors -- did any of mr. danielson's own doctors ever determine or diagnose that he was addicted? and dr. dorce answered that question for you. the answer is absolutely not. you can look through all the medical records we have and the answer is absolutely not. now, i told you the plaintiff and her experts would say you know what? it is really very simple. just count up the number of cigarettes that mr. danielson smoked per day and see if he smoked early in the morning; and if so, he is addicted. those are the two questions under the heaviness of smoking index. and, ladies and gentlemen, it should come as no surprise to you why the plaintiff wants you to use that test in this case. you saw it. you are considered addicted even if you score zero. even if you score zero. you heard from dr. cummings, who is not a medical doctor and who acknowledged he cannot diagnose anyone as addicted. he told you on the one hand addiction is a brain disease. he told you that. a chronic, relapsing brain disease. but, on the other hand, dr. cummings told you if you smoke just one cigarette per day, just one cigarette per day, you are addicted. that is what dr. cummings told you. what kind of standard is that to diagnose a brain disease, a brain disorder? and, ladies and gentlemen, that is one of the reasons why we brought up this issue of alcohol and beer drinking. we never suggested to you that mr. danielson was an alcoholic; that he had some problem with alcohol. we have told you consistently from day one that he drank a six-pack of beer every day and smoked cigarettes every day for the same reasons: because he enjoyed them, because it is what he wanted to do. but dr. cummings says, well, he did drink every day so maybe he was addicted. think about that for a second, ladies and gentlemen. according to the standard that the plaintiff wants you to use in this case, if you smoke just one cigarette per day and have just one beer every day, then you are an addict. an addict. and you have lost your free will, and you no longer have a choice about the decisions you make. ask yourself: does that make any sense? dr. burns told you the same thing. he is made more than three and a half million dollars testifying in cases against philip morris. and guess what, ladies and gentlemen? in every single case he has testified that the cigarette smoker was addicted. every single case. again, that should not come as a surprise to anybody, given what he told you. so ask yourself, ladies and gentlemen: is that the way we diagnose someone with an illness in this country? of course not. of course not. and that is why plaintiff, ladies and gentlemen, has fought so hard to convince you that mr. danielson was some chain-smoking fiend. the court: you have 30 -- mr. geraghty: if you are -- the court: i'm sorry, you have 30 minutes. mr. geraghty: thank you, your honor. i appreciate that. if you are truly addicted, it is a mental disorder just like dr. dorce told you. but we just do not label millions of people as addicts because they smoke a certain number of cigarettes. and that is also why, ladies and gentlemen, i was saying a moment ago, they are trying to convince you so badly that he was a chain-smoking fiend smoking two and a half to three packs of cigarettes per day. they brought you jerry pate, a local golf pro, to tell you that lamar danielson was a chain-smoker when he was in high school. mr. pate was on the stand. he was under oath. he said he was a chain-smoker in high school. micah danielson told you that was not true. micah danielson told you that was not true. does anyone really believe that lamar danielson was chain-smoking as a high school student in front of his mother, myrtle danielson? but that is why mrs. danielson and her lawyers want you to believe that he was smoking two and a half to three packs of cigarettes a day because they want it to be only about the number of cigarettes he smoked per day. so they refused to accept mr. danielson's own statement. lamar danielson's own statements, they refused to accept these because from their perspective the numbers are not high enough. i've tried to put it all on one page here, but you saw the insurance application forms, the life insurance application forms. mr. danielson filled one out in '83, '84, '86, and 1990; and, of course, he speaks to dr. thomas williams in 1994. and, ladies and gentlemen, he is remarkably consistent over the course of an 11-year period. told you he smoked a pack a day; a pack a day; a pack to a pack and a half a day; a pack and a half a day; and, again, in november '94 to dr. thomas williams, one pack to a pack and one half of cigarettes a day. that is what lamar danielson said years before anybody was thinking about filing a lawsuit. so it will be up to you, ladies and gentlemen, to decide whether that is enough in a court of law when both sides agree that addiction is a disease, a mental disorder that requires a diagnosis by a qualified medical doctor, or whether more should be required, particularly when plaintiff is asking for millions of dollars in damages. we brought you dr. daphne dorce, a medical doctor and a psychiatrist who is board certified in addiction medicine. she told you she is diagnosed and treated thousands of patients to addictions to all sorts of substances; and she is counseling thousands of cigarette smokers. she gave you a real set of medical criteria to determine whether lamar danielson was addicted: the dsm. we put it up on the screen. we walked you through her analysis. ms. diolombi asked her all the questions and then she answered all of your questions, ladies and gentlemen. she told you lamar danielson was not addicted to cigarettes. so at the end of the day, you have to ask yourself whether the plaintiff's evidence is sufficient in a court of law or should more be required, like tangible and reliable evidence that does not come from a source that has a financial interest in the outcome of the case. and, ladies and gentlemen, i think, at this point, based on the evidence you have heard, the answer should be obvious. mr. danielson was not addicted. and your answer to this first question should be no for that reason. but even if you ultimately decide that he was addicted, your work is just beginning because you still have to answer the second part this question. micah danielson still has the burden to prove by the greater weight of the evidence that his addiction was, quote, a legal cause of his lung cancer and death. now, the court gave you an instruction or will give you an instruction on legal cause; and, honestly, the language in the instruction is hard to follow, even if you are a lawyer. so let me give you the same example that i gave you at the very beginning of the case to try to help you understand the concept and distinguish it from medical cause. imagine right out in front of the courthouse someone walks across the street and they get hit by a bus. well, the bus is the medical cause of why they suffered injuries; but in order to understand legal cause, you would need to know more. did he have the right-of-way when he crossed the street? was the light green or was the light red? was the person paying attention when he walked across the street? or was he distracted, texting on his iphone, listening to music with earbuds in? did he cross the street that day knowing that that bus would be there every single day? you would need to know these things to understand legal cause. and in a case like this, ladies and gentlemen, the question of legal cause really boils down to quitting, motivation to quit, and whether you are really motivated to quit smoking. ask yourself this question, based on all of the evidence you have heard: was lamar danielson's claimed addiction so strong, so substantial that it stood in the way of a motivated and committed effort on his part to quit smoking? the evidence in this case is undisputed that lamar danielson never once tried to quit smoking until the late 1980s. mrs. danielson told you that he never tried to quit. he never expressed any desire to quit, until that point in time. and dr. cummings, who read all the depositions, agreed. the truth is -- and the evidence has shown -- that he enjoyed smoking cigarettes, just like he enjoyed drinking beer; and for many years he had no real interest in quitting. actions speak louder than words. when he quits in the late 1980s he quits smoking cold turkey for four months or more; and he does that despite the fact that he continues to drink beer and despite the fact that his wife is still smoking around him. she acknowledged to you that she continued to smoke around him. and just think about that for a moment. the fact that he quit for four months under those circumstances demonstrates that he had tremendous control over his cigarette smoking when he wanted to do so. and he did the same thing again in 1994; but this time he quit smoking for good because, at that point, he knew he had to. he knew he had to. the truth is -- and the evidence has shown -- that before he was diagnosed with cancer in 1994, mr. danielson did not want to quit. you heard the experts tell you if you do not want to quit, you are not going to quit. it is kind of obvious. right? but this is what dr. cummings told you. it takes motivation to quit smoking. if you are not motivated to quit, you are not going to quit, obviously. and if someone does not want to quit, they are not going to quit. his answer was true. plaintiff wants to blame nicotine and philip morris and marlboro cigarettes, but nicotine did not rob mr. danielson of his free will. and you do not need to take dr. dorce's word for it. remember what the plaintiff's own experts told you. despite everything you have heard about the engineering of cigarettes, nicotine receptors and brain changes -- all of those things -- what did all three -- dr. hurt, dr. cummings and dr. burns -- tell you? anyone can quit smoking if they are motivated to do so. 60 million americans have quit smoking, many of whom smoked cigarettes with the same design features as mr. danielson. most of these people would be considered addicted according to the plaintiff's standards. but most quit cold turkey with no assistance whatsoever. and this final one is from dr. hurt. motivation leads to trying to stop. trying to stop smoking does ultimately lead to most people quitting. that is from the plaintiff's own expert, ladies and gentlemen. and where does motivation come from? ask yourself. motivation comes from within each and every one of us, not from a nicotine patch, not from the nicorette gum. the nicotine in cigarettes did not prevent these 60 million people from understanding that smoking is dangerous and from exercising their free will to stop. and you have heard no evidence that mr. danielson was any different. he was intelligent. he was well-educated. he was strong-willed. he received many warnings over the years. and he smoked in the face of those warnings. and he had every right to make that choice. but it was his informed decision to smoke in the face of all those warnings, ladies and gentlemen, and not decide to quit until the very end of his life. that was the one and only legal cause of his cancer and death in this case. mrs. danielson claims her husband was addicted. but addiction did not force mr. danielson to smoke. he smoked because that is what he wanted to do. and that is what this question, ladies and gentlemen, is all about. you have heard all the evidence. mr. danielson was in control, not philip morris, not the nicotine in cigarettes. and your answer to this question should be no and your verdict should be for philip morris. i've just got a few more questions to cover on the verdict form. and let me try to do that quickly. question no. 2 is going to ask you to compare the percentage of fault or responsibility that you would assign to mr. danielson and philip morris, if you get that far. i do not think you will get that far. i do not think you will get past the first question; but if you do, let me briefly respond. mr. schultz told you that mrs. danielson accepts some responsibility for lamar danielson's smoking. so what does it mean to accept responsibility for the decisions we make in life? well, imagine someone like mr. danielson who drinks alcohol. right? we know he drank alcohol. many people drink alcohol. imagine a person who goes out one night and they have just a few too many drinks. they wake up the next day with a hangover. your eyes are bloodshot. you are bleary-eyed. you stumble to the mirror. you look at yourself in the mirror and you said, you know what? i'm only 25 percent responsible for my decision to have those drinks last night. no one says that, ladies and gentlemen. no one says that. and certainly lamar danielson was not the kind of person who would have said that. was anyone else responsible for the decisions that lamar danielson made to smoke cigarettes for 25 years? the facts of this case show loud and clear that lamar danielson got up every single day and made his own decisions in life. no one else made those decisions for him. "accepting responsibility" means just that, accepting full responsibility for the consequences of one's actions. and that is what you should put down if you get to question no. 2 on the verdict form. there should be no question that a strong and intelligent and hard-working man is one hundred percent responsible for the decisions he makes in life. now, again, i do not think you are going to get this far on the verdict form. but after question no. 2, there is a question no. 3, and a question no. 4, and because mr. schultz raised it, let me talk briefly about those questions. i'm going to try to read question no. 3 to you. it is a little involved. "was the concealment or omission of material information regarding the addictiveness or the health effects of cigarettes or both by philip morris usa a legal cause of the death of norman lamar danielson?" well, that is quite a mouthful. there is a companion question no. 4 that goes along with it that is worded very similar, except it refers to acts in furtherance of agreement, and it lists a series of tobacco companies. so, really, the first question, question no. 3, is referring specifically to philip morris. question no. 4 simply broadens the question to include the tobacco institute and other tobacco-related entities. mr. schultz told you that mrs. danielson accepts some responsibility for the decisions that mr. danielson made. but if you answer "yes" to either question no. 3 or no. 4, then the plaintiff is asking you to award her one hundred percent of the damages. those percentages of responsibility that we talked about with respect to question no. 2, they go out the window. and the plaintiff would get to keep one hundred percent of any damages if you decided to award damages in this case. is that accepting responsibility? they say they accept responsibility, but if you answer two questions the way they want you to answer them, then they say, "we do not accept any responsibility." let me try to simplify these two questions for you. basically, what you are being asked to decide is: did lamar danielson smoke cigarettes because philip morris or another cigarette company failed to disclose a material fact about the health risks or addictive nature of smoking? so you may be asking yourself, what is a "material fact"? there is an instruction on it. i believe it is instruction no. 15 in the package. "a 'material fact' is one that is of such importance that mr. danielson would not have acted as he did but for the concealment or omission of that fact." that is the instruction. the court: you have 15 minutes. mr. geraghty: thank you. in other words, to answer "yes" to these questions, plaintiff had to prove to you that lamar danielson would not have smoked marlboro cigarettes had philip morris or some other tobacco company told him that "smoking causes cancer. smoking is addictive. you need to quit." ladies and gentlemen, you know there is no evidence to support that conclusion. in fact, it is difficult to conceive of anything more material than what mr. danielson did every single day when he handled the lungs of cigarette smokers and nonsmokers. jen, could you put that up just one more time? what information could philip morris have provided that would have been more material, more dramatic, more important, ladies and gentlemen, to mr. danielson than seeing lungs like this on a regular basis? and so what evidence did plaintiff present to meet her burden? well, dr. cummings came in here and he showed you a bunch of documents, and he did that to try to make you angry. he wanted you to be angry in the hope that you would look past the undisputed facts that mr. danielson was intelligent and well-educated; that there was a warning label telling him that cigarette smoking was dangerous from the time he was 16 years old; that he was trained as an embalmer as a teenager to see the difference between the darkened lungs of heavy smokers and the health lungs of nonsmokers; and that there is absolutely no evidence that lamar danielson believed smoking was not dangerous because of something a cigarette company said or did not say. and to overcome this lack of evidence, mr. schultz tells you, "well, you can infer these things. you can infer these things." but the court will tell you they need to be reasonable inferences. and what mr. schultz is asking you to make are gigantic leaps, gigantic leaps that are essentially assumptions. he is asking you to assume that mr. danielson did not know that smoking was dangerous and then to further assume that if mr. danielson had read one of those internal tobacco company documents, he never would have smoked cigarettes. in fact, the evidence you have heard in this case squarely contradicts those assumptions. you heard direct evidence about the things that mr. danielson learned on his job about the health risks of smoking and the things that his family members told him. all you have to do is look at how lamar danielson reacted when his family and his friends and his own doctor told him he should quit. did he say, "my goodness, i've never heard that cigarette smoking can cause disease?" no. he said, "come on, sis. give me a break. get out of here. this is what i do." those are the things he told his family member [sic]. he said these things to his closest family members and friends not because he was confused about the health risks of smoking, but because he wanted to smoke cigarettes. it is what he wanted to do even though he knew he was making a lifestyle choice that came with the potential for serious health risks. use your common sense, evaluate the evidence, and consider it in the light of your good judgment and life experiences. mr. danielson did not listen to his mother. he did not listen to his mother-in-law or sister-in-law. he did not listen to his doctor. what makes any of us believe that he would have listened to anything a cigarette company had to say? the answer to question nos. 3 and 4 should be "no." now, let me address quickly the issue of damages. i do not think you are going to get here, but i need to respond. mr. schultz asked you to award a total, a grand total of over $17 million in damages for the decisions that mr. danielson and only mr. danielson made. that is an incredible sum of money. imagine a family, ladies and gentlemen, that may make only $50,000 a year. you know how many years it would take that family to earn just $1 million? mr. schultz: your honor -- mr. geraghty: it would take them -- mr. schultz: i'm sorry, mr. geraghty. the court: approach the bench, please. (the following proceedings were held outside of the hearing of the jury.) mr. schultz: we have an order in limine that we are not to discuss wealth or poverty of the parties -- an order in limine that we are not allowed to discuss wealth or poverty of the parties, no. 1. no. 2, the issue this jury is asked to decide is to valuate the loss to this family and their husband and father, not whether that is a lot of money to them or not. that is not the question they are charged to ask. this could not have any possible relevance to the facts that they are asked to decide in the case. the court: thank you. response? mr. geraghty: your honor, he picked 6 million and $3 million essentially out of thin air without giving them any real guidepost as to how he arrived at that. i have to simply be able to explain to the jury in what context that that is a tremendous amount of money and to point out why that amount of money is unsupported by the evidence in the case. it is a fair comment given what he was allowed to say. i objected to one of his arguments. your honor overruled that objection. i think i have to, in fairness, be permitted to respond. the court: the problem is you are not comparing apples to apples. it is because what you are comparing is the cost of living of a moderate income family with the amount you suggest as pain and suffering. compensatory damages are agreed to, so it is not another issue. so it can only be related to the noneconomic damages. and so you are not comparing the same thing. this is misleading argument on the whole, so i will sustain the objection. mr. schultz: thank you, your honor. i understand you have ruled. i do not want to belabor it. there is no evidence of the income either. i'll leave it at that. the court: thank you. (the following proceedings were held within the hearing of the jury.) mr. geraghty: mr. schultz asked you for $17 million. that is an incredible sum of money, ladies and gentlemen. what is the evidence you have heard that supports a number like that? how do you even get to 1 million, let alone 17 million? i've said it several times, but we are talking about a case where every pack of cigarettes that lamar danielson ever smoked had a federally mandated warning label on it. he had a job that constantly reminded him of the damage that cigarette smoking can cause. he had family members who told him to quit many times over the years. smoking was something that lamar danielson wanted to do, that he enjoyed doing. and mrs. danielson never once told him, "i want you to quit smoking. i think you should quit." he never expressed any interest in quitting until the late 1980s. should mrs. danielson and her family be made millionaires when the evidence shows that lamar danielson lived his life exactly the way he wanted to live it? and in this case, ladies and gentlemen, you do not have to speculate about how much mr. danielson would have earned over his lifetime and provided to his family. the parties have agreed to that amount, and that is what is called the "economic damages." these are damages to compensate for the loss of money the family would have received if mr. danielson had continued to work and ultimately retired at a normal age of retirement. we have already agreed to that number, ladies and gentlemen. there is no dispute about that. and the number that we agreed to before the trial started was $2.3 million. now, you saw it was broken down into several pieces, and i will not go over those pieces, but we agreed to $2.3 million. that, ladies and gentlemen, in and of itself is a lot of money. now, i do not think you should award damages in this case. but if you disagree with me, i would submit that 2.3 million adequately compensates mrs. danielson and her daughters. but that is only one component of compensatory damages. plaintiff also asked you for a combined $15 million, 6 for mrs. danielson, and 3 for each of her children in pain and suffering. and, ladies and gentlemen, that is above and beyond the $2.3 million that we have agreed is an amount that compensates the plaintiff and her family fully for the financial support that mr. danielson would have provided. again, we do not believe damages are appropriate in this case. but if you were inclined to award any damages for pain and suffering above and beyond that 2.3 million-dollar number, i would suggest that a more appropriate number is 250,000 to 300,000 per family member. that is $3.5 million total. that is still a tremendous amount of money. it would take a family making $50,000 a year -- mr. schultz: judge, this is the same objection. the court: sustain the objection. mr. geraghty: i'll move on. the court: thank you. mr. geraghty: here's the bottom line your honor -- ladies and gentlemen. if you decide that mrs. danielson and her family are entitled to recover damages for a lifetime of decisions that mr. danielson and only mr. danielson made, use your best judgment to decide what you think is a fair amount. but understand, there is no dispute about the amount of money he would have earned and provided to his family. that amount is $2.3 million, and that is still a tremendous amount of money. two more issues, and i'm going to sit down, ladies and gentlemen. the final question on the verdict form asks whether you find by clear and convincing evidence that punitive damages are warranted against philip morris. if you answer "no" to that question, you never get to the issue of punitive damages. so let me talk briefly so you understand what you are being asked to decide. you are not being asked to decide the amount of punitive damages. the issue here is whether, by clear and convincing evidence, plaintiff has shown that she is entitled to punitive damages. now, i want to make sure that if you get to this issue, you clearly understand what you have to decide. when you look in the instructions, you will see that "clear and convincing evidence" is defined. it is a much higher burden than the greater weight of the evidence. it will say that you need to find that the evidence was precise, explicit, lacking in confusion, and that it produces a firm belief or conviction without hesitation about the matter at issue. in other words, you need to be really, really, really convinced that punitive damages are warranted. punitive damages can only be based on conduct that relates specifically to lamar danielson himself. this case is about lamar danielson, not all cigarette smokers, and not the general public. lamar danielson, ladies and gentlemen, always had the information available to him to make an informed decision about whether he wanted to smoke cigarettes or whether he wanted to quit. he always had the ability to quit smoking whenever he was truly motivated to do so. he simply did not want to quit for good until, unfortunately, it was too late. you have heard no evidence during this trial that anything that philip morris did or did not do, said or did not say, caused mr. danielson to begin smoking or to continue smoking. so, ladies and gentlemen, given the evidence you have heard, the plaintiff has simply failed to meet her burden to prove by clear and convincing evidence that punitive damages are warranted in this case. your answer to that question should be "no." now, i'm going to sit down here in just a few minutes. and mr. schultz will have one more opportunity to speak to you, and that is because, as you have heard, the plaintiff bears the burden of proof. now, i do not know exactly what mr. schultz will say, but i can imagine he is going to say some very critical things about philip morris. i'm almost certain of that. but, as you listen to the things he says, ask yourself -- every time he says something, ask yourself what does this have to do with lamar danielson? what does it have to do with lamar danielson? a strong, intelligent, and well-educated man who you now know enjoyed smoking cigarettes and who had no real interest in quitting until the end. the truth is, ladies and gentlemen, we do enjoy a tremendous amount of freedom in this country. we have the right to make decisions for ourselves and lifestyle choices that are not always in our best interests. and with that freedom comes the obligation to accept personal responsibility for those decisions. and in the end, ladies and gentlemen, that is what this case is all about. are we going to hold philip morris legally responsible for the decisions made by a strong, intelligent, and well-educated man, who lived his life the way he wanted to live it and who smoked cigarettes because that is what he wanted to do? that is what this case is all about. and based on all the evidence you have heard over the last two weeks, the answer should be clear. based on the evidence you have heard in lamar danielson's case, the evidence supports one and only one true verdict, and that is a verdict in favor of philip morris. ladies and gentlemen, i am done. this is the last time i'm going to have the opportunity to address you, and i simply want to leave you with this: i can speak -- i know on behalf of hassia and myself that it has really been a privilege and an honor to present this case to you, to present the evidence to you. we know how attentive, how patient, and how indulgent you have been with the process. and all i can really say at the very end of the day is thank you very much for all of that. so thank you.