closing argument by the defense mr. mccarter: and good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. i'm happy to be able to talk to you at the end of this case. and thank you for your time and attention throughout the trial. and i say that on my behalf and on behalf of the folks who are working with me, at the office, behind the scenes, putting in the effort day and night here. as we have done throughout the case, i'm going to take most of the defense time up. i'm going to talk about arguments and reasons and evidence that applies to both defendants. and then you are going to hear from miss patterson, 169 who will talk about reasons, additional reasons, why you should find in favor of her client, r.j. reynolds. so i want to start by really picking up where i left off in my opening statement. and that is talking about what the evidence showed in this case. you may recall i talked about this about six days ago. what the evidence showed was that mrs. davis was aware of the risks of smoking. mr. byrd: objection as to time, age. the court: well, if we reach that, we will get to it. i do not think we have to reach that yet. go ahead. mr. mccarter: that miss davis smoked because she enjoyed smoking. that she was able to quit when she wanted to quit. that mrs. davis was not affected by anything the tobacco companies said or did. and i'm going to go through these one by one, starting with her awareness of the dangers of smoking. because what you have seen in the evidence is that for 39 years, the last 39 years of her smoking, mrs. davis was warned of the risks on every single package of cigarettes she smoked. there is no dispute in this case that r.j. reynolds and philip morris complied with the law and put this warning on every package of cigarettes they sold in the 170 united states between 1966 and 1970. no dispute about it. that was on every pack of cigarettes miss davis smoked during those years. the warning changed in 1970. and from 1975 to '85 -- 1970 to '85, this was the warning on all of mrs. davis' packs. she testified that she knew the warnings were on her packs and she understood the warnings. she understood the message they were telling her, that cigarette smoking was dangerous to her health. no dispute that r.j. reynolds and philip morris complied with the law and put this warning on every package of cigarettes they sold during those years. then, of course, in 1985, the warning changed again. and for the last 20 years mrs. davis smoked, one of these four warnings would have been on every package of cigarettes she smoked. no dispute again that r.j. reynolds and philip morris complied with the law at all times and put one of these warnings on every package of cigarettes. mrs. davis was warned of the very disease she would get, emphysema, 13 years before she got it. she had a warning on her pack speaking specifically to that disease. now, plaintiff's counsel earlier did an analogy 171 where he was talking about, well, what if -- what if we found out later that cell phones are causing cancer? but what he did not use in his analogy was what if your cell phone had a warning on it every time you picked it up that told you, warning, using a cell phone causes cancer? that is the analogy here. that is what mrs. davis had. for 39 years that she was using her cigarettes, there were warnings that she would have seen every time she picked up her pack. and in the advertising, when she saw advertising after 1971, 1972, every one of those ads would have had a warning on it as well. but warnings were not the only source of information for mrs. davis about the dangers of smoking. we know from the evidence, and you have seen it, that her friends and family members talked to her about the risks of smoking throughout the years. mr. byrd: objection. vague as to time. the court: well, i'm just going to say this once, and i do not think defense counsel is suggesting anything different. but we do not hold children to the same standard as adults in terms of making decisions. so the question of voluntariness is really in relation to her as an adult 172 after the age of 18. mr. mccarter: thank you, your honor. and these warnings were all on the packs when she was an adult. and these conversations with her friends and family members all occurred when she was an adult. remember, her husband, jackie, quit smoking in the early 1970s. he quit cold turkey. and he and miss davis used to smoke together. miss davis said in her deposition -- and you heard this read -- that the only thing he said after he quit, the only thing he said was he was not going to buy her cigarettes anymore. but what you heard when she was cross-examined yesterday is that mr. davis did, in fact, talk to her after he quit smoking. he told her it was bad for her health. he told her she should quit. that was the same message miss davis was getting to her over the years from her sons. her son jackie talked to her about her smoking in the 1970s and 1980s and said she should quit. she had the same conversation with david. she had the same conversation with tommy. she talked to her brother cecil. he was the one who quit smoking when the smoke was choking him. he could not breath. he told her all about it, and he told her how he quit. 173 and you heard today from fran craft. now, let me back up a second. because fran craft was the person that mrs. davis said before the lawsuit knew the most about her smoking. you heard her testify yesterday that she filled out a form. she was asked to list the name of people who know about her smoking. and she listed one name. and that was fran craft. we brought you fran craft's testimony today. mr. byrd: objection. misstates the testimony. the court: excuse me? mr. byrd: it misstates the facts in evidence about the verified worksheet. she is supposed to list anybody that had any knowledge of all of her claims and damages. the court: no. i think this is fair argument. overruled. mr. mccarter: thank you, your honor. she listed one person, fran craft. who brought fran craft's testimony to you? we did. we did not bring you experts who had been paid $3 million or $1 million or $350,000 who say the same thing in every case in which they are getting paid. we brought you testimony from the one person she listed as having knowledge about facts in this case. and what did fran craft say? she said she always talked to 174 mrs. davis about her smoking. she told mrs. davis she should quit. what did mrs. davis say in response? we would laugh it off and say, i do not want to quit smoking because i enjoy smoking. and she did enjoy smoking. and she was aware of the risks of smoking. mrs. davis' doctors talked about her smoking with her. that is just some of the medical records you have been shown. but you know that going back to the 1960s, mrs. davis' doctors were telling her to quit smoking while she was pregnant. they repeated the message in all three of her pregnancies. then in the time we have medical records, you saw notes in the medical records telling mrs. davis, counseling her to discontinue smoking. she was getting messages from her doctors as well. these messages sunk in. there is no dispute about it, because i asked mrs. davis this yesterday. i asked her, going back to the mid-1960s when you were in your 20s, you knew that smoking was bad for your health. when you were 25 years old, you knew smoking was bad for your health, correct? answer: true. from age 25 on, for the last 50 years, mrs. davis 175 knew smoking was bad for her health. now, you heard yesterday when plaintiff's counsel was questioning mrs. davis, he asked, well, when you were a little girl living in tampa, did anybody warn you that cigarette smoking was addictive? and he may have gotten an answer he did not expect. but the answer was yes. yes, people told me that. now, i'm not saying that to suggest that mrs. davis is to blame as a ten-year-old for disregarding that advice. but my point is that the information about addictiveness, that it is hard to quit smoking was so widespread that a ten-year-old girl in tampa in a rural area knew about it and was warned about it. that is how widespread knowledge was about how hard it was to quit tobacco, going back for hundreds of years, for a hundred years or more. now, the evidence also shows that miss davis smoked because she enjoyed smoking. you saw a video of her deposition where she testified that she loved smoking. she loved smoking. and yesterday when she testified, she testified again that she enjoyed smoking and that she told her friends over the years that she enjoyed smoking, that she told them that she enjoyed smoking before she ever filed this lawsuit. 176 and i talked about fran craft's testimony. you heard that earlier today. we read it to you. mrs. davis told her that she did not want to quit because she enjoyed smoking. and yesterday when mrs. davis testified, she admitted that that is what she told fran craft. miss davis also said that she enjoyed smoking marlboro cigarettes, that they were her favorite cigarette. and she also said -- and this is important at the bottom -- that she continued to smoke marlboro as her brand for all the years she smoked it. because you enjoyed them, correct? the image you are getting from plaintiff's counsel and plaintiff in this entire case is that mrs. davis was a victim to her addiction, a victim to addiction who was driven to smoke compulsively. that is not why she smoked. she smoked because she loved it and she enjoyed it. she knew the risks, but it was something she enjoyed doing. and she was willing to accept the risks to do it. mr. byrd: objection. assumption of risk, your honor. the court: well, let me say this to you, ladies and gentlemen. if you were to find on the one hand that 177 miss davis was addicted and that addiction was a sufficient cause of her copd and you were also to find that she was aware of that risk and still insisted on smoking, you would still, in that situation, have to find for the plaintiff. because the addiction that caused her to continue smoking, even though she could not -- there is a different issue whether she could have stopped. but the mere fact that she knew of the risk when she undertook smoking is not a defense if the addiction was the cause of her copd. go ahead, counsel. mr. mccarter: thank you, your honor. third, the evidence shows that mrs. davis was able to quit smoking when she wanted to quit. the fact is that mrs. davis was not interested in quitting smoking for a very long time. when she heard from the surgeon general in the 1960s that smoking was bad for her health, she was not interested in quitting and did not try to quit. when she saw the warnings on her packs in the 1960s and the 1970s and afterward, she was not interested in quitting and did not want to quit. when her husband jackie quit in the 1970s, she was not interested in quitting. when her children urged her to quit smoking in the '70s and '80s, she was not interested in quitting. 178 when fran craft, her friend, said, you should quit smoking, in the 1990s and 2000s, she said she did not want to quit. she enjoyed the cigarettes. and when her doctors advised her to quit, first when she was pregnant and later in life, she was not interested in quitting. and what she said to her sons, i think, speaks volumes. because what she told her sons when they said, mom, you should quit, she said, leave me alone. i know it is bad for my health. it is my decision to smoke. and that i will quit when i want to quit. and that is exactly what she did in 2005. she quit when she wanted to quit. this is from her friend fran craft that you heard this morning. did mrs. davis ever tell you, ever indicate to you that she had any interest in quitting smoking? the answer: no. i submit to you that is about as opposite as you can get from what the plaintiff is telling you in this case. and this is evidence from before this lawsuit was filed, evidence as to miss davis' reaction when miss craft would talk to her about her smoking. what miss davis said before the lawsuit was filed was, i do not want to quit smoking. i enjoy smoking. and 179 that is why she smoked. and, you know, you have seen this record. you have seen this board numerous times. but even as we get into the last year of mrs. davis' smoking, her doctor is counseling her to quit smoking. and he writes down, at this time she does not seem receptive to it. october 2004, that is what her doctor writes down. that is -- remember, this is year 19 of that supposed 20-year marathon quit attempt using the waterpik filters, where she says she is trying to quit for 20 years. and her doctor is trying to help her quit. and whatever she says to him, he writes down, she is not receptive to his message about quitting smoking. now, you may remember when dr. cummings was here, i showed this record to him. and then there were some questions asked later suggesting that the reason mrs. davis did not want to quit at this point in time was because she was taking care of her son tommy. you did not hear that from mrs. davis yesterday. dr. cummings was talking about it. but mrs. davis did not say that. and, in fact, this is two years after tommy was injured. and mrs. davis was saying the same thing to fran craft before tommy was hurt. and when she wound up 180 quitting, she quit and tommy was still hurt. so this had nothing to do with her son's injury. mrs. davis did not claim it did. it was only dr. cummings making that claim. mr. byrd: objection. misstates testimony of dr. cummings. the court: the jury's recollection will govern. and i want to mention to you, ladies and gentlemen -- i think i mentioned this before -- if at any time during your deliberations you are unsure of what someone said, just send us a note. and we will find the testimony and we will send it back to you so you do not have to speculate. we can tell you definitively. we can provide you with the actual transcript of what was said about any particular matter. in this matter, i do not recall one way or the other. so your recollection will govern. mr. mccarter: thank you, your honor. just a few months later, she did quit in 2005. so what changed? what changed -- and you remember this from her testimony -- is that she decided she had spent too much money on cigarettes, and she was tired of spending money on cigarettes. she had nine cigarettes left in her pack. she smoked them all in a row. and she did something she had 181 never done before. and that is she threw away her pack. she threw away her ashtrays. she threw away her lighters. because at that point in 2005, she had finally made the decision that she wanted to quit smoking. and once she made that decision, it was as simple as smoking the cigarettes in the pack, throwing everything away, and she never smoked again. now, before that when you heard from their witnesses that she is trying and trying and trying and wanting and wanting to quit but just cannot do it, before she did that in 2005, she never went 24 hours without smoking; she never threw away her ashtrays and lighters and cigarettes. there is no evidence that mrs. davis ever told anybody that she wanted to quit before she quit in 2005. and there is no evidence that anyone saw her try to quit before she quit in 2005. and this is important because the evidence is that if mrs. davis had decided to quit earlier and just finish her pack and throw her lighters and ashtrays and cigarettes away, if she had done that sooner, before she got sick, she never would have gotten copd. mr. byrd: objection, your honor. causation. conflating the issue. looking at the screen. the court: let me hear the last sentence re-read. 182 oh, wait a minute. here it is. sorry. overruled. mr. mccarter: this is from their own witness' testimony. this is dr. burns. he admitted if she had quit smoking, if a smoker quits before they have damage to their lungs, they are not going to go on to get copd. and mrs. davis had that opportunity for years and years and years, from the time she learned the dangers of smoking when she was 25 up until whenever it was that she first damaged her lungs. mr. byrd: objection. causation. the court: i think we are going to need a quick sidebar. i'm sorry. counsel? (discussion at sidebar on the record.) the court: so on the third required prong, i've already told the jury that addiction is sufficient cause, that the fact that she knew about it does not matter. what is it that you -- mr. byrd: well, i think this goes to -- you gave the instruction on the third question, on smoking, whether she could quit or not was not -- it is really the same deal. we do that because it is a causation question. it is basically saying that she knew this and she could have quit earlier. there was no causation. she had 183 the ability to quit. instead, i think we are just getting too far afield from what causation is all about. the court: this is the -- i think the argument we had at the charging conference -- i think that under the law, as i understand it, this is still a third required finding of members of the class. it is not a thereafter clause. as you know, i instructed the jury cannot use thereafter. mr. byrd: we use after for comparative fault. the court: yeah. mr. byrd: it should not be used in causation. mr. mccarter: i'm not even arguing in the context of a specific verdict form question. i'm just talking about what the evidence shows. if it is relevant to one of the claims, there should not be these objections. the court: and i agree. i think i'm a little concerned, although i do think the objections are fair, to clarify. i do not think defense counsel said anything wrong. but there was some ambiguity, and it should be clarified. i think an extension of risk can be clarified. so i think this one is still within the realm of argument. i will not have an instruction at this time. i'll keep it under consideration as we go forward. 184 all right. (end of discussion at sidebar.) mr. mccarter: if mrs. davis had quit smoking when she was 25 years old and knew that smoking was bad for her health, she would have avoided getting copd. if she had quit when the warning went on the pack in 1966, she would have avoided getting copd. if she had quit in 1970 when the warning changed, she would have avoided getting copd. if she had quit in the '70s and '80s when her husband and her sons were talking to her about her smoking, she would have avoided getting copd. in 1985 when the warning specifically warned her of the disease she would get 13 years later, if she had quit then, she would have avoided getting it. the court: now, again, i'm sorry, counsel. i need to just remind you, ladies and gentlemen, because this needs to be kept in mind. if you find that she was already addicted and you find that the addiction would have caused her ultimate copd, then the fact that she could have quit may be relevant for comparative fault. but it is not a total defense. so just keep that in mind. it goes to -- in that context, you will have to determine, well, was, you know, 185 was she -- how much of a fault for her disease did she bear some blame for because she did not quit? so it is highly relevant to the case. but it is not a total defense. it would still be liable. mr. mccarter: thank you, your honor. the evidence also showed that mrs. davis was not affected by anything the tobacco companies ever said or did. plaintiff's counsel has put a lot of those sticky things, those sticky notes on that timeline over there. and i told you in my opening that -- to be on the lookout. they are going to show you a lot of old documents and old videos and old ads. but the question is, what, if anything, does it have to do with mrs. davis? and i submit to you that if you took off all the stickies on there that are things that she never saw or heard or knew about or was affected by, if you stripped their board of all those stickies that had nothing to do with her, this is what their board would look like. because none of the statements they showed, none of the videos they played, none of the advertisements they showed you had anything to do with mrs. davis. and we know that because that is what mrs. davis said yesterday. 186 mrs. davis testified yesterday that she never heard any tobacco companies' statements. nothing. question: you do not remember ever seeing or hearing a statement by anyone from the tobacco companies at any time, correct? answer: correct. what is on that board over there has nothing to do with mrs. davis. nothing on there, no statement by the tobacco companies about smoking and disease or addiction. she never heard it. it never had any effect on her. what about cigarette advertising? remember, we had dr. kyriakoudes there for three or four hours talking about advertising? then i asked him, first question on cross-examination: does anything you are talking about, are you saying, telling the jury it has something to do with mrs. davis? her as an individual? no. so he spent three or four hours talking about things that there is no evidence had anything to do with her. and we know from dr. burns, he reviewed the depositions and the medical records. and he talked about cigarette advertising intercepting people as they are trying to quit. 187 well, i asked dr. burns. and he testified that advertising did not influence her to start. if that is -- i think that is a fair statement. so their own witness is saying, cigarette advertising is not what caused mrs. davis to start smoking. and, of course, you know from mrs. davis' testimony that she was not influenced by cigarette advertising. this was long, so i'm not going to read it. but she is -- she did not have a television growing up. she did not see ads on television for cigarettes before she started smoking. she was not influenced by television advertising to go out and buy a pack of cigarettes. in fact, she did not even choose her brands. she did not choose her brands based on cigarette advertising. she chose her brands based on what people gave her when she was younger. then when she was an adult, she chose her brand based on what her husband bought. he brought the cigarettes home, and she smoked what he bought. she was not influenced by advertising. now, the rest of the time i want to spend talking about the verdict form, because that is going to be your job, of course, is to get the verdict form to deliberate together and to answer the questions that are posed to you. and i want to walk through the questions on the 188 verdict form. but before i do, i want to say something about this burden of proof, because with the exception of the comparative fault issue, the plaintiff bears the burden of proof on everything. and they bear the burden of proof to provide you with credible evidence. credible evidence. evidence you can believe in and trust that allows you to conclude that they met their burden of proof. now, there is a statement in here that you do not decide whether they meet their burden of proof the way counsel suggested, by stacking up the number of witnesses on both sides and saying they called more witnesses, they used more of your time, so they win. that is not the way it works. it does not mean the greater number of witnesses. and one reason why is because we go second. we have the benefit of cross-examining their witnesses. and when we ask their witnesses questions and they give us answers, that is evidence you are getting from us. and we put in a lot of evidence, hours and hours of evidence from when we cross-examined dr. burns and dr. kyriakoudes and dr. cummings and mrs. davis and then we brought you fran craft. so this nonsense about us not bringing evidence is just that. it is nonsense. because what you learned from 189 our cross-examinations of their own witnesses is that people have known for a hundred years or more that cigarettes are harmful to your health, that they are hard to quit. that people have been using terms like coffin nails and cancer sticks and nicotine fiend and nicotine fit going back to the 1800s. you heard that when we cross-examined their witnesses. that is evidence that we are bringing to you. you learned that it was common knowledge that people knew before mrs. davis was ever born that smoking was hard to quit. and it was such common knowledge that it was communicated to her as a kid. you learned about those 1950s studies that were published in all of the magazines and newspapers linking smoking to lung cancer when we cross-examined their witnesses. you learned that by 1954, 95 percent of americans in 1954 had heard or read something to the effect that smoking caused cancer. that was our evidence. you were shown the document that talked about addiction as a reason people smoked in 1959. and what you learned when we cross-examined their witness was that the person who wrote the document was simply copying down reasons why people smoked that he read in a newspaper and saw in surveys and that there was not any secret research 190 showing cigarette smoking was addictive. what you learned in our cross-examinations was that when the tobacco companies had a list of carcinogens and cigarette smoke in the early 1960s -- they showed a philip morris document, for example -- philip morris gave that list of carcinogens over to the surgeon general. and then the surgeon general then thanked philip morris and thanked r.j. reynolds specifically for their contributions to that 1964 report. you learned about the warnings when we cross-examined their experts. you learned about television advertising coming off of tv and radio in 1971 when we cross-examined their experts. you learned about 30 million people quitting smoking between 1964 and 1979 when we cross-examined their experts. you also learned that one of those 30 million people was mrs. davis' husband. you learned that today somewhere between 55 and 65 million americans have quit smoking and that there are more former smokers in this country than there are current smokers. and through our cross-examination of mrs. davis, you learned all the stuff we just talked about, about how she knew the risks of smoking, going back to when she was years old. 191 and you also learned that her copd did not manifest until 1998. that is what you learned yesterday when we showed the medical records from mrs. davis' doctors. and that is the issue i want to turn to right now, because its first on the verdict form. and what i thought i would do is try to give you a sense of the big picture on this issue right now. and then i'm going to show you the documents. so this is the timeline of the events, the evidence relating to her copd. and you see here, there is a thick line there. that is november 21, 1996. and, of course, that is the important date, right, because she has to prove that her copd manifested before that date. so here's all the evidence showing that she had copd before that date. and there is just nothing on there. and i'm going to talk about dr. burns' testimony since they talked about that. but there is no evidence. there is no evidence that mrs. davis had copd before this date. all the evidence relating to her copd and her shortness of breath comes after 1996. so the story is, the relevant story is that mrs. davis is an active-duty police officer in waldo from 1985 to february 22, 1998. 192 and on that day, she breaks her ribs. she breaks her ribs on the job. she then goes and sees dr. velasquez. dr. velasquez is her family doctor in gainesville. and so she breaks her ribs. she is goes to see dr. velasquez. and we know that sometime after this happens, after february '98, she has her first pulmonary function test. now, you remember that pulmonary function test is that breathing test that is used to see if somebody has copd. dr. burns talks about it. i'm going to show you mrs. davis' testimony. but you may remember already from yesterday, she said she did not have a test like that until after she quit the police force. so after february 1998. then a month later, she is in the hospital, and it references the history of copd. well, we know to diagnose copd she has to have a pulmonary function test, because dr. burns talked about that. and the record, which i'll show you, references her having had one. so she must have had that pulmonary function test sometime in the month between february 22 and march 22, 1998, because we know the test was done after she quit the police force but before she was in the hospital in march. mr. byrd: objection, your honor. misstates 193 testimony. these are not dr. velasquez's records. the court: no. the argument is being made inferentially from a circumstantial basis. so, ladies and gentlemen, you should understand as to arguments from both counsel, and particularly on this issue, that they are -- both counsel are trying to reconstruct the relevant time period from inferences from circumstantial evidence. so that is perfectly permissible. under florida law, doctors do not have to keep their records more than five years. some of them do, some of them do not. but you have already heard that records from some periods are missing. missing in a sense that we do not know where they are. the doctor could have legitimately destroyed them or whatever. so counsel for both sides can quite properly make arguments to you that you should conclude that she developed and manifested copd at x time or y time, and you will make your own decision after you have heard all of the arguments. mr. mccarter: thank you, your honor. mr. byrd: just to be clear, my objection is referencing -- i'm happy to tell you at sidebar. i was not referencing dr. velasquez's records. i was referencing testimony. 194 the court: i think that is clear. there is no -- i do not recall -- counsel can correct me if i'm wrong -- i think that the record is clear that dr. velasquez's records from this period are not available. mr. byrd: the argument was that she saw dr. velasquez in february and march of '98. using these records, that is not true. those records are not from dr. velasquez. the court: well, i do not want you testifying. i will hear you briefly at the sidebar. (discussion at sidebar on the record.) the court: he is making a circumstantial argument as to when the test might have occurred. the only thing i found at fault in defense counsel's thing was his statement that there was no evidence. that is really what you were saying is that there is no evidence you should accept that she had copd because there is documents in evidence which you are going to get to. there was the reference about her history, which the document shows. i do not see anything wrong with that specifically. mr. byrd: well, what he started saying was, he said in march of '98, she saw dr. velasquez. and using this and saying that that is where dr. velasquez did this. in my record, it is not dr. velasquez. in fact, 195 there is no records from dr. velasquez. he is trying to make it sound like february of '98 with the ribs. the court: so when is the ribs? mr. byrd: the ribs is february 22, '98. that is not -- that is not dr. velasquez. it is the other doctor. he said it was. mr. mccarter: she testified yesterday that before she went to the hospital, she saw dr. velasquez. she referred her. that is what i'm talking about. the court: i agree. i agree. that is what she said. i agree. overruled. (end of discussion at sidebar.) mr. mccarter: okay. back to the overview here, and then i'll show you the actual documents. she has her first pulmonary function test after 1998. that is a necessary thing to diagnose somebody with copd, according to dr. burns. that did not happen until 1998. what about symptoms of copd? she talked about being overheated in the sun when she was working traffic duty. now, you are standing on hot asphalt and you are in your late 50s in a hot police officer outfit and it is the middle of summer. is it a surprise that you get overheated? was there any evidence -- is there any evidence 196 that the overheating was the result of copd? what did she do when she got overheated? did she go to a pulmonologist? no. she did not do that until after 1998. she went in her car and turned on the air conditioning just like anybody else would do. there is no evidence tying that overheating to copd, no evidence at all. what the evidence is is that there was no shortness of breath. by the time you get into the spring of 1998, that is what she is telling her doctors. she is had no problems breathing. july 1998. then later she has another pulmonary function test in august, and it suggests a diagnosis of emphysema. suggests a diagnosis of emphysema. and then we have a record saying shortness of breath. not back before 1996. shortness of breath recently. so as you are looking for symptoms of copd, the first shortness of breath report in the medical records is 1998, september, when it is recent. so let us go through, because this is obviously -- this is where i would submit to you that your deliberations do start on this. this is question one. but i would submit to you they start and end on 197 this question because there is just no evidence from which you could conclude that she had copd by the date she needs to prove it. okay. so let us go on. when was the first pulmonary function test, right? because she cannot be diagnosed with copd until she has that test. she testified she does not remember having such a test until after she left the police force. that is 1998. this is her testimony from yesterday, that she remembers having a test done in 1998. she does not remember having a breathing test done on her lungs before that. that is what the evidence is. so the first pulmonary function test in evidence is 1998. then we get to her march 22 record. past medical history. remarkable for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. now, counsel made a big deal of the word history, like we are going back to christopher columbus or george washington or something. but there was evidence to tell you how far we are going back. because what you know is that for her to have a history of copd, she has to have had a pulmonary function test. and we know the pulmonary function test was not until after february of '98. so it had to be that one 198 month before. is there other evidence that she had recently had a pulmonary function test? you bet. later in the record, it talks about she has had pulmonary function tests here in this hospital and that they suggested mild-to-moderate obstructive ventilatory defect. so put the evidence together, the test they are referring to here that she has had is the one that she had after she left the police force, in february of 1998. continue forward, may 20, 1998, no shortness of breath. but remember, she has those broken ribs. and when she breathes in deeply, it hurts. it hurts. now, i asked her about this record yesterday. and she said, no, no, i did not tell my doctor i did not have shortness of breath then. but i did tell him the rest of the sentence. she agreed that the rest of the sentence was accurate. i submit to you that the whole sentence is accurate and that she did not have shortness of breath, she did not have symptoms of copd in may of 1998, a year and a half after the cutoff on here. july 1998, she has had no problems breathing. no problems breathing, july 1998, except for when she breathes in deeply, her ribs hurt. 199 this was another one. i do not remember telling my doctor i did not have shortness of breath. but the rest of the sentence is right. the whole sentence is right. the doctor was not making it up. she did not have symptoms of copd in july 1998. but after that, something happens where she goes into the hospital up in gainesville, and she does have another pulmonary function test. that is the one where they say it suggests diagnosis of emphysema. she then goes to see a different doctor in september, and she tells the doctor that she is having shortness of breath recently. so that is -- everything i talked about on this timeline, you have just seen in the evidence. you have just seen what the evidence shows, that everything points to the copd manifesting after, well after, in fact, the cutoff. now, there is another piece of evidence here, and that comes from this medical record. because the doctor went on to give her advice and said that she should be evaluated by a pulmonologist. and she said, well, i'd rather see my family doctor. and he said, well, that is fine, as long as they are able to take care of your lungs. 200 and remember, i asked mrs. davis, i said, well, he was giving you that advice because up until this point in september of 1998 you did not -- you had not been seeing a pulmonologist, right? and she said -- she said, no, i had not been seeing a pulmonologist before september 1998. if she had lung problems, if she had copd, if she had shortness of breath, would not she have been seeing a pulmonologist during that time? well, what she admits is that in september of 1998, getting close to two years after this cut-off, she still had not been seeing a pulmonologist. so on the question one on the verdict form, the answer to this question is no. and if you check it no, you are done. the case is over. and that is where, i submit, the case ought to end. there is no mention of mrs. davis having copd in the medical records before 1998. there is no testimony from any doctor who treated her before 1998 that she had copd before then. absolutely no evidence of that. and it is their burden of proof. she did not have a pulmonary function test done before 1998. she did not even have a pulmonologist she had been seeing before 1998. these problems with her lungs happened after 201 november 21, 1996. so what about dr. burns? because that is what they are hinging their case on on this. they are saying, well, dr. burns said if you have a moderate level of copd, you have had it for two or three years or three or four years, whatever he said. what they did not tell you about was the preface, what dr. burns said before that. he was not talking about mrs. davis. they have this world-renown pulmonologist, and he never told you that mrs. davis had copd before that date. he never said that. what he said was he was talking about on average. and he qualified it. he was standing here on this chart. i remember standing over there when he was doing it. and he said, this is an average. whatever the number was. it is an average. it is everybody. individuals, not everybody follows the average. some people decline, get into the copd category faster. some people slower. it is just individual. this case is not about when the average smoker would have had copd. it is about when mrs. davis had copd. and dr. burns said absolutely nothing about mrs. davis. and there is no other evidence regarding mrs. davis other than the evidence that points to 1998. 202 so, look, how do you reconcile the evidence in this case? look at what mrs. davis said, the facts and circumstances that led her to go to her doctor regarding her shortness of breath. and let us look at what the evidence says as to when those things happened. she testified yesterday that she had recent shortness of breath, that she went to dr. velasquez, that she had a pulmonary function test, that she visited different doctors, and that she had copd and emphysema. okay. so when did it happen, right? that is what she said happened. let us talk about when it happened. we just saw a recent shortness of breath, september 1998. visited dr. velasquez in february/march 1998. first pulmonary function test, 1998. visited different doctors. we saw she visited a dr. nelson and a dr. melton after visiting dr. velasquez, 1998. copd/emphysema diagnosis in the medical records, 1998. how do we explain it? i submit to you that the explanation is what you saw yesterday from what mrs. davis wrote after her deposition. i'm not arguing that she is making up the sequence of events as they happened. she just disremembered them. 203 we have the benefit of the medical records. this was 15, 20 years ago. and we know what the benefit of the medical records is when things happened. and when she was telling people dates and times in her deposition, it was the same thing yesterday, that all dates and times were guessed or estimated without actual knowing. and that explains why she is saying it was before 1996 and why all the evidence in the case says it was 1998. so when you get to this question on the verdict form, the answer to the question is no. now, question two on the verdict form asks whether the plaintiff has proved that she is addicted to nicotine. and you have the definition the court has given you. and i want to focus on a couple of elements of this. one is they have to prove that she had a compulsive need for and use of a habit-forming substance, that she was compulsively smoking. she had a compulsive need for cigarettes. and they have to prove also that she had well-defined physiological symptoms upon withdrawal. they did not prove that she is addicted. mrs. davis, there is no evidence that she was a compulsive smoker. she was able to quit when she wanted to quit. when she quit, she did not have withdrawal symptoms. 204 and dr. burns and dr. cummings, who they are hinging their testimony on, the testimony is not credible. mrs. davis, we saw the records where she is smoking half a pack a day. we saw them when dr. cummings was here, because remember they did not send dr. cummings those records. and dr. cummings admitted that if he had seen those records, he would have had to score her the lowest on that part of his addiction test, not the highest, which he did. now, there is been different versions of this, but one version is that mrs. davis, the medical records say she was smoking half a pack a day or one pack a day for 50 years. that is one version of it. the other version is that she was smoking more than that in the past, but she cut down to half a pack a day after she got sick. i would submit to you either way, it shows she is not a compulsive smoker. if she is limiting her smoking to half a pack a day for 50 years, that is not compulsion. if, instead, the other version is true that she was smoking two or three packs a day and then cuts down to half a pack a day and is able to stick with that, limit her smoking to that for the next ten years, that shows she can control her smoking. but either way, there is no evidence that she was 205 compelled or driven or desperately needed cigarettes. she was in control of her own smoking behavior at all times. i'm going to -- these are the records that show -- that we showed dr. cummings. i'm going to skip through them. you have seen them. there is also no evidence, keep in mind, corroborating -- no other evidence, just mrs. davis' say-so -- corroborating her testimony that she wanted to quit smoking before 2005. and there is no evidence corroborating her testimony that she made a serious effort to quit before 2005. there is no -- her testimony is the only evidence on that. they did not bring you friends or family members to back it up. and it is not backed up by any of the medical records either. we talked about this earlier, but when mrs. davis wanted to quit in 2005, she did quit. and it was easy. she threw everything away. and she was done with it. she could quit when she wanted to quit. before that, she had never gone 24 hours without smoking. she had never thrown everything away. she talked about that liquid concoction she got from the pharmacist that made the cigarettes taste bad. what she did is she would let it wear off and smoke. 206 she talked about the nicotine patch. when she first got a prescription from her doctor for the patch, she did not even go fill it. later she got a patch from the health department. then she smoked while using the patch. she would just take it off and smoke. and then you remember the health department said -- called her and asked her how her experience was. and they said to her, if you are interested in quitting smoking, if you want help, call us back. and she testified she never called them back. when she wanted to quit, she just quit in 2005. and when she finally decided to quit, she woke up one morning and decided she was not going to smoke anymore. in 2005, she said, was when she finally made the decision that she was going to quit smoking. and when she finally made that decision, what happened? she quit, and she quit for good. she did not have any problem quitting. and when she quit, she did not have withdrawal symptoms. remember, dr. cummings testified, he was talking about withdrawal symptoms and he reviewed records and he reviewed testimony. well, i asked dr. cummings, i said, is not it true that the only withdrawal symptom you could find when you looked at everything they gave you was that she gained some 207 weight afterward. that is the only thing he could find in 2005 when she quit. she gained some weight. and you may want to look in the medical records that are in evidence because you are actually not going to find any evidence that she did gain weight after she quit smoking. and, finally, a few words about dr. burns and dr. cummings. they are paid millions of dollars in these cases. dr. burns has been paid more than $3 million. dr. cummings has been paid more than $1 million. they did not even -- dr. burns was never mrs. davis' doctor. neither of them talked to her, interviewed her, interviewed any of her friends and family before they said she was addicted. dr. burns diagnosed her as addicted sitting in his office 3,000 miles away in san diego, california, without ever meeting her. they did not know her when she was smoking. and both of them admitted that in every case they come and testify, when they are getting paid the $4,800 per day, in every case, they always tell the jury the same thing; the smoker was addicted. do you have any doubt in your mind that when 208 dr. burns is getting paid $4,800 to testify, that he is not going to come in and tell the jury that the smoker was addicted? is there any doubt in your mind that he will give that testimony? he says the same thing all the time. both of them admit that not every smoker is addicted, but when they are involved in a lawsuit, guess what? every smoker is addicted. that is their testimony. that is what they want you to find liability based on in this case. they have reviewed all the evidence that they had. neither saw any evidence corroborating what mrs. davis was saying about trying and trying to quit and failing. dr. burns admitted it. the only one who says mrs. davis tried to quit is mrs. davis. nobody else said that in the materials he reviewed. and their testimony was full of holes and inconsistencies. i'm just going to cover a couple in the interest of time. but you remember dr. burns said on his direct that mrs. davis was diagnosed by her doctors as addicted? then on cross-examination he had to admit, you could look through all the medical records you looked at, and they say they sent him everything, and you are not going to find the word addicted, addiction, addictive, anything like that in the medical records. 209 because mrs. davis' doctors did not diagnose her as addicted to nicotine. the only people who diagnosed her are the people who had never met her and are getting paid for their testimony. dr. burns also showed you this chart here, i think, to convey that it is hard for people to quit smoking. but what he had to admit was if he used the standard for trying to quit that is used in this chart, by the rules of the survey, you would have to classify mrs. davis as never having made a quit attempt until 2005. by the rules of the survey he used in his direct examination, he told you she was trying to quit over and over and over again, but the rules of his survey would not count her as ever trying to quit until she did quit. now, dr. cummings sat here and tried to say that there was a reference in her medical records to her trying to quit smoking. you might remember he was sitting up there. he had his medical records, and he is thumbing through and thumbing through, and we are all sitting, waiting and waiting and waiting for him to find one. and then he finds one. and he has to admit it does not say that she actually tried to quit. all it said is that she said she will quit smoking. there is not a 210 single reference in her medical records that she ever tried to quit smoking before she quit in 2005. and, of course, with dr. cummings we had the moments where he was shown medical records, after testifying she wanted to quit and wanted to quit and wanted to quit. it turned out that the plaintiff's lawyers did not send him the medical records where she told her doctor she was not interested in quitting smoking. they did not give that to him before he came here and said she wanted to quit. they did not give him the medical record from 2003 where she said she was confident she could quit smoking. remember, this is year 18 of the supposed failure -- failed quit attempt using waterpik filters. and she is telling her doctor, i'm confident i can quit smoking. they did not give that to dr. cummings. they did not give him this one. she is not receptive to the message to quit smoking. and they did not give him any of those records that we showed where she said she was smoking half a pack a day, where she admitted if he had scored her using that, she would have had the lowest level on his test, not the highest level. so the jury instruction requires you to find that 211 she was a compulsive smoker and that she had physiological withdrawal symptoms. and there simply is not evidence of either. for that reason, if you get this far, if you get past this question on the verdict form, your answer to question two should be no as well. the third question has to do with whether plaintiff has proved that mrs. davis' addiction -- this assumes you found her addicted -- was a legal cause of her copd. and this is the instruction the court will give you. that question gets at if she was addicted, was she heavily addicted? was she addicted enough that her addiction contributed substantially to her continuing to smoke so that if she had not been addicted, she would not have gotten copd? and we have gone through a lot of the evidence relating to this. but mrs. davis' addiction was not a cause of her copd, and she smoked because she enjoyed smoking. that is why she smoked. she did not smoke because of an addiction. mr. byrd: objection. violation of jury instructions. causation. the court: so i'm going to just read you in advance to clarify this, ladies and gentlemen, that -- that portion of my instruction that deals with legal causation. 212 i think you have already seen it on the board. but one of the things that you will be asked is whether or not the plaintiff has shown that it is more likely than not, quote, that her addiction was a legal cause of her copd in the sense that her continued smoking of cigarettes was, at least in part, a natural and direct result of her addiction. in this regard, plaintiff need not prove that addiction was the only reason miss davis continued to smoke cigarettes. she may, for example, have partly smoked them because she enjoyed smoking. but plaintiff must prove that her addiction contributed substantially to her continuing to smoke so that but for the addiction, her copd would not have occurred. so the -- i do not think -- what you have seen is counsel for the plaintiff emphasize one part of that instruction, defense counsel's emphasizing a different part of that instruction. when you get it, you should look at the instruction as a whole. that is the way to figure out the answer to these questions. but counsel may continue. mr. mccarter: thank you, your honor. addiction did not prevent mrs. davis from quitting 213 because she was not interested in quitting smoking. and the cause of her copd, mrs. davis' free choice is what caused her to smoke cigarettes and ultimately to get copd. so if you get this far in the verdict form, your answer should be no. i'm going to skip to question five because miss patterson is going to talk about question four. question five gets to this allocation of fault that was talked about earlier. and if you get this far, i've asked you to consider mrs. davis' own statements about her smoking, what she knew about it, why she smoked, whether she wanted to quit, when you consider this question. because this is what she said to people when they talk to her about her smoking: leave me alone. i know it is bad for my health. it is my decision to smoke. i enjoy smoking. i do not want to quit. i'll quit smoking when i want to quit smoking. those are statements made by somebody who is one hundred percent responsible for the choices they make and the consequences that flow from those choices. that is what people say when they are responsible 214 for their choices. it is their decision. they know it is bad for them. they want to do it. they will stop doing it when they do not want to do it anymore. and that was mrs. davis. and so if you get this far in the verdict form, i would ask you to put down one hundred percent of the responsibility on mrs. davis, 0 percent on philip morris, 0 percent on r.j. reynolds. mr. byrd: objection, your honor. improper legal argument. the court: we will take this up at the end of summation. mr. mccarter: now, plaintiff's counsel talked about, well, they are going to come up here and say it is all her fault. they are going to blame mrs. davis for her smoking. i am not blaming mrs. davis. i am not blaming mrs. davis. but she filed this lawsuit. and she is one hundred percent responsible for the choices she made and the consequences that flow from those choices. on the verdict form, the next questions, six and eight, get at the same issue. it is this fraudulent concealment and the conspiracy claim. and i want to show you one of the important instructions here. and that is what the plaintiff has to prove is 215 that the defendant created the misimpression that cigarette smoking was not a health hazard or was not addictive. there is no evidence that mrs. davis ever had a misimpression about either of those things. she did not testify that she was confused about the risks of smoking at some point in time or she was confused about addiction. there is absolutely no evidence that mrs. davis was ever confused about anything. the second half of this -- they have to prove both -- is that she has to prove that she relied on a misrepresentation and decided to continue to smoke. that is where we get out of this issue of did she actually hear and rely upon -- did she rely upon anything the tobacco company said about the health risks of smoking? and i covered this earlier, but the answer is good. this is from her own testimony. this is from her own testimony, and it is an admission that these questions must be answered no. she does not remember seeing or hearing a statement from anyone from the tobacco companies at any time. and we have gone through this, but you know she knew from the mid-1960s on that smoking was dangerous. and you have seen this evidence and heard it over and over again, the warnings. she heard about cancer sticks. what she talked 216 about with her sons and doctor and husband. what she talked about with fran craft and her doctors in 2004 when she said she did not want to quit. advertising did not influence her to start smoking or to smoke either. i've gone through that. and so on these questions, the answer should be not liable as well, if you make it this far. compensatory damages. you should know that the plaintiffs are not asking for any money for mrs. davis' medical bills. they are not asking for money for medical bills. they are not asking for money for lost income when she could not work. what they are asking for is that $7 million for pain and suffering that they say should be computed based on how many puffs she took off a cigarette. you are going to read the jury instructions. the number of puffs she took off a cigarette have nothing to do with it. it is completely irrelevant to that calculation. and the $7 million is ridiculous. finally, there is a question on punitive damages on here. and this has a higher standard that the plaintiffs have to prove by clear and convincing evidence. there is going to be an instruction in the packet about clear and convincing evidence. but they proved nothing in this case about clear 217 and convincing evidence. and they certainly did not prove that they should get more money in the form of punitive damages. so that question also should be no. now, i want to talk about two more things. and that is i think -- i'm not sure we needed dr. kyriakoudes here for three or four hours to talk about things that had nothing to do with mrs. davis. but he had something useful to say, i submit, on this historical method. and what he said is if you actually want to know, get accurate information about what happened in the past, what you do is you look at what people were saying and doing at the time. and i asked him, i said, well, that statement applies not just to tobacco companies but to individuals. and he agreed. and that is essentially your task, is to go back and try to figure out what is the truth with respect to mrs. davis' smoking and her copd several years ago. so i would submit what you ought to do is to look at what she was saying back then, what she was telling her friends and her doctors, and what her medical records say, not what people are saying now that a lawsuit is filed and you want $7 million. what people were saying at the time, before they had no interest and maybe twisting things in a 218 way that might help their case. and if you do that in this case, what you see is that she knew smoking was bad for her health. she was warned for 39 years. there is no evidence that anybody saw her try to quit smoking. she never told anybody. there is no evidence she told anybody she wanted to quit smoking. what she told people is that she enjoyed smoking and did not want to quit. and the records show she did not have shortness of breath and copd until 1998. now, the whole time i've been here, i've been resisting the temptation to grab that board and bring it over here. and i'm going to do it. i know you have seen it enough, but i want to point out one thing to you. do you remember when dr. burns was here? he was asked to assume that she had copd in 1993 and 1994. remember when he was asked to assume it. they did not have evidence of it. they said assume it. and i guess they will put on evidence later. what they did here is they wrote on here, and they left room. for what? what did they leave room for? a sticky. where is the sticky? if they proved she had copd back then, where is the sticky? they would have put it on there. that is enough to show you that in addition to all the other evidence, when you go in the jury room, ask 219 yourself, where is the sticky? because if they had given you evidence she had copd back then, you know, you know they would have put a sticky on there. they certainly did not run out of paper. it is because there is no evidence, there is no evidence that she had copd before november 1996. and as i said earlier, i submit that is the first question and the last question you need to answer in this case. so i appreciate your time and your attention. and when you go back into the jury room, i ask you to return a verdict for my client, philip morris, and for miss patterson's client, r.j. reynolds. thank you very much. closing argument by the defense ms. patterson: may it please the court? good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. it is a pleasure to speak with you all again. as you know, my name is jordon patterson, and i represent r.j. reynolds tobacco company. and you probably know at this point that i'm going to be brief today. before i begin, i just want to take a moment to sincerely thank you for the time that you spent, your 220 service in this case. and i want to thank you personally and on behalf of my client, reynolds. now, during opening statements, i said that you would not hear a lot from me during this trial, one, because mr. mccarter would go first and he could cover the points, and i want to be respectful of your time and not waste your time. so mr. mccarter just thoroughly walked you through the evidence in this case. and what he said applies with equal force to reynolds, so i do not want to retread that ground. but you also did not hear a lot from me in this case for another reason. and that is because miss davis did not smoke reynolds cigarettes for any substantial amount of time, and that is what i want to focus on this afternoon. now, you are going to hear from judge rakoff that you all are the judges of the facts. and when it comes to my client, the facts are of critical importance. and plaintiff has the burden to prove those facts to you. now, inside of a courtroom, in a lawsuit for money damages, plaintiffs must give you proof. and there just is not much proof in this case about miss davis' use of my client's cigarettes. so when i talked to you last time at the beginning of this case, i told you that the only conclusion that 221 you would be able to draw from the evidence about my client, reynolds, is that to the extent miss davis smoked reynolds' cigarettes, it was not for a long amount of time and it was a very long time ago. so what did we hear from miss davis about reynolds' brands? can we have the first slide, please? thank you. when miss davis first started, she puffed on cigarettes that her older brother had hidden under the house. she was not a regular smoker at this point in time. she was not really smoking at all. she was not inhaling. she said she was just puffing. she testified that her brother had a box of cigarettes, and in that box were a couple of different brands. there was some marlboro, some philip morris, camel, and pall mall cigarettes. and only two of those brands were reynolds brands, pall mall and camel. now, miss davis testified that she only smoked pall mall one time. that is it. that is all plaintiff told you about pall mall. now, what about camel? camel was just one of several brands that were in her brother's box of cigarettes when she first started. and miss davis did not tell you that she ever 222 smoked camel exclusively. she was smoking other brands at the same time. and out of those many different brands, camel was not her preferred brand. in fact, miss davis testified that in the beginning of her smoking, she already had a preference for a different brand, not camel. plaintiff did not bring you any proof that miss davis smoked a reynolds cigarette after that period when she first started smoking. her only testimony as to when she smoked camels was when she first started smoking. that is all you heard. that is all the proof that plaintiff brought. and you cannot assume that she smoking any brand, much less a reynolds brand, at any point in time unless plaintiff proves this. and she did not. now, the summary i just gave you is the extent of the testimony that miss davis gave about my client's brands. so looking at the evidence, the absolute most that you can fairly conclude is that miss davis smoked reynolds cigarettes for about a year, because she only smoked camel right when she first started smoking. she was not even inhaling. and she was not smoking camels exclusively. she was smoking other brands as well. so that is about a year out of a 55-year smoking 223 history. now, you have also heard no evidence that miss davis had any abnormal lung function when she was smoking or puffing reynolds cigarettes. and that is important because dr. burns testified that if a smoker quits while they still have normal lung function, they will not develop copd. so that means that if miss davis quit smoking all together, when she stopped smoking reynolds cigarettes, she would not have gotten copd. now, i would like to focus on our chart about what we heard about the limited amount that she smoked. and i'm going to tell you why that is important to my client and why it is important for you guys to understand why that, that limited amount, matters. and it is because of something called legal cause. and as judge rakoff will tell you in some of his instructions, plaintiff has the burden to prove to you that smoking reynolds cigarettes was sufficient to be a legal cause of her copd. now, legal cause is a cause, like the way that you or i might use it, it is a term that has special legal significance. and you will hear that in judge rakoff's instruction. you will hear that plaintiff must prove that smoking 224 r.j. reynolds cigarettes substantially contributed to miss davis' copd. so look for that language when you hear it from the judge. and i want to show you now where that is going to fit on the verdict form. and that is going to be question number four. so, again, i'm not going to go back over the evidence that mr. mccarter has already talked with you about. for the reasons he discussed, you should not even get to this question. you should answer no to the first three questions. but if you get here, this is where you will have to decide if cigarettes made by my client, reynolds, were a legal cause of miss davis' copd. now, as you know, plaintiff has the burden to prove that smoking my client's cigarettes legally caused or substantially contributed to mrs. davis' copd. so listen for that language in judge rakoff's instructions. a moment ago, you heard from plaintiff's counsel, and i believe that he said that the essential part of this question is whether or not miss davis smoked any cigarettes made by reynolds or philip morris. and i'd ask you to pay close attention to judge rakoff's instructions when he gives them to you. and when you go back in the jury room, look at those instructions, 225 and i think you will find that more proof is required than plaintiff insinuated. so based on the limited evidence that plaintiff brought you, you cannot fairly conclude that smoking reynolds cigarettes was a substantial contribution to her copd. now, i would like to offer you a way to think about whether something is a substantial contribution. i'm a coffee person, so i'm going to use that as an example. so imagine that you and a friend decide that you really, really want a cup of coffee. and only the best will do. so where are you going to go, other than seattle, washington, to get the best cup of coffee you can? so you start your road trip. your friend starts driving. things are going pretty smoothly. and about an hour in, your friend decides that she is tired of driving and she asks you to drive. now, this is a 55-hour trip from ocala, florida, to seattle, washington. so do you know how far that you have gotten into this 55-hour trip when your friend tells you that she is tired of driving? you have gotten to just a little bit north of gainesville if you left from ocala. that is not even to the florida-georgia line. you are still going to have to drive through 226 florida, through georgia, tennessee, missouri, all the way up iowa/nebraska border, across south dakota, across montana, through idaho. and then you are finally going to go through washington until you finally get to seattle, and you finally get your delicious cup of coffee. now, would you say that your friend who stopped driving 54 hours ago when you were only an hour away from ocala substantially contributed to driving this trip? i would suggest no. the same is true here. at most, reynolds' contribution in this case is no greater than the friend's contribution in the cross-country road trip in my example. the one year that miss davis smoked reynolds cigarettes out of the 55 years that she smoked was not a substantial contribution to her developing copd. and there is another question on the verdict form where you should consider the limited amount of reynolds brands that miss davis smoked, and that is going to be -- will you pull up the next slide, please? it is going to be on question number five. so the evidence will show -- or with everything that mr. mccarter has already talked with you about, those reasons are going to apply equally to reynolds. but for an additional reason, reynolds should have zero responsibility. and that is because of the limited 227 amount that she smoked. and for the additional reason that you heard from dr. burns, that if she had quit smoking before she ever developed any lung decline, which is when she would have been smoking reynolds cigarettes, she would not have gotten copd. mr. byrd: objection, your honor. same objection you said we would discuss -- the court: all right. mr. byrd: -- after summation. the court: go ahead. ms. patterson: now, i want to move forward quickly to some other questions on the verdict form. and mr. mccarter and i agree that you should not even get to these questions. but if you do, i would like to ask you to focus on one word, and that word is relied. now, this key word relied is going to be in judge rakoff's instructions. so listen to those and then look for it on the jury instructions when you go back to the jury room. the judge's instructions require you -- or require plaintiff to prove to you that plaintiff relied on something that reynolds said or did. it had to make miss davis take some kind of action. and it is only about miss davis, not someone else. 228 that miss davis got copd because she relied on something that reynolds said or did. and miss davis simply has not proven this. now, first, there is no evidence that miss davis ever heard or read any statement from a tobacco company. none of the advertisements or tobacco companies' statements that plaintiff's counsel showed you had anything to do with the choices that miss davis made. so let us talk for a minute about the evidence that plaintiff did bring you. you heard from dr. kyriakoudes, who knew nothing about miss davis. in fact, he told you himself that his opinion was not specific to miss davis in any way. he showed you advertisements that were from before she was born and for brands that she never smoked. maybe you will remember the flintstone ad that advertised winston cigarettes. she did not watch flintstones. she did not smoke winstons. you did not hear that from plaintiff. and dr. cummings and dr. burns showed you various documents and statements from tobacco companies, but neither one of them said that miss davis heard or saw, much less relied on, any of those. and remember relied is the key word that you are looking for. 229 in fact, many of the documents and the video clips that plaintiff's lawyer showed you were well after miss davis stopped smoking or puffing reynolds cigarettes. for example, you were shown an advertisement in the "new york times." it was called, can we have an open debate about smoking? you did not hear any evidence that miss davis read the "new york times." and you did not hear any evidence that she saw this article. and this was at least 20 years after she had stopped smoking reynolds cigarettes. the same thing happened when they showed you a snippet of congressional testimony in 1994. you did not hear that miss davis ever heard that testimony. and this was at least 30 years after she had stopped smoking reynolds cigarettes. so who is the one who could have told you whether she relied? it is miss davis herself. so what did miss davis say about whether she relied? she said she did not hear or read any statement from a tobacco company. mr. byrd: objection, your honor. misstates testimony about statement from a person or -- the court: yeah, i think -- i do think that is an overstatement on counsel's part. but the jury's 230 recollection will recall. but i think the evidence was not quite as unequivocal as counsel remembers. but we will let the jury decide. ms. patterson: she also said that she did not start smoking because of an advertisement. in fact, the evidence was quite the opposite. she said she started smoking because her brother, her older brother, gave her cigarettes. and she told you that she never bought a brand of cigarettes based on an advertisement. you saw some camel advertisements yesterday. but none of those camel advertisements impacted her brain choice. and that is because she was already smoking camel. so something that she saw after she already began smoking a brand could not have influenced her decision to start. so plaintiff's theory is that reynolds has -- if reynolds had said something publicly that was in its internal documents, that that would have somehow made a difference to miss davis. but the story just does not add up. miss davis is the type of person who, when her friends and her family members would urge her to quit, she would say, leave me alone. and she would say, i'll quit when i get ready. she said she loved smoking. that is the 231 type of person that miss davis is. for these reasons, you should mark no to question number six and question number eight. because no reliance means no liability. now, there is also one additional reason i'd like to talk to you about there. and mr. byrd and plaintiff's experts spent a great deal of time talking with you about filtered cigarettes. and i'm not going to spend any time talking about that for one simple reason, and that is because miss davis never smoked a single cigarette that was filtered by my client. she never smoked one filtered reynolds brand. both the camel and the pall mall cigarettes that she smoked were unfiltered. now, mr. byrd has suggested an award of an enormous amount of money against my client, reynolds, despite the fact miss davis only smoked a reynolds product about a year out of a 55-year smoking history. my client should not pay any money for the limited amount of smoking history. you should not award miss davis any money from reynolds based on these facts that you have heard in this case. reynolds did not substantially contribute to mrs. davis' copd. and if she had chosen to quit smoking cigarettes altogether when she stopped smoking reynolds 232 brand, she would not have copd today. so for all the reasons that mr. mccarter talked with you about, and that i talked with you about, i'm asking you to return a defense verdict in favor of r.j. reynolds. thank you very much for your service and for your attention.