closing argument by the plaintiff mr. byrd: good afternoon, everybody. and we thank you for your time. it is not much longer now. and we appreciate all the listening that you have done. we know we gave you a lot of evidence, a lot of materials. and i want to explain to you for a little bit why i think it is all relevant and why i think it plays into your decision making. so i hope -- i said at the beginning of this trial that i thought that by the time this trial was over that everyone would have learned something they did not know about cigarettes and about this history of cigarettes that everybody sort of has ideas about and think they know 102 about, but maybe they have not seen all this material. and i promised you that we would see some documents that not a lot of people have seen. and, of course, we could not bring you ten courtrooms full of documents. we would be here for a year to do that. but we tried to bring you samples and examples. and that is why, i hope you remember, our experts testified several times that there were -- you know, i would ask them about an example. they would say there are hundreds of examples like this. so there is plenty more evidence in the record that we did not have time to bring you, but that we tried to pick out some of the most -- the ones that were the good examples of that. in a little bit this afternoon, but probably more likely tomorrow given our timing, you are going to begin the real hard work in this case. and that is your deliberations. and nothing could be more important. miss davis is truly proud, and i'm proud to be here on her behalf, and her team, to get her day in court and present her case to you. and when you do those deliberations, you know, they are not easy. but they are important. this is a -- this is a hugely important case. mr. mccarter: objection. 103 the court: overruled. mr. byrd: and when, you know -- we have people say all the time, there is three branches of government: there is the executive, the congressional. we have heard different things from the surgeon general's office, from congress, and things like that. and then there is the third branch, which is this branch, the judicial branch. and in our country, the judge, at least in this case, the judge does not make the decision here. you are. you are the judge. you are the third branch. you are the third branch of government today for miss davis and for the defendants, to make the determinations about this case and the years and years of history that we have tried to show you. and so when you -- the judge will instruct you on the law. i'm going to give you my interpretation of that. but obviously if there is ever anything that i pass over or go too quick or i say something a little bit differently than it was, we are going to try to show you what his instructions are. the judge rules. the judge is the final word on what the law is. and i say that because it is important. and, john, if you can put up the instructions. in this case, when you deliberate -- and you made this vow when you came to court the first day. i do not 104 know if you remember, but the judge asked several questions of you all, about whether you could put aside biases, to make sure that we get a fair day in trial. and all of you swore that, you know, you can put anything aside. you can come in here. you know, if you get back in the jury room and you think you are doing deliberations and somebody starts bringing in biases, you know, they do not believe people should be -- get to file lawsuits like that, that this is wrong, things like that that you know the judge has already said you are supposed to leave at the door, i hope you remind them. there is a jury instruction -- can you show us? can you zoom in on that? -- that regardless of the law, it is your sworn duty to follow the law as i give it to you. i, meaning the court. that is his instructions. it is going to be his instructions. and you can point them back, that the way we make our decisions in a court of law, and in this case, no matter what your biases are, is with the jury instructions. and you have to follow just those and nothing else. and if somebody is unable to do that, that is something that the judge will instruct you how to do this, how you can bring it to the court's attention. and so we hope you use the jury instructions as a 105 guidebook. it is the guidebook for you to deliberate. and nothing -- you cannot consider anything outside what that guidebook permits you to consider. and so we appreciate you doing what you said you could do to give us, everybody, a fair shake. not just miss davis, but the tobacco companies, too, to be fair. now, when i first came, i said that we had come to sue philip morris and r.j. reynolds for a few reasons. just briefly, i had mentioned that, you know, because we thought that it is wrong when a company hides -- knows about a danger and does not tell its customers about it, in its product. and we said that, you know, it is wrong for the -- for companies to needlessly endanger the public, and that it was wrong for them to conceal information it knows about its product. we do not think any company should be able to do that. and that we thought it was especially wrong for a company, in any setting, to understand the dangers and vulnerabilities of a product that they have hidden and then make them even more addictive or harder to quit to the public. and then, finally, we were here because, taking all that into account, it seemed especially wrong and is wrong for a company to then target that type of product to 106 children, and to use and manipulate their knowledge, their superior knowledge of their product, of their own product, to get children hooked on what they know was a dangerous product. and i told you you had to take yourself back in time in this case. and i hope you have. we tried -- we played you a lot of videos. i'm sure some of it gets boring and old. but we had to show you about a different time and a different -- and different culture and different era in american history. and i'll get into this in just a little bit, but i hope you realize, i hope you got the idea that there was a time when things like lung cancer, copd, they did not exist. in the early 1900s, they just did not exist. it was the rarest form of disease and types of disease you could see. and something happened. okay? and so we showed you the chart. the consumption of cigarettes go out of control, and 20 years later, these diseases -- or it is an epidemic. it is an epidemic. this did not just happen out of the blue. this did not just come out of nowhere. and you had to understand the culture. you have to judge this case -- you have to judge this case by not just what philip morris and r.j. reynolds did or what miss davis did, but you have to go back and judge it at the 107 appropriate time of what was known and the appropriate time in their life of what they did. you know, miss davis, when she was ten years old was not sitting in the boardroom of the largest companies in the world, cigarette companies. she was not sitting in there. and you have to make that determination and judge about when -- you are going to look at comparative fault. we will get there in a minute. the fault of both sides. that is one thing you are going to look at. it is going to be, i'm sure, something that is very important in your deliberations to look at both sides of that equation. she was not sitting in a boardroom. but the cigarette companies had a boardroom, and they were making decisions during that time. and you have to look at those decisions versus ten-year-old evonne davis. what she was doing at the time, she was under a board. if you remember her testifying, she was under her house board as a ten-year-old smoking cigarettes. that was her perspective, looking up at a board, the cigarette smoke going into her mom's house. that is how she started. maybe eight years old when she was starting to puff. and then ten, eleven is when it started becoming routine, regular, every day. half pack, and then grew. now, the judge is going to instruct you, but let us 108 talk about a couple things in the instructions. john, if you could bring up the instructions on burden of proof. the judge has talked briefly about this, but i want to point it out. the judge is going to instruct you what our burden of proof is. and he is already told you this is not a criminal case. this is not beyond all reasonable doubt. and i want to be really clear about that, because if you get into the jury room and somebody says, you know, i have some doubt. i did not think that was whatever. i have a little doubt here whether she actually did x or saw x, whatever it is. you can have doubt in a case like this. we are in a different standard. you have to apply these rules. and you can have some doubt. and if somebody says, i have a little doubt, you know, please remind them, well, let us look at what the jury instruction says. obviously we cannot bring this up. we do not have it on a screen, but it says, to establish an element of a claim by preponderance of the evidence, that is the standard -- preponderance of the credible evidence means to prove that the element is more likely true than not true. okay. it is just more likely true than not true. i'll give an example. you know, it is like the scales, the 109 scales of justice. if it tilts just ever so slightly in our favor, you have to find in our favor. that is how civil cases work. that is how this law works. you know, it is maybe a poor analogy, but, you know, you have to bet all the money in the world that you have on one thing. you can either choose a or b. you bet all the money in the world on a or b, okay, with the evidence you have. which one are you going to go with? it is just what is more likely true than not true. now -- and you have to pick. you have to pick one side or the other. you have got to do the one that is just -- which one has tipped the scales ever so slightly. now, the first question -- actually, it is not the first question. the first question you are going to be asked is about manifestation. you have heard about that, about when did her symptoms, her symptoms of copd, first arise, and was it before november of 1996. okay. and there is a reason for that date that, you know, you do not need to worry about. but the main reason is was it before november 21, 1996. and i'll get to that point in a minute. okay. but i want to go to a couple of other questions that are going to determine whether miss davis receives the benefit of what we have been talking about, some of the engle 110 findings. okay. the engle findings are critical to this case. the judge is going to instruct you what they are. but they do not mean anything, they do not mean anything unless miss davis proves that she is entitled to receive their benefit. we refer to it as a member of the class, a member of the engle class. if she proves these things -- and we are going to go over those questions -- then she gets the benefit of those findings. and when she gets the benefit of those findings, you have to apply them. it is the law. you cannot question or speculate as to anything about them, or whether you agree with them or somebody disagrees with them. you need to remind them or even tell the court if you have to, that once she receives the benefits of the findings, they cannot be questioned. you have to apply them. that is the way this case works under the law. so let us look at -- the first question i'd like to look at, it will be on your verdict form here -- if you can show, john -- it will be whether it is more likely than not that miss davis was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, okay? now, it will actually be question two. as i said, i'm going to get to the manifestation question later. that 111 will be question one. question two will be, we, the jury, find that the plaintiff has proved that it is more likely than not that miss davis was addicted to the nicotine in cigarettes. okay? now, what was the evidence -- remember, we just have to show more likely than not. what was the evidence -- and actually, can you just pull this up so they can see it? slide part one. remember, this is the standard we looked at. it was, to establish a claim by a preponderance of the evidence means to prove something is more likely true than not true. and then let us talk about what it means to be addicted. the judge is going to give you an instruction on what addiction means. jeff, can we bring up this slide, four? now, this is the definition that the judge is going to instruct you on. a compulsive need for and use of a habit-forming substance, characterized by tolerance and by well-defined physiological symptoms upon withdrawal. that is the definition of addiction. and you heard first from dr. burns. and dr. burns is -- was a medical doctor, you know, in the surgeon 112 general's office dealing with tobacco matters and smoking and health before any litigation ever happened. years and years before he ever worked in litigation, he was an expert in this field of smoking and health and worked in the surgeon general's office and -- and helped contribute to all the reports. and, you know, those reports -- we are going to show you some things from those reports. but the thing about those reports is, they are the truth. they speak the truth about science on smoking and health. and if there is any doubt, we will show you some of these. this is one. this is the 2010 surgeon general's report. okay? and on our side, with miss davis, we stand with the surgeon general of the united states. and when you look at these reports, that is where we are. that is where we stand. and we are going to talk a little bit -- in a little bit about where philip morris and r.j. reynolds stood over the years and even currently with the surgeon general's office of the united states and their findings. and it is a stark difference that we want you to understand. but on addiction, have we proved that it is more likely right than wrong or more likely than not that she was addicted? dr. burns came in and he talked about how 113 changes in the brain happen. your brain is changed forever. that children and young people, the younger you start, that your brain is still forming, and that that has all the more reason why nicotine can take its hold on you and get a hold on you. and it is a predictor how young you smoke, how young you start smoking, about whether you will be able to quit or not, and how hard it will be for you to quit down the road. and dr. burns explained to you that nicotine comes into the lungs. and, you know, we are created in this -- this goes to the second and third question really, addiction, whether she was addicted, but whether the addiction caused the disease. you know, dr. burns described about the lungs. and, you know, when you think about it, we are made in an amazing way. we are created in a special, special way. we have these lungs. and he drew them for you. remember, he -- you know, he drew kind of how the lungs work and everything that spreads out. and what he told you was, when you spread -- it is like a tree. it is like the leaves on a tree. when you spread all that out, if you opened up all the airways where air can get in your lungs, you just put it all out. it is 114 as big as a tennis court. that is how we are made. and that is what dr. burns told you. if you spread it all out, he said it was as big as a tennis court. he meant that literally. it is like if you imagine a tree in a park, all of those branches are going out in your organs, you take those leaves, you spread it out, you can cover a tennis court. that is the surface area that the cigarette smoke is hitting. okay? and when the cigarette smoke goes in, okay, what else -- what other defense mechanisms do we have that we are created with when we are born? okay. miss davis, she was born 1940, had the same thing we all do. we have these cilia in the lungs. you remember dr. burns talked about cigarettes come in, and they freeze that. okay? they freeze the cilia. so even on the first cigarette, even on the first cigarette miss davis ever had, which was, you know, camel cigarettes, which is an r.j. reynolds product, you heard, and she smoked some marlboros, too. she smoked camels for quite a while in the early years. those are the formative years. you are going to hear some -- in a little bit, we will get to this. you are going to hear some statements, i'm sure, from r.j. reynolds' counsel, who you have not heard a lot from, but i've got to tell you, they are here 115 for a very serious reason. and it is serious because those are the cigarettes that really start forming the addiction in a young child. and those are the -- while your brain is still forming. and they are among the most cigarettes that she smoked. and they are also here for some very serious reasons about what they did in conjunction and in coordination and in agreement that we allege formed a conspiracy and was a conspiracy with philip morris and other cigarette companies to do the things that are on this timeline that we will get into. but those initial cigarettes are important. and dr. burns told you every cigarette, even from the first cigarette, it freezes the -- every cigarette you smoke, it freezes the cilia and damage starts to be done. so then every time you smoke, these carcinogens, these chemicals, these irritants are coming in and irritating your lung. remember, he spent a long time telling you about how that works. and the cilia no longer can throw -- they cannot throw the irritants out. and it just starts gathering and gathering and gathering. and the mechanisms that we are made with to stop this from ever happening that never happened back before the 1920s, '30s because we did not have cigarettes, those 116 mechanisms break down, and people die. and people get diseases and fatal diseases. so you heard dr. burns talk about how that works. and then you heard dr. cummings mention that the cigarette companies had mastered that they can get it down -- you know, nicotine gets into your blood, goes into the lung, deep inhalation, seven to ten seconds it hits your brain. and when it hits your brain, it goes to these nicotine receptors. and these nicotine receptors grow and grow and grow, and they change your brain permanently. the nicotine receptors grow, and come and go, depending on the smoke; but the pathways that have been created, the physical pathways that have been created with those receptors, never leave your brain. dr. burns testified we know this because they have done studies and studies on the brain. modern studies that show us that. so what do you have? they talked about compulsive need for use. you heard that from dr. burns, and you heard that from dr. cummings. they talked about it is a habit-forming substance. they talked about tolerance. you remember dr. burns and dr. cummings talked about this concept of when you start, you know, you maybe start at a half a pack like she did, and you grow and you grow and you grow 117 because your body is building up a tolerance and you need that much more until you get to that level that really feeds your addiction. and then physiological symptoms upon withdrawal. and what did dr. burns and dr. cummings say that then miss davis came on the stand and supported as well? when she tried to quit, she would get jittery. she would get nervous. she would get agitated. she would get angry. a little bit upset to be around. and those are all classic defined withdrawal symptoms that dr. cummings told you about, that dr. burns mentioned to you. and she had them. it was throughout the records. and so let us look at some of the evidence about addiction. i told you, remember, just more likely than not. can you bring this up, jeff? so we have the scales of justice here that i put on about, you know, what is the evidence in this case, okay, that you are looking at, that you are going to look at to make your determination from plaintiff, evonne davis. and then we have on the other side for the defendants, philip morris and r.j. reynolds. and let us look at -- you have dr. burns, okay? we brought you dr. burns, and it tips the scales 118 ever so slightly. he read the records. he read all of the medical records, by the way. i know there was some suggestion about, you know, dr. cummings was cross the other day about we had not given him all the medical records. and that is true, we had not given him all the medical records. that is our bad. but the medical records he had not been provided, the only ones they showed him that he had not been provided were after 19 -- were after her copd when it said half a pack, half a pack. and he had plenty of medical records -- he did have a lot of those records that said half a pack a day, half a pack a day. but they tried to make this a big point that we just did not show all the records that said half a pack a day. and they made a point that, oh, she was not receptive to quitting. okay? we will talk about whether that even comes into play in your determination at all or not on these questions. all right? but dr. burns, he had all the medical records because he is the medical doctor. and we gave dr. burns each and every one of the medical records. and he saw tobacco abuse in the records. he saw tolerance. he saw the withdrawal symptoms in the records. and he saw the pack history that developed over that. 119 and he did not stop there. he read the depositions. okay? he read the depositions of everybody in the case that miss davis -- and you heard -- there were some long depositions -- that defendants did to find out everything they could about miss davis. and he read those. and he determined easily, he said, again, no doubt in his mind, no doubt in his mind, that she was addicted and heavily addicted. and then what else did we bring? we brought dr. cummings. he came at it from a -- he is not a medical doctor. he came at it from a behavioral science perspective. he was more focused on the depositions and what they said and the medical records as well to determine pack-year history. okay? but he got what he needed on the pack-year history. and we brought you dr. cummings, and that tips the scales. and, you know, they are going to -- the cigarette companies are going to come up here and mention and criticize that these people make money and they are in a war against tobacco and, you know, they make all of this money. and i submit to you, well, of course they do. because -- you heard them. dr. cummings said he testified once and thought he would never have to testify again in the original engle litigation, and did it pro bono. he did not know it was going to be brought up in all of these 120 cases. he is having to spend every day on this. but we brought you the best experts there are out there. the best. and we brought you -- remember, i told you there is only a handful of people -- and you heard that from dr. cummings. there is only a few people that have even been able to review these medical records in this kind of way. he was the first -- dr. cummings was the first one to receive them, really. you heard the new york attorney general's office sent him the records. he got them, and he had to start the catalog for everybody else. and dr. burns, he is worked with the surgeon general's office forever. they are renowned experts. nothing -- the fact that they have to charge money for all the time that they have to spend to give defendants their depositions, to consult us, to advise, to review the records does not take away from what they said. and we will get to it in a minute. but, you know, it does not take away from these documents over here. they say what they say. i mean, if we had misrepresented something in these documents, they would have brought somebody from r.j. reynolds and philip morris to tell you that. and they did not. so we brought dr. cummings. 121 and then what else did we show you? we brought miss davis. miss davis came, and she was willing to come in here and sit on the stand and go through any question we wanted. and she told us about when she started smoking, what she felt like, how much it was. and then she confirmed one of the largest things about this compulsive use, you know, despite harm, which they talk about. she continued to smoke after she had copd. okay? after she had copd, she kept smoking. and so is the defendants' argument really, you know, she had copd. she cannot breathe. every doctor, every time she goes in, is telling her she needs to quit, she needs to quit. and that she just -- she seriously just kept doing it because she did not give a crap. i mean, really? she was trying -- she was trying to quit from '85 on. the fact that she continued to smoke after a disease, after something she knows is caused by smoking and hurting her, you heard it from dr. burns, is a key indicator that you are addicted. because you are smoking compulsive use despite harm. go back to the addiction definition. it is plain language, and it is what the judge will give you. so we brought miss davis to testify. and you heard her testify about what she smoked, when she smoked, 122 how much. it grew over time. it got as much as two packs a day, or maybe more, maybe two and a half packs sometimes. and then she told you, after copd, exactly what the records defendant showed, everyone confirms. she was trying to cut back. and she was using the waterpik system starting in '85. and she cut back and went down to a half a pack a day. you saw that in the records. that was her cutting down in those years after her copd. but she could not stop it all the way. that is what she was trying to do. but she could not stop it all the way. and she told you about one of those times when she tried to quit, the symptoms of withdrawal that she had, what she experienced. and, finally, we brought you the 2010 surgeon general report. remember, that is the one that says nicotine addiction is the fundamental reason. okay? now, we heard some -- i'll let you decide about mr. jupe and mr. gentry. we had to play long depositions for you. i apologize. i apologize for long depositions. but, you know, we kind of thought that we may not hear from philip morris and r.j. reynolds, and we needed to bring you what they say currently. and what they say currently is they are still arguing with the surgeon general's office of the united states. oh, they will tell you, we believe it is -- we 123 believe cigarettes are addictive. and they will tell you, well, smoking causes diseases. and addiction causes people to smoke more. oh, but we will not say addiction caused disease. we cannot say that. we are not going to say that. that is just wrong. even though every public health authority says it is the number one issue that we have to deal with. why? because most people would quit if they could. most smokers are addicted. and nicotine, we showed you in this report right here -- and by the way, the surgeon general's report, at least the ones we introduced, the 2010 surgeon general's report, it is going to be back in your deliberating room for you to review. read it. there is a great chapter. it is exhibit 237. 237. it will be in your exhibits. there is a great chapter on nicotine addiction. and if you glance at the summary -- and there is a great chapter on the changing cigarette. and if you look at these chapters and review them, you can see what we are talking about. and, again, you take that as the truth that nicotine addiction is the primary reason people smoke. and we brought you that. and it was the reason miss davis was smoking for all those years and throughout even when she 124 was sick and could, you know, barely breathe, with her shortness of breath and her copd. and then we brought you the 2014 surgeon general consumer guide. actually, can we bring that up, that one page? and what are the 2014 -- modern science. okay? now, the cigarette companies will challenge these things, but this is modern science. the reality -- this is 2014. the surgeon general says, the reality is that smoking is not usually a choice. for most smokers, tobacco use is an addiction, and nicotine is the primary drug in tobacco that causes addiction. and i -- there is no evidence brought by the cigarette companies to challenge that piece of evidence. not one. what is more likely right than wrong? do you have to have -- have the scales been tipped ever so slightly? and if so, you have to find in our favor that she was more likely than not addicted. and, finally, we brought you miss davis' medical records. remember, they showed you the medical records about whether she was receptive to quitting or not. and, you know, if you have some questions about how hard she tried to quit, whether she tried to quit enough, should she have tried more, was she dedicated 125 enough or motivated enough to quit, i understand that. we are not here to tell you that miss davis has, you know, no blame whatsoever. she is willing, at least for her part, on her side of this case, to stand up and accept some responsibility for her own choices, although she started when she was ten. but she is willing to stand up for that. but the part -- the place for you to consider that is in what is called the comparative fault section, which we get to when you weigh the fault of all the different parties. it is not an easy question. okay. that is where we submit that you should make that consideration about her motivation to quit and all that. that is in comparative fault. and do not confuse those issues. so we brought you the medical records. can we show the tobacco -- the october 7 record that -- remember, defendants kept showing it to people up here. they kept pulling it out. and they did not highlight one portion of that record. they did not highlight the portion that said tobacco abuse. from a doctor. her treating doctor. before any litigation. before any lawsuits or anything like that. tobacco abuse. right there, from her own medical doctor, 126 made that own determination. more likely right than wrong. do we trust doctors? do we trust doctors who treat us? do you think they put these things in there willy-nilly? that is what they meant. and, you know, what if the defendants said, we do not know what they meant by that. we do not know what that means? that is going to be the argument? we do not know what that means? so when you read the jury instructions, the jury instructions are going to say use your common sense. you can make reasonable inferences. reasonable inferences. i'm not asking you to do anything unreasonable here. what is the reasonable inference? look at the jury instructions. what is the reasonable inference from that alone? even if i had not brought -- even if we had not brought any of the other evidence, that should do it right there. so we go back to our scales. how am i doing on time? mr. walburg: forty-nine left. mr. byrd: when you go back to the scales, let us see how it is tipped. and we have to tip it ever so slightly. so if you are in the jury deliberation room and somebody says, well, i have doubts about whether she is addicted, well, press them. 127 on what? based on what? all they have to prove, it is more likely right than wrong, more likely than not. they do not have to prove beyond a reasonable doubt. and then what evidence did -- what evidence did defendants bring? okay. one witness that they read. that is it. one witness that they read, miss fran craft. and you know, she said, well, you know, i never saw her try to quit. did not say anything about addiction. you are not going to see the word quit. you are not going to see whether -- you are not going to see if she could quit or not or whether she tried hard to quit in the definition of addiction. and you have to use the judge's definition of addiction. quitting is not in there. and so they brought miss craft by deposition. they had someone come up here and act like she was miss craft, to read it for you so you can read what she said. and the thing you have got to remember about miss craft, she met her in '88. met her. she testified, what the deposition testimony said is that she did not spend any time with her meaningfully until 1998. i'm sorry. '99. it was '99. she said 1999. but by 1999, miss davis has copd. she is been trying the 128 waterpik filter for years and years and years, and she is down to a half a pack. that is their evidence. that is the only evidence they brought. and if they thought that they could bring in here an addiction expert like dr. burns, a medical doctor, or a behavioral scientist expert like dr. cummings, if they had somebody that they could find to say that she was not addicted, they would have brought them in here and told you. and they did not. now, the second question is going to be whether addiction caused the disease. and dr. burns talked to you about the fact -- and we have already gone over it. it is the repeated exposure to smoke. okay. it is not just one cigarette. it is every cigarette that combines. you cannot pick out what years or times that it did it. it is every cigarette combines. why? every cigarette -- for two reasons. because every cigarette -- you can take that down. every cigarette helps contribute to the addiction. okay? and every cigarette contributes to stopping the cilia, doing irritants and damage, and that it all leads up over time to creating copd. and, john, if you can show the instructions real quick on -- no, the instructions on addiction causation. and the instruction says that her addiction was a 129 legal cause -- this is one of the things she has to show to get the benefit of the findings, that her addiction was a legal cause of her copd in the sense that her continued smoking of cigarettes was, at least in part, a natural and direct result -- a natural and direct result of her addiction. and now, he goes on to explain in this regard, plaintiff need not prove that addiction was the only reason miss davis continued to smoke cigarettes. she may, for example, have partly smoked them because she enjoyed smoking. okay. so if somebody said, well, she enjoyed smoking, i think she enjoyed smoking, that is fine. we explained all the reasons why smokers enjoy smoking and why they say that. of course, they are going to enjoy smoking if you are addicted. but even if somebody said, well, i think she just did it for enjoyment, no other reason, the judge has instructed you, and you must follow them, that even if she enjoyed smoking, that does not matter. they can act in concert and have more than one reason why she smoked them. and as long as addiction was a substantive reason, a substantial contributing reason -- and it was, because it was the repeated exposure to the smoking cigarettes that caused it -- then we have proved addiction. 130 and i submit to you i could line up the scales again. and i will not do that. all the evidence we brought. and what evidence did they bring? zero. zero. where was the medical doctor to come in and say, you know, this was caused by something else? and, in fact, the judge is even going to instruct you -- it is somewhere different, but the judge is going to instruct you that neither party disputes, okay, cigarettes caused her disease. and then dr. burns said 95 percent of copd is caused by smoking. no one disputes that in this case. it is undisputed. cigarettes caused mrs. davis' copd, end of story. it cannot even be questioned. and so if cigarettes caused it, well, then what caused her to keep smoking? addiction. but addiction need not be the only cause. it only has to be a cause. you can have other causes. because i'm going to show you some other causes, too, where i think some of their lies and concealments and their potential things they did, they also contributed. you can have more than one cause. it just needs to be a cause. just a cause. and so the question, is it more likely than not -- and remember, you know, make sure the standard is followed when you all deliberate. 131 is it more likely than not that addiction was a cause of her disease? we submit to you that it is not even a close call. and dr. burns said that, and everyone else backed that up. and the medical records back that up as well. now, the only other question that we need to show to become what is known as an engle member and get the benefit of these findings is the manifestation question. and it will be your first question. did her disease manifest prior to november 1 -- november 21 of 1996? and let me just say, you know, there are -- you know, everyone would love to have medical records, you know, somewhere between 1993, '94, '95, '96 in this case. we would love to have them. they do not exist. we do not have them. you know, any medical doctor she saw, those records are gone. not by anybody's fault. but they are gone. and nobody has them. neither side has them. and so, you know, we are unable -- because it is so long ago, to be able to show you those records. but what we can do is, the first record we do have, okay, is from march of 1998. and i'll show that. this is the first record that is available, related to copd anyway, for either side. 132 all right? and i do not know if you can bring that up. the medical record says, it is from march of 1998. and history, okay, now when you go into a doctor here, it says history of present illness. history means past, in the past. she is already been diagnosed with this. we just do not have the records. she is already been diagnosed. you do not say history of something that you have in the past that you have not -- that there has not already been a diagnosis for. doctors are not, you know, careless about what they say in medical records. they are not. and if the cigarette companies are going to say they are, okay, maybe you should think back to what historically the cigarette companies have said about doctors. maybe you should think historically about what they have challenged doctors said. think about that. doctors are not willy-nilly here on this record. so it says miss davis is a 58-year-old white female with a history of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. it does not say suggested disease. it says history of it. and then dr. burns, the really important part of this, too, that dr. burns was able to decipher for you, was pulmonary function tests were suggesting -- okay, so she had pulmonary function tests -- were suggesting 133 mild-to-moderate obstructive ventilatory defect. and if you remember, i'm glad he explained this to you because way outside my ability on how the lung actually works, and how -- the breathing and all that. the court reporter: could you please slow down? mr. byrd: okay. and i speak notoriously fast as well. i'm sorry. so i apologize to you. dr. burns, remember he explained to you how the breathing capacity works and how long it takes over time for that to develop that you have symptoms. and remember he said -- he drew this picture. and he said let us find out -- i asked him about mild-to-moderate obstructive disease, right, which is what she had in march of 1998. and it was a history of that. and he pointed out that, you know, if you have this, you are talking about down here. symptoms start up here. because you are going to have shortness of breath. you are going to have these beginning symptoms that you would have around the eighty percent mark. and then he said, but she was already here, in the sixty percent zone. okay. that is what mild-to-moderate means. and so then i said, what is this time period right here? okay? what is that? what is this time period? 134 what can we say about march of '98. and put up dr. burns' testimony on this. dr. burns said -- i asked him about what does that mean about timing. his answer was that if you get folks who were short of breath and that is why they came in to be detected, and say they are hovering around this 50 to 60 range -- he was pointing to that -- they may have had copd that we could detect for ten or fifteen years, or they may have had it for four or five years. if you have moderate disease, okay, we know you have had it for at least two or three years. that is what he said. if you have moderate disease, we know you have had it for at least two or three years. and so i did not pull this out of nowhere. in '98, in march of 1998, she has the moderate disease. two to three years, it will be '96. three years will be '95. okay. so at least, at least certainly before november 21 of 1996 is it more likely than not from dr. burns' testimony that she had it? of course it is. she said her symptoms started in '91 or '92. okay. there were some suggestions that they denied it then. 135 but if you take the middle point of her saying '91, '92 it was happening, and then i remember, she said i went to -- i went to my training in october of 1993, went to st. petersburg for the police training. and that is when i really noticed it. and i went to dr. velasquez right after that or shortly after that. so that is in october of '93 she is having these problems. and she is goes to velasquez who then said you have got to stop smoking. velasquez says you have got to quit this smoking for this shortness of breath. that was copd. that was the symptoms and manifestations of copd right then. and all you have to do is listen to what dr. burns said. he took the march -- you know, we have the march of 1998 record. and if you believe dr. burns in the medical field -- and i submit to you that you should -- it goes back at least two or three years. and all i need to show is -- you know, all miss davis needs to show is november 21, 1996. so that is even less than two years. that is a year and a half, whatever that is. okay. so is it more likely than not? more likely than not? what did -- you know, what was the defense case on this? zero. they brought in no medical doctor. if there 136 was a doctor who could come in here and tell you what that march of '98 record meant, or that it meant that she only had it for a few months, do you think you would have heard about it? where is that person? well, what they did do, what they are going to do, is try to say miss davis, who is elderly -- and we sat her through nine hours of deposition -- she said some things, we just do not believe it. she is wrong. who they did not attack, not one question, not one iota of them taking dr. burns on in this concept. if they thought that dr. burns was wrong, why did not they ask him and press him on it? why did not they ask him? where was the medical thing to take to dr. burns? here, dr. burns, you said it would have been at least two or three years, right? well, then, have you considered this? have you thought about that? they did not do that because they cannot challenge dr. burns. all they can do is put doubt, let us put doubt in your mind. let us put doubt. and, you know, when you hear the evidence that goes on throughout the history and all this timeline we have done, all the way up to gentry, mr. gentry and mr. jupe you heard from -- and that is 2011. and then, you know, it goes on. you are going to hear this ringing, gentry and jupe 137 and others, philip morris and r.j. reynolds, of doubt. okay? mr. mccarter: i'm going to object, your honor, of the comparison of counsel to -- mr. byrd: i did not compare counsel. the court: i do not think that is quite what he did. but anyway, go ahead. mr. byrd: okay. what is one of the products we showed you? an internal secret document, never come out before until the late '90s. doubt is our product. that was in 1969. okay? doubt is our product. well, i'll get into the doubt campaign later. it goes to something else, and i'll talk about that later. okay. so have we proved all of these things that we need, these three things? have we proved it beyond a reasonable doubt? no. although, i think all of our experts said i have no doubt in my mind. i think they went way further and said they have no doubt. but have we proved it more likely than not, the standard that you have to use? the standard that everybody in that jury room uses? yes, we have. now, the next question you are going to deal with, if you find those things, okay, then we have shown that miss davis gets the benefit of the findings. okay. 138 and there is various findings. i'm going to mention a few of them. but the findings are going to be in the jury instructions as they are relevant to whatever question you are answering. and for the first question -- john, if you can, show us the first finding. strict liability and negligence. well, the first finding is that nicotine is addictive. okay. cigarettes and nicotine -- nicotine and cigarettes are addictive. and that they cause -- that the cigarettes cause copd. diseases like copd. okay. and that is going to be -- actually, do not worry about it. it is too hard to blow it up. you will read it in the jury room. that is the finding. okay? and the judge is going to inform you that that means that if -- that the defendants will be liable for strict liability and negligence as long as, you know, we were smoking their cigarettes. okay. now, the reason we have -- you are going to be asked then a question. and, john, you can put that up. are they liable for negligence and strict liability? well, the finding will be that they were 139 negligent because they were negligent. and the other finding is that they put defective and unreasonably dangerous products on the market. okay. that is the other finding. and i wish i had the findings in a nice, wrapped-up way for you, but i do not. they are in the instructions. but when you put those findings together, it means that they are liable for negligence and strict liability as long as we showed you that she smoked their products. okay. and we showed you -- that is the only question you will see in the instructions. you will see in the instructions what you have to consider. all we basically have to show in that question is, did she smoke philip morris products? and did she smoke r.j. reynolds products which contributed to her injuries. okay? and we do not have any other cigarette companies in this room. we did not bring anybody here that does not make the brands that she smokes. r.j. reynolds makes camels. and that was a stipulated fact. we read that to you. those were among the most important of her brands because they were in her early years. and then she smoked the raw majority of her time 140 philip morris cigarettes, because they make marlboro and they make marlboro lights. so, are they liable when you read the instructions to what the judge is going to give you? of course they are, because she smoked philip morris cigarettes and she smoked camel cigarettes made by r.j. reynolds. okay? and that is the real question that you will see. you will see in the instructions, the judge will tell you the only thing for your determination is whether she smoked the cigarettes manufactured by these defendants. and that is it. that is the essential part of that question. and then you get to the next question on the verdict form. john? whether -- the comparative fault question here on the bottom, okay. this is the real thing i'm trying to get to as quick as i can. i think it is the most important aspect of the verdict form here, the how you weigh the fault of all of these parties. all right? does miss davis bear some responsibility? maybe. okay. if you think she should have tried harder to quit -- this is where i was telling you, if you think maybe she was not motivated enough or she should have tried harder or she should have done other things, this is where you put it. this is where you discuss that kind of thing. 141 and let us think a little about how you answer this question. all right? because as we showed you over here, and i want to explain to you, the cigarette companies had one hundred percent of knowledge about their product. okay. they had one hundred percent knowledge about their product. and miss davis had zero, zero knowledge. she is a ten-year-old girl. remember, when you determine this question of comparative fault, you have to -- at the time, what was the comparative fault in the 1950s compared to, you know, what was evonne davis, ten-year-old, versus philip morris and r.j. reynolds? what about when she was 15? what about when she was 20? what about later? and, you know, imagine it is like -- you know, people have probably heard -- everybody uses cell phones. okay? and cell phones, you know, as you have read or heard, you might hear if you hold cell phones to your ear it might cause brain cancer. it is been in newspapers. it is been in news articles. you have heard it. everybody keeps using them. everybody in the world is using them. okay. now, what if, you know, 30, 40 years from now we find out that cell phones actually do cause brain cancer, number one? and number two, what if we find out that the people that made cell phones knew it, knew it from day one and never told us? 142 does not it make a difference when the people who manufactured the things you use know about it and they do not tell you? and they hide it from you? it makes all of the difference in the world. and you have to imagine, back then, the defendants' argument here is, well, she knew it was bad for her. really? we are going to blame a ten-year-old? is that what we do in this country? do we blame children in this country because they should be fully aware of the decisions they are making or something? especially back in the 1950s and '60s when this culture of smoking that you heard from dr. kyriakoudes arose. is that what we do? so i would suggest to that when you take this consideration into account, you have to understand what their knowledge was about their product and versus what her knowledge was. and understand that -- you know, take that into consideration as you determine the percentage of fault. now, what choices did they make? you know they are going to tell you that miss davis came in every morning and that she made choices in her life. she woke up every morning and made a choice in her life about whether she was going to smoke or not. again, i submit to you i do not think we should do 143 that to her from the ages of ten to eighteen at least. i just do not. we submit you just do not do that to children. but let us look at exhibit 832. let us look at the choices that the cigarette companies made. we showed you, back in 1950, when she is ten, they make a choice. remember? reports linking cigarettes to disease and cancer. the tobacco companies internal scientists know that it causes this stuff. what choice did they make? when they woke up, looked themselves in the mirror, went to the boardroom, what choice did they make? and if we are going to talk about the choices miss davis made, make sure the people in the jury deliberation room are thinking about the choices -- every time they talk about a choice miss davis makes, please ask what choice were the cigarette companies making at the same time. okay. when the surgeon general came out, he came out with a warning. he asked them to provide information. what choice did they make? to withhold that information. undesirable. undesirable. do not submit it to the surgeon general. it is undesirable. and then when the surgeon general came out and said, everybody look -- and you can see this as the consumption goes up. everybody, cigarettes may be 144 hazardous. if the cigarette companies had come out then and said, you know what, we agree. we have got to get -- we are sorry. we agree. we stand with -- we stand with the surgeon general of the united states. and everybody needs to listen to it. they did not do that. they made a choice not to do that. and dr. burns told you about what that means when people are in lockstep, trying to give a warning, a public health warning, what that means. then they made a choice. they made a choice to make filters. they knew they did not work. we showed you the documents. and they even said, it does not matter -- do you remember why would they do this? we must provide a psychological crutch and a self-rationale to continue smoking. that was their secret internal documents. they did not tell people they were providing a psychological crutch in public. we must do that. and they start making filters. okay? and then they make lights to do the same thing. all along this map of her lifetime, they made choices, too. and then they made a choice -- 145 they talked to her about she should have tried harder to quit. and, oh, it was 1985. remember that? 1985 she was doing the waterpik filter. they said she is not trying to quit. and, oh, did you ever participate in the great american smokeout? remember, they made this big thing about the great american smokeout. okay? they are talking to her, why did not she do things like that to quit in 1985. okay? nicorette gum. why were not you doing that kind of stuff? okay. well, she did, by the way, use nicorette gum and did the great american smokeout. it did not work. what were the cigarette companies doing at the same time? jeff, exhibit 1501. oh, they were sending this to their customers. your great american smoker's kit. remember? jeff, just flip through. a message. sincerely, from your friends at philip morris. you do not need to participate in the great american smokeout. you know what? if your friends are egging you on and telling you to participate and try to quit, you know, let us give you some clever comebacks. 146 do you know what people who do that are? do you know what they are doing? here's a little sticker. do not nag me. i'm a great american smoker. that is what they sent out in '85, the mid-'80s. and then go on. if you have somebody bothering you, here's what you tell them. okay? this is what you do. this is their message in the mid-'80s. sure, they get to come in today into court and say, well, look, smoking is addictive. we are not -- we do not agree with that. smoking is bad for you. everybody should quit as soon as they can. of course, they are going to say that now. but this is not a case about now. this is a case about what they said over the lifetime of miss davis. and then nicorette gum. you know, this is brought to you by the cigarette companies. brought to you by the cigarette companies that say, you know -- by the way, essentially their argument is -- you know, imagine, they are going to get up here to talk. so one of the reasons i'm doing this is i'm not going to get to talk to you after. so i do want you to think about when they talk, you know, what would i say in response because i cannot get back up and talk to you again to counter anything they say. so i'm trying to predict a little bit. 147 but, you know, people can just -- their central defense is, you know, yeah, we make this horrible thing and it is awful. but do you know what? it is our customers' fault for buying them. i want you to listen and see if you do not think that is essentially the argument. i mean, imagine, this is -- you know, we are coming into court. there is certain things that a company should not do. and this is an argument. okay? and you all need to make a determination about this. it is important. a company is going to come in and say, you should have known better than to believe us and buy our product. you are crazy. why did you buy our product? that is the argument. that is the argument we are going to check on the box and say, okay, okay, go home. they are going to come in here and say you just check a box no on the class membership and you get to go home. they are going to tell you that. just come in here, check a box and go. hoping you will not want to look at the evidence. hoping you will not want to read all the documents and materials here. read it. you are a better jury than that. you are a better jury than that. there will be plenty of time to go home. but this is your time to make a determination 148 from documents that a lot of people do not see. and it is your time to give miss davis her fair trial, the tobacco companies their fair trial. read the documents. read the documents. i put the exhibit numbers on here. you are not going to be able to have this back in the room with you, this timeline. read the documents that i put up there. make your own determination. what were they doing to nicorette gum? okay. think about this. jeff, bring up exhibit 34. do you remember the dow chemical store, the nicorette gum? they are going to talk about what she should have done in the mid-'80s. let us look at what they were doing 1982 through '85. they were telling the people making the nicorette gum, nicorette gum should not be a problem. because the cigarette companies say you can just put your cigarettes down whenever you want. all you have to do is throw your ashtray out and you are done. that is their argument, is not it? really? because i think they are really concerned about nicorette gum here. and i wonder why they are concerned about nicorette gum. and, you know, the deal they find -- if you can 149 read this. jeff, can you bring it up bigger? because i'm having trouble reading it that far away. you know, they were threatening to take away their business from dow chemical, because they get all these chemicals to make cigarettes from dow chemical. through a series of meetings over the past few years, dow has been repeatedly advised of our displeasure over the anti-smoking nature of dow merrill's nicorette program. we had been assured that nicorette would have a low-key introduction and would be aimed only at those smokers who had to stop for medical reasons. this is what they are doing. they are cutting arrangements with dow chemical. you know, you can use nicorette gum, but please do not give it to anybody unless they are sick already. where is the free choice in that? so we will keep everybody else addicted. you can help people once they get too sick and they are on their way to the grave. how about that? that is the choice they make. because miss davis did not wake up in the morning and make that decision. and they cannot just wipe that off the table. they 150 made decisions, too. and they brought you nobody, zero. nobody from their company came in here to explain what was going on in this thing. or to explain it away, say something was not what they were doing. because they cannot. so you can make a determination -- you can put that down. when you make a determination on the percentage of fault, here's what i would suggest. you know, miss davis, i believe -- i think you should look at the time that she smoked. and from 1950, okay, to 1966, there were no warnings on cigarettes at all. and, by the way, she is a child. and then from 19 -- all the way to 1985, okay, 1985 is the first time, okay, that she was told on a cigarette pack. you know, she said she saw the warning on a pack every day. okay. let us buy that. the first time she was told that it may cause or that it causes emphysema, 1985. so from 1950 to 1985, for 35 years of her smoking history, okay, i submit to you that because she was a child, because of the activities they were engaging in, because the warning did not come on until here about emphysema, that she should bear no responsibility for that. okay. if you want to bear some responsibility for 151 her, look at the years, divide it up and see the percentage of time. from 1985 on. okay. you know, apply some fault to her because you think she did not try hard enough. she was doing the waterpik filter. but do not forget, all along they did not even admit it causes cancer or other diseases. they did not do that until after her copd. so when you look at what she was doing between '85 to '99, look at what they were doing, too. and i would submit that an appropriate division -- you know, you are going to set the division. you are going to set the percentage of fault. i would submit that miss davis bears no more than to twenty percent responsibility. okay? and then you divide it up among philip morris and r.j. reynolds based on what they did. she smoked philip morris for the longest, no doubt. she did marlboro and marlboro light. and maybe they are 50 or sixty percent responsible. and maybe r.j. reynolds is, you know, 20 or 30 percent responsible. but do not forget, r.j. reynolds is going to come up here and say, well, she did not really -- there is no evidence she smoked hardly any camels. well, that is not true. she smoked camels when she was a kid. 152 do not forget the reason that they need a percentage of fault that is meaningful and lets them know about their part in this, because of their knowledge as well that they had. do not forget, this is when your brain is forming, and how important those early cigarettes are. so, you know, we say, sure, miss davis take some fault, 10 to twenty percent fault? and we think that when we really view the evidence, that that is appropriate. do not forget, they had one hundred percent of the knowledge. and they tried to do everything they could to keep her knowledge as low, as close to zero as possible. they deliberately played down the role of nicotine, they said. and they went out on television, they lied. they said if we ever find anything, we are going to take it out. they did not. and think about all that -- you know, they built this thing up as a -- dr. kyriakoudes showed you what they did in their advertising. they did not show anybody walking around with a breathing problem. everybody was happy, playing sports, running around. now, we are going to go on to -- let us talk about this advertising, because you are going to be asked questions about what is known as the intentional torts. and i guess i'm going to have to -- i'm rushing here. how much time do i have? 153 i'm not going to go over the -- this in-depth. but you are going to basically be asked -- there is two more sections you are going to be asked about, fraudulent concealment. and what we suggest to you is that they hid, and we showed you on the timeline where they hid and lied about the dangers of the product. they lied whether it caused disease or not. they also hid -- remember, these yellow tags here represent the studies that they were doing. okay? they were studying to see how well can they manipulate the levels of nicotine. miss davis did not know about that. how can they -- how can they get the lowest -- how low can they go to get a habituating level of nicotine. they knew what they were doing. miss davis did not know they were setting the nicotine level and adjusting the ph and engineering this product and putting filters and vent holes on it. i mean, have you ever seen vent holes on these things? i mean, what were they used for? we showed you in the evidence. and she did not know about that. and so these questions go to their concealment and fraud. and did that play a role in what happened to her? of course it did. 154 and then you are going to have to make a determination. it is honestly a lot of legal mumbo jumbo that i do not want to get into. but here's the deal. you are going to have to answer questions about may 5 of 1982. there is no reason you need to be concerned about. nothing important happened on may 5 of 1982. but all you need to be asked is when did their agreement, when did their fraudulent concealment happen? and then when we get to the conspiracy question, you are going to be asked when did the conspiracy happen. of course, it happened before 1982. we showed you all that. and did it continue? of course it did. they kept lying. lied to congress in '94. they did not do anything until 2000. of course, it kept going on and on. okay? now, so we submit to you that, yes, they are liable, that their fraud and concealment was before and after. okay. it was both, before and after. and then their conspiracy, you are going to be instructed that for this question and the next question, the engle findings, remember, they will be -- they will have taken hold. and you have to give her the benefit of those findings. 155 and you are going to be instructed that they concealed information. you cannot question it. it is already been determined. and you are going to be instructed that they engaged in a conspiracy, an agreement with each other. remember that plaza hotel meeting in 1954? and it continued. they said -- you know, they got their plan for their campaign of doubt and their truth squad. remember all of that? that is what they did. and that conspiracy continued and continued and continued. until at least after she had copd. if not further. at least until 1999. now, let us go to -- let us go to damages. you know, you have heard about -- actually, let us talk about -- can you bring up exhibit 177? and then 129? these are the two ftc reports. dr. kyriakoudes talked about advertising. and i do not want you to forget, one thing the ftc determined, okay, well, they are going to tell you that miss davis did not hear any of this. miss davis did not know anything about -- she cannot remember an advertisement she relied on and that kind of stuff. she cannot remember. well, i mean, who can remember. i mean, let us think about like cereal. can you remember what fruit loop commercial you saw as a kid? what day you heard it? what time? all of these questions. no. 156 but do you know that cereal advertising had an impact? probably. you think people advertise for no reason? remember dr. robert heimann said -- he was the deposition where he said the surgeon general is wrong, dead wrong. and i disagree with the cancer society and medical doctors. and i know better than medical doctors. remember that guy? he said, we expect people to trust our advertising. it is truthful. it is our promise to the customer. that is what he said. and then what did they do in the advertising? cigarette advertising reaches virtually all americans who can either read or understand the spoken word. cigarettes are advertised on both network and spot television, on radio, in magazines, and in newspapers, in outdoor media, and by means of many types of points of sale of advertising aids. so pervasive is cigarette advertising that it is virtually impossible for persons of almost any age to avoid cigarette advertising. they ramped it up, too. that is the '67 surgeon general report. the '81 surgeon general report -- jeff -- that is the one -- i will not read it. that is the one that tells us 157 they spent more than one day on advertising than the public health authority spent in a year, telling people not to smoke. that is a lot of power. that is a lot of money. and all for what? because -- we will not pull this document up. but it was exhibit 72. exhibit 72 i submit to you is worth reading. and if you can pull exhibit 72. it is a 1982 document, after the may 5, 1982, date. december 1982. talks about the exit and entry gates. you know, if the exit gates are ever opened, our people flood out, our business will be out of business overnight. read the document. exhibit 72. it will be back there with you. you can read it. we cannot ever be comfortable selling a product which most of our customers could stop using if they could. so then that comes down to damages that we are going to see in this case. and you will be instructed. i'm not going to waste my time. you read the jury instructions. i mean, i cannot emphasize enough that when you have a question on the verdict form, first go to the jury instructions and read exactly what you are instructed to do, because that is your bible, so to speak, on this issue. 158 and, you know, i told you originally when i came in that i was going to, you know, have to ask for a substantial number, and i thought the evidence would support that. and, you know, it is not easy to come up with a number that you ask for in a case like this. you know, if somebody had -- if somebody had like a car injury, hurt themselves and broke a leg or something, and they were out of commission for a week or two, and then maybe i'd have to come in here and ask for thousands of dollars or $10,000 or something like that. you know, the amount and what is the injury, how debilitating, and how long is the recovery period is how i would look at that. but then, you know, i guess if somebody has some sort of injury, you know, their leg is completely -- it will never be better again. it is been destroyed. it has pins in it. they will never walk the same again. and that is going to be for a long time. or maybe it is going to be ten years of rehabilitation to ever get back. it is a longer period of time, serious injury. then i have to come in and ask for hundreds of thousands for something like that. but, you know, when an injury is fatal, you are never going to get better. it is only going to get worse. you are going to have to live with it forever. you are going 159 to die with it prematurely. you are going to leave people behind. that kind of injury is where i have to get in the millions. and, you know, miss davis, she -- you know, you can talk about comparative fault. she is taken her part of the fault. she got copd. she is a vibrant, you know, firefighter -- or tried to become a firefighter and was a police officer. and then ultimately, you know, had the rib injury. but then she had the copd, and her breathing problems got worse and worse. and dr. burns told you what happened. showed you the graph. she is down to thirty percent now, and she is going to be hospitalized more and more and more. she is been tethered to an oxygen tank like this for years. she puts a breathing tube in her nose. and that breathing tube she has to breathe with constantly leads to bloody noses all the time, dry noses. she is got to have it. she is got to do breathing treatments constantly. she will never get better. she will only get worse. she has to think about leaving her lovely son, tommy, behind, who has a severe brain injury, and worried about who is going to take care of him when she is gone. remember, you heard her testify, i just want somebody who is not going to make fun of him, not going to 160 give him a rough time. that is something she thinks about every night. and she is going to have these copd exacerbations. you know, chest. cannot catch a breath. dr. burns explained what happens in the copd exacerbation. when i have to get to that kind of number and i have to ask in the millions, you know, i would encourage you -- it is a number for you to decide. you can go higher than i ask, by the way. but you can go lower, of course, too. but i would submit the number, the minimum number, should correlate to the number of puffs of cigarettes that we calculated she had. mr. mccarter: objection, your honor. that is not a proper basis. mr. byrd: well, i can explain the basis, your honor. the court: okay. mr. byrd: let me explain the basis. because dr. burns explained that every puff of a cigarette freezes the cilia. that is dangerous. and every puff lets irritants and chemicals and carcinogens come in. every puff, he said. and it goes over and over. and each one of those cause damage to your cells and then to your airways, which lead to copd. 161 so it is not one puff that does this. it is 7 million puffs doing their job of freezing your cilia and loading you up with irritants over and over and over. so i would ask and submit the appropriate amount of damages for miss davis is $7 million. and the judge will tell you you do not reduce for comparative fault. so if you find that that number is accurate, $7 million, but let us say you found her fifty percent at fault, or whatever; i'm just using that example. i do not think you should come near fifty percent. but let us say you use fifty percent fault. that does not mean you put in $3.5 million. the judge will deal with those kind of issues. you will put in the full $7 million and let him deal with comparative fault. and the comparative fault will go to the first two claims. they are going to be one hundred percent liable, by the way, for their intentional torts, for their fraud and their conspiracy. they will be one hundred percent responsible for that. now, the last question -- your honor, could i get an additional minute or two? the court: all right. i will give you an additional five minutes, but i'm going to cut you off in midstream if you go beyond that. mr. byrd: sure. that is fine. so that means i'm 162 11 minutes. now, there is a final question to be asked about whether punitive damages are warranted. and punitive damages -- if you can get the instruction here, john, the punitive damage instruction. and i apologize. paragraph two says -- here's the standard. you need to read the whole thing. but punitive damages are available if the cigarette companies' conduct is so gross and flagrant as to show such a reckless disregard of a conscious indifference to human life or health that an award of compensatory damages is insufficient to punish that defendant for its misconduct -- and this is the important part -- or to deter it from engaging in such misconduct in the future. and this is to deter this company and other companies from doing things like this. a deterrence. and that is why, you know, you do not put -- we are not talking about any amount or anything like that. that would -- is it warranted? did they show reckless disregard for human life? of course, they did. and when you consider this question of, you know -- of this kind of conduct to deter them, you can consider the kind of conduct that hurt miss davis does not hurt others. and it does. 163 and you even heard from mr. jupe and mr. gentry. pick that up. they both confirmed to you. it is from their own mouths. they know. philip morris and r.j. reynolds. they killed -- 400,000 american customers die every year. they both said it. and dr. burns actually gave you the most recent numbers are 480,000 a year. twenty million have died prematurely. okay? and, you know, we showed you that graph. if you could show the consumption chart, you know, that lung cancer -- here's the thing. you know, when miss davis picks up a cigarette or an individual picks up a cigarette and you take a smoke, and maybe eventually when you do understand that there are hazards, you may not know what hazards mean. you think it is a scratchy throat or a cough or bronchitis and get over it. when you really understand this is a lifelong disease that you will never recover from and that is what you are dealing with. you know, you take this puff of the cigarette and you know of -- you know, you go, well, what are the odds. maybe i get it, maybe i do not. you know, the odds are probably worse than a smoker really wants to acknowledge. but they do think, well, you know, chance is i do not get anything. i'll be 164 fine. that is kind of what they are looking at. that is kind of how they think about it. but when philip morris and r.j. reynolds, they go into the boardroom -- and miss davis wakes up in the morning. philip morris goes into the boardroom, and they sit down, it is not an if. they know it is certain, 400,000 a year. they may not know which ones. they may not know which ones or who. they know for certain, that not an if, 400,000 a year. that is disregard for human life. i cannot think of a better example for facts to meet the definition. read the definition of punitive damage and try to explain how that is not a disregard for human life to keep up this kind of conduct. and then to start, you know, let us go find the children. why? because we showed you the evidence. the children start -- 95 percent of their business starts between 14 and 25. and let us get the children. because they know they are the only place for replacement smoker. today's teenager is tomorrow's regular customer. they are saying that in '81. the surgeon general report from 2012 -- i'm not going to pull it back up here. they said it continues. 165 they are still doing it. back here, they were studying kids. remember, we put up -- it is exhibit 595. it is not on the board. exhibit 595. they were studying children with add. in elementary school. what is that? studying kids with add. not to help them with add; to sell them cigarettes. mr. mccarter: objection, your honor. documents said the opposite. the court: well, i do not remember. it is the jury's recollection to recall, but, of course, you are free to refer to that in your summation. mr. byrd: smoking behavior they were studying. okay? smoking behavior of children. that is what they were saying. go find them. and when we study them, by the way, go get them at the recreation centers, soda fountains, the lakes, the pools. why? i did not make this up. it was in the documents. the parents will not be there. give some more truthful answers. the parents will not be there. is that the kind of conduct that needs deterrence in this country? do we need to deter that kind of conduct when the 2012 surgeon general report says it still goes on? yes, i think we do. this graph is the last thing i'll say. this graph 166 shows a tragedy in america. okay? these companies have killed grandparents. they have killed grandmothers. they have killed aunts and uncles. they have killed mommies and daddies. they have killed cousins and siblings, brothers and sisters. and make no mistake, the replacement smokers are children. one of them many years ago was miss davis, eight, ten years old she starts smoking. loses her mom. dad cannot take care of them. goes into a juvenile home, an orphanage, a juvenile hall. and she smokes away there. why? because everybody did it. because back then they thought -- because that is what you did back then. you let kids smoke. this case warrants punitive damages. and precisely because of the exact same type of conduct that they engaged in that hurt miss davis. can she point to a specific advertisement? no. do you think any of the 400,000 people -- do you think anybody can point to the specific ad that they remember? but, you know, i promise you, people of that generation, people who -- you all are young. but there is a lot of people from a different generation. if you were alive during this time in the '30s, '40s, and '50s and you heard call for philip morris, you knew that. everyone 167 knew that. walk a mile for a camel. you knew it. it did not just not have an impact. of course it had an impact. reliance? what was miss davis' reliance on this, you are going to be asked? did she rely before 1982, after 1982? every time. she lit and puffed this away. here's her reliance. one after the other. from 1950 until 2005. thank you for your time. miss davis appreciates your time and your careful consideration of all the evidence as long as you need to make sure you do the right thing.