mr. cofer: may it please the court, counsel, mr. denton? members of the jury, good morning. ms. wiles, i'm going to be using not the elmo but thank you. the other. thank you. 57 i told you in opening statement that we believe this case does come down to three pretty simple, straightforward questions: did she wait so long to quit? the defendants do to cause ms. denton to smoke and get sick? remember back in my opening statement what i told why did linda denton smoke? and what, if anything, did why you the evidence would be, that ms. denton smoked because her family smoked, that ms. denton always had the ability to quit smoking, and that nothing that the defendants did or did not do, said or did not say caused ms. denton to begin smoking. you may also remember that i began my opening statement by telling you the things that were not in dispute, and i told you i was doing that so we could take those things off the table and we could focus on the issues in the case. and i want to begin my closing argument the same what i want to do is i want to begin with the facts way. that are not in dispute, and let us start with the first well, members of the question. jury, you remember that both dr. burns and dr. cummings told you that the most important reason that a person becomes a smoker is whether their friends and family smoke. both of them told you that. why did linda denton smoke? and it is true that we do not know very much about 58 ms. denton's friends, but we do know, members of the jury, that everyone who was important to her in her life smoked. her mom smoked. her big brother smoked. her little brother smoked. smoked when they met. her husband of 30 years, he even her daughter karol smoked. her dad smoked. given the environment that she grew up in, is it any surprise that linda denton decided to become a smoker? and you remember that dr. burns told you that the environment we grow up in is a very important factor in whether someone decides to smoke. members of the jury, there was not a single shred of evidence that ms. denton started smoking because of anything that a tobacco company said or did not say. there was not a single shred of evidence that ms. denton was ever fooled about the risks of smoking or that she relied on anything that a cigarette company said. the evidence was that ms. denton smoked her first cigarette after the 1964 surgeon general's report, and essentially every cigarette that she smoked came from a package that had the surgeon general's warning on it. question 2, why did she wait so long to quit? we know there is no question that ms. denton had the ability to quit because she did quit smoking. unfortunately she waited until she was diagnosed with cancer before she put her cigarettes down for good. 59 there is also no question, members of the jury, that ms. denton personally understood the risks of smoking, that it was dangerous and it could cause cancer. could we go to the next demo, please? this is the 1964 surgeon general's report. is what the surgeon general concluded in 1964: smoking is causally related to lung cancer in men." points that way in women. the surgeon general also determined that cigarette smoking was a habit and not an addiction because it was not intoxicating. this "cigarette says it now, dr. burns told you that the '64 surgeon general's report was a big deal and got a ton of publicity. he told you that it was on the front page of newspapers. it was on the cover of national magazines, and it was reported on the television too. now, ms. barnett said in her opening statement that philip morris and r.j. reynolds knew, before ms. denton started smoking, that cigarettes could cause cancer. well, so did she. and you saw this, but let me show you how harry reasoner reported on cbs news the '64 surgeon general's report. (video played.) mr. cofer: ms. barnett said -- ms. barnett told you in her closing argument that if philip morris and reynolds had just told ms. denton, linda denton, that 60 cigarettes were dangerous, she would have had a fighting chance. members of the jury, this was the information that the was available before she decided to start smoking. first time that any witness actually saw linda denton smoking was november of 1966, after she dropped out of high school and moved in with her sister, gerry dawson. no one has any credible information before that about when linda denton smoked her first cigarette, what brand she smoked, what the circumstances were, or how much she smoked. now, you have heard about some conversations that ms. denton had with some of her friends and with mr. denton. there is no way to verify whether any of those stories is accurate because none of the witnesses are here. all we have is the evidence that is in front of you. but probably the most credible story is the one that mr. denton told, and he said that the first time he met the woman who would become his wife, she was already smoking. and she told mr. denton, if his memory's correct, that she would been smoking, for about a year, an occasional cigarette with one of her girlfriends. that was in january '67. so why is that important? this label, the first warning label, went on the cigarette packs on january 1st, 1966. smoke her first cigarette. this was 11 months before gerry dawson saw ms. denton the evidence is, in terms of 61 people who've seen her smoke, every cigarette she smoked came in a package with a warning. evidence, how the warning got stronger and how it got more specific over the years. and you heard the i -- i guess here's the point, members of the linda denton was not a person who began smoking in linda denton began smoking in the at the time that she decided whether to become a jury. the 1940s and 1950s. 1960s. smoker, there was an enormous amount of evidence about the risks of smoking, the dangers of smoking, and specifically that smoking caused cancer. she was clearly on notice of the risks from the git-go, from the time that she decided whether to smoke. now, you heard dr. burns talk about the difference well, there is absolutely no between someone being aware that smoking can cause cancer and someone actually understanding that smoking has personal relevance to their life. question whatsoever, members of the jury, that linda denton understood that smoking had personal relevance. literally watched her dad, her mom, and her brother die from small cell lung cancer that she believed was caused by smoking. she her husband, bobby denton, coughed up blood in 1973, and he quit smoking, and he told ms. denton he was going to quit before he got emphysema or cancer and it 62 killed him. and i know we have been through it, but let us at least briefly walk through what linda denton knew about the dangers of smoking and when she knew it, and let us go to the time line that i've showed you. when linda and bobby denton first married in february of 1967 -- you can see it in the end over at the top -- her father already had emphysema that they both believed was caused by smoking. this is after the warning is on the pack. general's report. now it is her dad has emphysema that they believed was caused by smoking, yet neither of them made any effort to quit smoking. this is after the surgeon and why that is important is because dr. burns you remember what he he said that addiction -- and this is dr. burns -- admitted that if ms. denton had tried to quit then, it would have been relatively easy for her. said? that addiction, particularly addiction to nicotine, takes a considerable time to grow in strength and power for the individual. he specifically testified that two years into a person's smoking habit, it would have been much easier to stop and stay off cigarettes than it would have been later in life, and that makes sense. tried to quit. in fact, mr. denton told you that she but there is no evidence they 63 did not. four years after they were married, in 1971, ms. denton's father died of small cell lung cancer, the very type of cancer that ms. denton, linda denton, would be diagnosed with 25 years later. 21-year-old adult. make any effort to try to quit smoking when her dad died from lung cancer from smoking. she was a mother of two, yet she did not in 1971 linda denton was a mr. denton told his wife why he was two years after that, in 1973, mr. denton coughed he decided then and there he was going to quit, up blood. and he put his cigarettes down, and he never again was a regular smoker. quitting, and this was the very first time -- it was 1973 -- was the very first time ms. denton mentioned anything to him and what he told you was she did not about her quitting. she said she was throw her cigarettes away like he did. just going to cut back, but he admitted that she did not really even do that. now, this is really important, members of the after 1973 the next time anyone can specifically jury. identify a time that ms. denton actually tried to quit smoking was in the 1985/'86 time period. now, in '76 and '77, three or four years after mr. denton coughed up blood, both ms. denton's mother and brother were having breathing problems. 64 her mother had emphysema. her mother told ms. denton that her mother believed that smoking caused those problems, but ms. denton did not try to quit. three years later, in 1980, her brother died of small cell lung cancer, and before he died, he told ms. denton that he believed smoking caused his cancer. ms. denton did not try to quit. but two years later, in february of 1982, ms. denton's mother died of small cell lung cancer, but linda denton did not try to quit. now, both dr. burns and dr. cummings told you something, and you really did not need an expert to tell you this because it is common sense, and that is if you do not want to do something and you do not try to do something, you are not going to. the surgeon general's reports tell you that it is up to the smoker to make up his or her mind that she wants to quit, and then you have to truly make an effort to quit. you have to try. again, what is your common sense -- that is not something that anyone can do for you. things happening, the evidence was ms. denton did not try to quit smoking. and the surgeon general tells you -- but the fact is with all of those why is it important? we talked about this in opening statement. why is it important? well, it is 65 critically important evidence because dr. burns told you that when a person stops smoking, his or her risk of getting sick from smoking goes down. enough and stays quit long enough, the risk essentially returns to that of a never smoker. and if he or she quits early and let us get very specific. here's what he testified about linda denton. dr. burns specifically told you that if ms. denton had quit smoking by 1981, 15 years before she was diagnosed with lung cancer, it is medically more likely than not she would not have gotten lung cancer. according to dr. burns, she could have smoked up till 1981, when she was 31 years old, and if she had quit then, she would not have gotten lung cancer. here's the bottom line. the risk was always linda denton and only linda denton within her control. could make the decision to stop. one could do for her. she would seen it in her own family, and it was up to her to make a decision whether to accept that risk or to quit smoking and avoid that risk. that was something that no she knew smoking caused lung cancer. now, mr. denton told you when he testified the other day that his wife tried really hard to quit and that cigarettes really had a hold on her. evidence? she never threw her cigarettes away. the evidence was that before she quit for good, she never got rid of but what was the 66 her ashtrays or her lighters. dr. cummings told you that is one way to gauge whether a person is sincere about quitting. ms. denton never tried nicotine gum. she never she was prescribed the tried hypnosis as a way to quit. patch once in 1994, but according to mr. denton, she only wore it for a day or two, and she smoked while she had the patch. now, you remember seeing the medical record where the patch did not make her feel good? told you that if a person smokes while they are wearing the patch, it can make them dizzy, and it can make them nauseous. well, dr. cummings the seventh-day adventists held them. ms. denton never went to a stop-smoking clinic. you heard from dr. cummings, there have been stop-smoking clinics in jacksonville and around the country since the 1960s. cancer society held them. held them. she never asked her family members or friends for help in quitting. the american the american lung association but ms. denton never attended a single one, and the great thing about juries is we bring our we bring our life experiences when we listen common sense. to the evidence, when we are asked to decide the facts. and i think back to the old statement actions speak louder than words. i know what people told you that ms. denton was 67 thinking, but what was the evidence of her actions? where is the evidence that ms. denton really wanted to quit and really tried to quit, really made a sincere, serious effort to quit? you heard from dr. cummings that a serious quit attempt is defined as going without a cigarette for at least 24 hours. that is a benchmark the surgeon general uses too. well, until she quit for good, it is not clear that ms. denton ever went 24 hours without a cigarette. mr. denton said that she would taper off; she sometimes sometimes that would last but the bottom line is it is never -- it would try to cut back, that she would cut down. that would last for a day or two. for a few hours. was not clear that she ever actually put the cigarettes away for more than a day or even for a day. and if she did not, according to the surgeon general, the first time she made a serious quit attempt was after she was diagnosed with cancer in april of 1996. the plaintiff has an easy answer for why ms. denton did not quit smoking until she was diagnosed with cancer. addiction, the plaintiff says, prevented ms. denton from quitting. that is not true. that even addicted smokers can and do quit smoking. both dr. burns and dr. cummings told you well, plaintiff's own experts told you dr. cummings told you that while it may be hard to 68 quit, he believes that every smoker has the ability to quit dr. burns and smoking, and that included linda denton. dr. cummings told you that millions of heavily addicted smokers in this country have successfully quit smoking. according to the surgeon general, 60 million when they americans have quit, and the vast majority of those have quit without any kind of professional help. finally decided it was more important to them not to smoke than it was to smoke, they put their cigarettes down, and they became nonsmokers. of the jury, you have heard from all the experts in whether someone successfully quits smoking is motivation and persistence. the most important factor, members now, let me tell you something. i am not trying to suggest that it is easy for everyone to quit smoking. for some people it is; for some people it is pretty hard, and you but really, is not that gotta try, and you gotta try again. true about everything we want to accomplish in life? if you really want something, sometimes you have to work for it? and the fact that it is not easy, that does not mean that you do not have to work for it. you have to sincerely try, and if you do not, it is not going to happen. now, i want to talk for a few minutes about the you have to try. role of family support when a smoker wants to quit smoking. both dr. burns and dr. cummings told you that a family's 69 support and encouragement is an important factor in whether a smoker is successful in quitting smoking. dr. burns told you it is very clear from the literature that family support is an important aid in helping people successfully stay off cigarettes. dr. cummings told you that he advises family members of people who want to quit smoking that the kind of support you give can either help or hold back his or her willingness and ability to quit smoking. members of the jury, ms. denton did not get support from her family. it. she did not ask for it, and they did not volunteer and the fact is, now, ms. barnett asked, are defendants blaming her i am not blaming let me be very clear. i am not criticizing them in any way, and her family? mr. denton or his family for ms. denton's decision to continue to smoke. but one of the critical issues in this case is why did linda why did not she quit earlier? denton wait so long to quit? i mean, she obviously had the information she needed, not just to make a choice, but to make an informed choice. i agree that a choice without information is not really a choice, but she had the information to make an informed choice. told you that by 1973, when she first said she ought to quit, that ms. denton understood the dangers. so why did not she quit earlier? dr. burns 70 when mr. denton testified, i thought he was very candid, and he admitted that by '71, '72, '73, he admitted his wife knew smoking caused cancer. mr. denton just said he thought it really had a hold on her. on her, and that is why she did not quit. nicotine had a hold ms. denton's family believed that it was her her family believed it was decision to smoke or not smoke. her choice whether to ask for their help or not, and the fact that she did not ask the people she loved the most for help, does not that tell you something about whether she really wanted to quit? one of the first witnesses was her daughter karrie she is ms. denton's youngest daughter, and she forrester. specifically testified that she never once, never once, but more importantly, asked her mother to quit smoking. members of the jury, she told you why. you remember what she said? she said that her mother was a grown woman, so she would make her own decisions. robert benjamin denton, their oldest boy, he testified he does not remember anyone in the family he expressing any concerns to his mother about her smoking. he said that was just not something that they talked about. also testified that ms. denton never referred to herself as addicted, and until she passed away, no one in the family said she was addicted. 71 but probably the most telling testimony comes from he testified that over mr. denton, her husband of 30 years. the course of their marriage, he never took any steps to help his wife quit smoking, and he never told her that he wanted her to quit because he believed that was her choice, just like it was his choice. he told you from the witness stand, members of the jury, that while his wife was alive, he believed it was her prerogative whether to smoke or not smoke. while ms. denton was alive, her family respected her decision. capable of making an informed choice about how she wanted to live her life. lawsuit is the first time her family ever second-guessed the choices that linda denton made. they believed that she was an adult who was and the fact is, members of the jury, this the fact is cancer. now, the only person who did encourage ms. denton mary melvin was a to try to quit smoking was mary melvin. and you heard nurse, and she was ms. denton's best friend. that ms. melvin told ms. denton over 50 times that smoking could cause cancer and that she should quit. remember what ms. denton said back? ms. denton told her best friend when ms. melvin was nagging her? "mind your own business and stop telling me that." in april of 1996, ms. denton was diagnosed with while she was in the hospital, she told her family do you remember what do you 72 she was not going to smoke anymore. her daughters went to the house and scrubbed the walls and the rest of the house and got rid of the cigarettes, got rid of the ashtrays. ms. denton came home from the hospital and never smoked again. now, let me say, we have heard testimony that maybe she smoked a cigarette or two. i showed the interrogatory responses to dr. cummings where mr. denton said that after april of 1996, ms. denton quit smoking. now, i do want to talk very briefly about plaintiff showed you a few ads, and cigarette advertising. dr. cummings told you that advertising influenced ms. denton's decisions. that. well, there was no evidence of plaintiff showed you some television ads for the brand philip morris and winston cigarettes. with their proof is those ads aired before ms. denton was a smoker, and they were for brands she did not smoke. i mean, common sense is they could not have influenced her too much if she did not buy the product. the problem mr. denton testified the only ads he remembers discussing with his wife were some old tv jingles. could you put the time line back up? but the evidence was the cigarette ads were taken they went off the air in 1971, and then off tv and radio. 73 beginning in 1972, every print ad had the surgeon general's warning right on the ads. there was no evidence that ms. denton ever chose a ms. -- mr. denton told cigarette based on an advertisement. you that she did not buy cigarettes based on cigarette coupons or promotions. denton told you their mother decided what brands to buy based on price. advertising influenced any of ms. denton's decisions. there was simply no evidence that cigarette karrie forrester and robert benjamin now, dr. cummings also talked about youth smoking, and it is true that linda denton started smoking when she was a teenager. first person who saw her smoke was her sister when she was 16 years old. as i've already shown you and told you, the when ms. denton was 16 years old, she would already left high school, and she was working at a coil factory. few months later, she was married, and by the time she was 18 or 19, she was a mother. but she had already entered adulthood. of a family, she had adult responsibilities, and she was making adult choices. ms. denton may have been young, she was taking care a everyone in her family described ms. denton as strong, smart, and resourceful. her husband described her as her own person and someone who, when they made up their and mind to do something, would carry through and do it. 74 while that is true, it is true that ms. denton started to smoke when she was a teenager, she continued to smoke as an adult, and she made those choices, members of the jury, with full appreciation that smoking was dangerous and could cause cancer. now, i did tell you in opening statement that if you looked back over the last 60 years at the millions of pages of documents written by the thousands of employees at philip morris and r.j. reynolds, you would see they said some pretty dumb things, and now that you have had a chance to see the documents and watch the videos, i'm sure you agree. but i want you to think about how plaintiff showed they literally took snippets out of you that evidence. context from a couple dozen documents and a couple videos, and they flashed them on the screen, and they had dr. burns and dr. cummings read them to you. they did not put them in context. it, when they were written, or even which company the documents came from. evidence that any of that affected linda denton in any way. much of the time, they did not tell you who wrote more importantly, they offered no and let me give you just one example. you remember the video where helmut wakeham said people could die from eating too much applesauce? strange thing to say, even if it were true. important point is that until cross-examination, you learned well, that is a pretty but the more 75 for the first time that ms. denton could not possibly have seen that video because the first time it was shown was in san francisco in the 1990s. and you probably thought, why is he asking dr. cummings that dumb question: hear it, it cannot affect you." "if you do not see it or and you heard he agreed, "well, that is right." because if you do not see it and you do not hear it, it cannot affect you. and when mr. -- when dr. burns showed you that, he knew that linda denton did not see it. could not possibly have affected any of her decisions, but he did not tell you that. cross-examination. that it did. because he wanted you to believe you did not learn that until he knew that it why? when you think about those documents or videos, the question you should ask is, did plaintiff tie any of those statements to linda denton? that they affected ms. denton in any way? the jury, if the answer's no, then why did they show them to you? did he offer any evidence and, members of i want to talk for a moment about filters and dr. burns told you that filters and low-tar cigarettes. low-tar cigarettes were marketed as health cigarettes. he said that the defendants deceived ms. denton and the public because, in fact, filtered cigarettes were not any safer. 76 well, let me make a couple comments. first, plaintiff did not show you a single statement where the tobacco companies told the public that filtered cigarettes you remember, when i or low-tar cigarettes were safer. cross-examined dr. david burns, it was the public health community that told the public that filtered cigarettes and low-tar cigarettes were safer. the public health community, including the american cancer society and the surgeon general of the united states, specifically told the public that while all cigarettes are dangerous, if you were unwilling or unable to quit, you should smoke filtered cigarettes and low-tar cigarettes. do you remember? i marched through the various surgeon general's the public health community and the surgeon reports with dr. burns and showed you what the surgeon general said. general made that recommendation based on over 50 epidemiologic studies that showed that smoking filter and low-tar cigarettes, in fact, reduces the risk of lung cancer. i asked dr. burns to explain what epidemiological studies were so we would all have the context when we were considering the statements that the surgeon general was making. no one ever said filtered cigarettes were safe. the surgeon general said they were safer, and plaintiff 77 showed you no evidence that either philip morris or r.j. reynolds ever said anything to linda denton or the public that caused her to believe that filters were safe or safer. dr. burns told you he himself believed they were dr. burns now says that the surgeon safer up until 1997. general misinterpreted those studies. surgeon general did, or maybe the surgeon general did not. but it was public health who was telling the public to smoke filters and low-tar, not the tobacco companies. the public health community was encouraging the tobacco companies to make filtered cigarettes and low-tar cigarettes. well, maybe the in fact, second, ms. denton always smoked filtered she never told anyone why she smoked filtered she never said she thought filters were risk cigarettes. cigarettes. in fact, mr. denton was smoking filtered cigarettes, free. of course, marlboro and winston, when he coughed up blood. ms. denton understood that filtered cigarettes were not safe. her husband was smoking filtered cigarettes when he coughed up blood and said, "i'm putting these down. i'm not smoking anymore because i do not want to get emphysema or lung cancer and die." now, according to mr. denton -- and i showed you those brand charts. i know it was tedious, but it was 78 and important, i thought, for you to understand what she smoked, when she smoked, when she switched to low-tar. according to the sworn interrogatories and according to the evidence, mr. denton said that ms. denton -- the first time she talked about low tar was when she switched to basic, and he said -- and you saw the charts -- that was 1985. and he said he remembers his wife told him she was switching to basic because she wanted a lower-tar cigarette. well, as we now know, that was a mistake because basic was not on the basic was not on the market in 1985. market until 1990, and it was not marketed as a low-tar cigarette. dr. cummings. ultimately he agreed with that. he and i had a little back-and-forth, but it was a discount cigarette. remember the evidence is that ms. denton first smoked a low-tar cigarette, merit and cambridge, in 1990, and she never told mr. denton why she switched to merit or cambridge. something philip morris told her. there is no evidence that she switched because of ms. denton's children testified that their mother never talked about why she smoked the brands she did, but it was their understanding that she made her brand decisions based on price. you heard that sometimes money was tight, and so she bought the cigarettes that were cheapest. so those are the facts. the question is how do 79 those facts help you decide this case? can we go to the verdict form? and this is question 1 and 2, and i put these together. as ms. barnett told you and as the court will instruct you, the first thing you have to do -- the first thing you have to decide is whether ms. denton was a member of the engle class, and there is two questions that go to class membership. the first is, was linda denton addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine? case is over. question. cigarettes containing nicotine a legal cause of her death? if your answer is yes, you go to the next and that is, was linda denton's addiction to if your answer is no, the and we are going to talk about legal cause. we talked about it a little bit in opening. about it because it is a critically important concept in this case, and it is part of what you need to understand to decide the issues before you. ms. barnett talked but first, let me say it is plaintiff's burden to prove both of these, that she was, in fact, addicted and that addiction was a legal cause of her death. now, let us talk about addiction. you have heard about how the term addiction, its definition, has changed over time. until 1988 the surgeon general said that cigarettes were not addictive because they were not 80 intoxicating. in 1988 the surgeon general adopted a new definition and said intoxication is no longer required. they are now addictive. dr. burns and dr. cummings told you it is their well, as opinion that linda denton was, in fact, addicted. you have heard, dr. burns has been testifying for 30 years, and he has never once testified that any plaintiff was not addicted. dr. cummings has been testifying for 16 years, and like dr. burns, he too has never met a plaintiff who, in his opinion, was not addicted. and given their tests for addiction, that is not surprising because basically both burns and cummings rely on the heaviness of smoking index. questions: morning, and how much do you smoke? when do you have your first cigarette in the that index asked two and it is like math. if you are a daily smoker, you are addicted, and the sooner you have your first cigarette and the more cigarettes that you smoke, the more heavily addicted you are. well, since ms. denton smoked every day and she smoked in the morning, they told you that is all we need to know. she is heavily addicted. that is the test. that is it. i want you to think about that for a minute and apply it to the way we live our lives. someone's a coffee drinker and they drink coffee most every you know, if 81 day and they get up and they have coffee in the morning -- for that matter, if before they go to bed, they set one of the -- the timer so the coffee will be percolating when you wake up, that person's a coffee addict. if they drink more than a couple cups, you are really addicted. told you he believes he is addicted to caffeine. dr. cummings now, dr. kaplan told you that psychiatrists and mental health professionals use dsm-iv as a diagnostic criteria to make a diagnosis for a mental disorder, including addiction, and that is what addiction is under the dsm. it is a mental health disorder, and there are a list of criteria that you consider before you diagnose somebody with a mental disorder. he told you, based on those accepted criteria, he he also told would not diagnose ms. denton as addicted. you, based on the surgeon general's definition of compulsive use, he would not diagnose her as addicted because even though she was a daily smoker, he did not believe that her smoking was compulsive, that nicotine compelled her to smoke. but let me just be very honest with you. whether -- whatever test you choose to apply, i'm not sure it really matters much whether ms. denton was addicted because the real question you have to decide is, was an addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine a legal cause of 82 and i gave you an example in opening, and i her death? bungled it, and ms. barnett talked about it today in closing. but i'm going to give you this example because i want you to understand the difference between cause in fact and legal cause. and let me tell you, everyone who ever went to law school and took torts class struggled with this proximate it gives us all cause and legal cause. nightmares when we think back to that first year and these concepts, but here's the easiest explanation or example that i can think of. what does it mean? so if i walk out of the courtroom today and i walk but what is the legal cause? you have what happened and i got hit by a truck, right? was i texting and the crosswalk said do not cross, and was i in down the street and i get hit by a truck, what is the cause in fact of my injuries? that is just obvious. to ask why did he get hit by a truck? why? i stepped out in front of the truck and got hit? the crosswalk, and i had the crosswalk, and a guy came around the corner in the truck and was accelerating, smoking a cigarette, listening to the radio, not paying attention, talking on a cell phone, and hit me? you have to consider the circumstances. but that is the difference between cause in fact and legal cause. can we put the instruction up? 83 so here's the instruction: addiction is a legal cause of death if it directly and in natural and continuous sequence produces or contributes substantially to producing such death so it can reasonably be said that but for the addiction, the death would not have occurred. the rest of the instruction just tells you there can be more than one legal cause, and that is what counsel told you in her opening statement. you will get. but that is the language bottom line is plaintiff has to show that ms. denton was, in fact, addicted and that her addiction was so strong and substantial that it can reasonably be said that but for her addiction, she would not have smoked and she would not have gotten sick. in other words, plaintiff has to prove that if ms. denton had not been addicted, she would have quit smoking, and she would not have gotten sick. well, members of the jury, there is just no the one thing that burns, cummings, and evidence of that. kaplan all agreed on is that all smokers, including addicted smokers, have the ability to quit. they do not all quit, but and whether they quit they all have the ability to quit. depends on their motivation and persistence. they have to want to quit and they have to try to quit. so why did i tell you about the 60 million americans who have quit smoking and -- when burns and 84 cummings said they thought the majority of those people were addicted, some of whom highly addicted? well, where was the evidence that ms. denton was any different than those 60 million people? cummings told you he believed the vast majority of the 60 million were addicted. he told you he believed the vast majority had had brain changes, but that did not stop them from quitting. where was the evidence that ms. denton was any they did not offer a single opinion or single piece different than the 60 million people who successfully quit? they brought you two, as they described, world-class experts. of evidence on that. different. they did not try to distinguish those numbers because they could not, because they had to concede that addiction does not prevent you from quitting. they did not tell you why she was ms. denton always had the ability to quit smoking, unfortunately she did not make up her members of the jury. mind to do it until she was diagnosed with lung cancer. you know, plaintiff argues that ms. denton tried really hard to quit. could only identify four specific times over their 30-year marriage, four specific times -- dr. cummings, dr. cummings admitted he could you put the time line up? -- where ms. denton actually tried to quit 1973, she said she should quit, but mr. denton smoking. 85 1985, cuts 1994, she breaks her thumb so the doctor sees she is a smoker. says, "well, she really did not even cut back." back for maybe a day or two. she goes to the doctor. the doctor says, "here's a patch." expensive. on. it lasted a day or two. was the end of it. yes, she paid for the patch. yes, the patch was yes, she put it yes, she kept smoking. it made her dizzy and nauseous. she took the patch off, and that and according to dr. cummings, the only other time in that 30-year period was after she was diagnosed with cancer, when she put her cigarettes down and quit for good. can we put the question back on? members of the jury, question 1, you decide what definition you want to apply with respect to question 1, and you decide whether you think, using whatever definition -- and there will be no definition of addiction in the instructions. whether you think she was addicted. when you get to question 2 -- was linda denton's addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine a legal cause of her death? -- the answer to that question is no. you decide, using whatever definition, but let me suggest that whether you think she was addicted, there was no evidence that her -- that but for her addiction, she would have quit. all of the evidence was that heavily addicted smokers can quit smoking. heavily addicted smokers do quit 86 i'm not saying it is easy for everybody, but what i smoking. am saying is what the surgeon general said, what cummings said, what burns said, what common sense says, that if you do not really try, it is not going to happen. can we put up the next instruction, please? well, if you decide that ms. denton was a member of the engle class and then the engle findings apply to her -- and counsel walked through the engle findings, and you are going to have those. that the engle jury found. you can see exactly what it was and if you decide that she was a class member, there are still some very then she gets the benefit of those findings, but that does not mean the case is over. important questions that you will have to decide. first, this question: it will be on your verdict form: defendant, whether the negligence on the part of the defendant was a legal cause of ms. denton's death. and the please state -- this is question 3. please state, as to each would you show the next one too? because i want to talk about these together. this is question 4: please state as to each defendant whether the defendant's placement of cigarettes on the market that were defective and unreasonably dangerous was a legal cause of ms. denton's death. so you are going to have those two instructions, 87 and if you decide the findings apply, then, as ms. barnett told you, it is already been decided that the defendants were negligent and placed the defective product on the market. the instructions will not tell you how we were negligent or why the product was defective, but they will instruct you what the findings do. they will also tell you that there is something you have to decide, and that is whether our negligence or whether the placement of the product was a legal cause of ms. denton's lung cancer and death. that by looking at the evidence in the case. and you can only decide so let us go through the evidence, and let us see how burns and cummings criticized us and what they said we did wrong, and think about whether that is a legal cause, whether that made a difference to ms. denton. dr. burns said that what philip morris and dr. burns said that smokers r.j. reynolds did wrong was that they confused the message that smoking was dangerous. need a consistent, repetitive message that smoking is ms. barnett characterized it, we should have dangerous. told her they were dangerous; we should have given her a fighting chance. that is what we should have done. dr. burns said that when smokers have that message, they personalize the risk, and they quit smoking. well, members of the jury, there may well be smokers out 88 there who were confused about the risks of smoking, but i respectfully submit that ms. denton was not one of them. ms. denton personalized the risk. mr. denton told you that. anyone to tell you that because you saw the time line where she saw and -- the personal relevance of how smoking and cancer affected her life. but frankly, you do not need burns told you that, and dr. cummings admitted that ms. denton had an increasing awareness of the risks of smoking as she watched the bottom line is ms. denton her family die of cancer. personally understood that smoking caused cancer when she watched her dad, her brother, and her mother die of cancer. and since -- dr. burns testified that this all dr. burns testified that if happened before 1982. ms. denton would have quit smoking by 1981, she would not have gotten cancer. morris or r.j. reynolds said or did not say was a legal cause of ms. denton's cancer. needed. personal message that smoking is dangerous, and if you believe dr. burns, had she acted on it, she would not have gotten sick. ms. denton had a consistent, repetitive, impactful, there is no question that nothing philip she had the information she now, dr. cummings had a different theory as to why philip morris and r.j. reynolds were negligent and why their products were defective. cummings testified that philip 89 morris and rjr designed their cigarettes to make them harder to quit smoking. that our cigarettes were rigged to make it harder to quit. what counsel told you this morning was and cummings told you specifically, on direct he talked about reconstituted tobacco. he talked about he talked he talked about the companies' efforts to examination, why he believed that was true. filters. about additives. alter ph, and he said on direct examination those design features made it harder to quit. cross-examination, dr. cummings admitted that that was not true. but then on you remember, i asked him about his testimony about filters and additives and ph, and i reminded him that he told you on direct examination that those design features made cigarettes harder to quit. question: current cigarettes are more addictive than the cigarettes from the 1950s, do you?" and he said no. "but, dr. cummings, you do not believe that and then i asked him this they are more addictive. he believes there is no change. he said no, he does not believe he believes they are as addictive. on cross-examination, dr. cummings took it all he admitted that none of those design changes made back. cigarettes more dangerous or harder to quit, including additive-free cigarettes. 90 you remember i asked him: "are additive-free cigarettes -- do additive-free cigarettes cause cancer? "what do you mean by additive-free? "i mean additive-free cigarettes. "well, a filter can be an additive. "are additive-free -- do additive-free cigarettes cause cancer? "yes, they do. "are additive-free cigarettes addictive? "yes, they are. "is there any evidence that any cigarette is more dangerous than any other? "no, there is not. "is there any evidence that any cigarette is more addictive than any other?" according to dr. cummings, "no, there is not." and the reason why cigarettes are addictive, because they have nicotine in them, and some people who smoke will get addicted to nicotine. remember, i asked dr. cummings, "you agree mother he fought with me on that. nature put nicotine in tobacco." i had to impeach him with his prior testimony, but the bottom line is if it has nicotine in it, it can be addictive. and any cigarette where you burn tobacco can cause cancer because it is the leaves of the tobacco, it is 91 the tobacco itself that when it is burned creates carcinogens or cancer-causing agents and then causes cancer in some people. you heard burns tell you that of regular smokers, 15 percent of regular smokers will get lung cancer from smoking. line is -- 85 percent will not, but 15 percent will. so bottom the court: mr. cofer: the court: mr. cofer: so bottom line is cummings told you on direct mr. cofer? 50 minutes? that is your mark. thank you. go ahead. examination they did all these things to make it harder to quit. i listened to him say that, and i've got to tell you, i was just amazed because i had his prior testimony, and so when i cross-examined and i knew that was not true. him, i showed him, and he admitted it. he admitted that it does not matter whether linda denton smoked cigarettes from the '50s or the '60s or the '70s or the '80s. none is more dangerous than any other. design features did not make any difference. reason -- none is more addictive. the and for that let us go back to no. 3, please. the question: please state as to each defendant 92 whether the negligence on the part of the defendant was a legal cause of ms. denton's death. the answer is no. she did. burns said that the problem was she did not have a cummings single, consistent, repetitive message. said the problem was -- and counsel said -- that we rigged the cigarettes to make them more addictive. admitted on cross-examination that was not true. to question 3, based on the evidence, i respectfully suggest, members of the jury, is no. cummings the answer please put up 4. and for the very same reason -- please state as to each defendant whether the defendant's placement of cigarettes on the market that were defective and unreasonably dangerous was a legal cause of her death. the very same reason, the answer is no. for let us go to the next one, fraudulent concealment. please and we can go through this fairly quickly. state as to each defendant whether ms. denton relied to her detriment -- not did the company say something or not say something. concealment or omission of material fact by the defendants concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking and, if so, whether such reliance was a legal cause of her death. did ms. denton rely to her detriment on a i'm not going to task your patience by going 93 think of the time line. think think of the admission through the evidence again. of all the information that she had. that dr. burns made, that she knew by '73. mr. denton told you, that she knew by 1973. suggest that the evidence is overwhelming, members of the jury, that the answer to this question is no. think of what i respectfully could you put up the next one? go to 6, no. 6, please, question no. 6. no, actually just there we go. this is the same question except it asks whether we agreed to conceal and whether that was material -- whether she materially relied, detrimentally relied. the same reason, members of the jury, the answer is no. had the information she needed to make an informed choice. there was nothing anyone else could have told her that was more impactful than what she experienced in her life. for she now, let us talk about comparative fault. would you put question 7 up? if you decide that ms. denton and the defendants are responsible for ms. denton's death, then you can assign how much each party's responsible. something so there is no confusion. this question, you have to first decide that she was a class member, that addiction was a legal cause. you have to then decide that the negligence or the strict liability or the you concealment were legal causes, or you never get here. but let me tell you before you ever get to 94 do not just jump to 7 and, you know, split the baby. plaintiff has to prove all of those elements before you ever get here. and if you do get here, this is your opportunity to decide, based on all the facts and the evidence, how would you allocate responsibility. ms. barnett tell you the plaintiff admits that linda denton was partially responsible for causing her lung cancer. so what does that mean? does that mean? no witness told you that, but what now, you heard it can only mean that plaintiff admits that ms. denton had the information she needed to understand that smoking caused cancer and had the ability to quit smoking in time to avoid her injury, or how could she be responsible at all? responsible is an admission that she understood the risks and had the ability to quit smoking in time to avoid her injury. the very fact they told you that she is partially and based on that admission, if you get this far, i respectfully suggest, members of the jury, that with linda denton, you put one hundred percent because plaintiff is telling you that she knew the risks, and she had the ability to quit. now i want to talk just briefly about damages. no. 8, please? question 8 asks you to award the amount of damages 95 you heard ms. barnett suggest that the denton family suffered for the loss of companionship and protection as a result of ms. denton's injury and death. $15 million. that. you get this far and you decide that mr. denton and his family is entitled to recover. frankly, i do not even know what to say about there is really nothing i can tell you to help you if what we do know is, by all accounts, that linda they were married for 30 years, denton was quite a lady. that does not change the fact that and so he is remarried. she is gone, and i'm sure that he and her family miss her every day. not going to suggest any number. you are going to have to decide on your own. so if you get this far, members of the jury, i'm that is just something that punitive damages, question 9. question 9 asks whether you find by clear and convincing evidence -- and that is a much higher standard; you have a jury instruction on it -- that punitive damages are warranted against either philip morris or r.j. reynolds in this case. now, let me talk for a minute about punitive damages so you know what it is you are to decide. not being asked to decide the amount of punitive damages, if any. evidence, plaintiff has shown you that he is entitled to recover punitive damages, that mr. denton and his family is the issue is whether, by clear and convincing you are 96 entitled to recover punitive damages. do not spend one minute thinking about amount. the question before you is entitlement, and as counsel told you, if you get that far, if you make that decision, there will be another phase of the trial. you will have closing arguments. the issue is have they shown, under the law, that they are entitled to it. you will hear evidence. you can decide amount. here well, what you will see when you look at the it must be explicit. instructions, the instructions define clear and convincing evidence as a much higher standard of proof. precise. confusion and of such a weight that produces a firm belief or conviction, without hesitation, about the matter at issue. it must be lacking in it must be we are not talking more likely than not. we are not we are talking a talking the greater weight of the evidence. and the reason why is because you much higher standard. will have already compensated the denton family for their loss. the issue you will be asked to decide is whether they get more money to punish the defendants and to deter the defendants. now, let me say -- and the court will instruct when you decide you -- this case is about linda denton. whether punitive damages are appropriate, you can only 97 you have heard about harm consider the harm to linda denton. to other people, but this is not a class action anymore. other people can bring their lawsuits. witnesses that some have. with respect to those claims. and whether -- based on conduct to her, whether her family's entitled to get punitive damages. other juries will decide that this is about linda denton you heard from the i respectfully suggest, members of the jury, that based on the evidence, that defendants did nothing to harm ms. denton other than selling cigarettes. evidence that we fooled her in any way. that she lacked the information to make an informed decision. the 60 million people who quit smoking. there is no evidence she was any different than there is no evidence there is no one last verdict form, no. -- the next one. this is 10, and i put 5 and 10 together because i think it is just easier for you to see. if you answered yes to question 5 -- and that is the concealment -- please state when, by a preponderance of the evidence, the reliance occurred. question 10 says: now, let me make very clear because i think counsel may have misspoke in her closing. these events happened. relied on them and when she did. we believe, members of the jury, for all the reasons i told you and basically based on the issue is whether ms. denton it is not whether 98 the time line, the answer is no to question 5. but if you disagree and if you think that she did rely to her detriment at some point in time, i would respectfully suggest it certainly was not after may 5th, 1982. by that time, here -- her dad had died from lung cancer; her mom had died from lung cancer; her brother had died from lung cancer; mr. denton had coughed up blood. dr. burns admitted that she knew by then. admitted that she knew by then. mr. denton so if you get this far, i suggest that the evidence is overwhelming that the answer to (b), 10(b) -- did she rely after may 5th, 1982 -- is no. you just check that no. please put up 11. and this is the very same thing. it goes: did you -- did you rely on an agreement? and i know that throwing all these legal at you right now is difficult, but when you see the instructions and you think about the evidence, it will make more sense. but for the very same reasons, the answer to 11(b) there is no question that by may 5th, '82 -- before is no. may 5th, '82, she knew everything she needed to know. okay. let me just say this on behalf of everybody. have, which is the greatest system in the history of the we could not have the system of justice that we 99 world, if we did not have jurors who were willing to take time out of their lives to come in and help parties settle disputes. i know that we have six in you. all we ask for are fair and unbiased jurors. on behalf of my client, on behalf of reynolds, i believe also on behalf of mr. denton and his family, we want to thank you for your service. we want to thank you for how diligent you have been, and we look -- we appreciate the opportunity to have presented our case. much for being so patient. and thank you very