ms. barnett: good morning. folks, in a little while you are going to go back to the jury room to deliberate, and when you go you will have three jobs. the first job is to answer the questions on the verdict form. the second job is to make sure that everybody on the jury carefully follows the instructions on the law that the court gives you. and the third job is, before you answer any of those questions, to explain to each other why you feel the way you feel about the answers to certain questions. and so i want to spend my time this morning hopefully giving you some ways to do that. denton 14 we sued. now, i told you at the beginning the reasons why there were four reasons. the first reason is because the cigarette companies knew their products were dangerous and deadly, and they chose to lie about it. it started in 1954, long before linda denton ever picked up her first cigarette, and there is been no witness to come in here and say, "oh, that is not true. clear. they created a doubt where there was no doubt, a controversy where there was no controversy, even though their own scientists told them that cigarettes caused cancer. that is not what happened." they lied about cigarettes. it is been perfectly and not only that, they knew people were worried about cancer, that people were worried about the health risks, and so in addition with the lies and the psychological crutch that they provided, they also gave the illusion of filtration, cigarettes that were supposed to be healthier and safer but which were not. and we know linda denton started on filtered cigarettes that were supposed to help her breathe easy, smoke clean. and when she moved on and tried to quit and was unable to quit, she tried health cigarettes, the doral cigarettes made by rjr, the merit, cambridge ultra lights, all those cigarettes made by philip morris. so we know those things happened, and that is why 15 we are suing. have given her a fighting chance. they should have told the truth. they should and i want to remind you, if i could for a second -- i'm going to turn this board around. if i can stand here for just a moment, your honor. the peak is where the cigarette -- the word was the sales went getting out about cigarettes causing cancer. they met, they got together, they decided they had to down. do something about it, and what they did not do was tell the truth and give people the choice like it is today. instead they launched this conspiracy, and one of the people they caught at the top, over there, is when linda denton started to smoke. and just look at how different that line would be it would be like things and i think it is important to remember there is if the conspiracy had not happened. are today. two generations, at least two generations: on this side of that curve, a lot of us here, born on the other side where people knew or the cigarette companies were not allowed to deny and to market phony cigarettes. that is the first reason. ms. denton, born so and as i said, the second reason is because these cigarette companies meticulously studied nicotine and addiction, and they used that information to rig the cigarettes, to make sure that they would get people hooked, 16 25 they set product specifications to make that they would keep people hooked, that they would make sure they -- they knew how low they could go in their nicotine levels. sure they were designed for addiction. like chopped-up tobacco just rolled up and sold. designer drug, made to be the perfect nicotine delivery device. and so they were not it was a the third reason that we sued, as i told you, is because these cigarette companies knew if they wanted to have long-term addicted customers who would stick with them, their best shot was with kids because kids' brains are forming. kids have less ability to understand risks. children are more susceptible to addiction. and so they studied very carefully, very carefully, the smoking behaviors and habits of children, and then they used that knowledge to design marketing and also cigarette designs to get those kids, including menthol, which made it easier to inhale, to get more nicotine in your lungs. and the final fourth reason that we are suing is because the cigarette companies refuse to take any responsibility, any responsibility at all, for what they did. and i want to talk for a minute about choice and freedom. denton 17 i apologize. i want to talk for a minute about choice and freedom because we have heard an awful lot about choice and freedom in this courtroom. and people should be free to make choices. companies made a choice. cancer, and they made a choice to sell them, to sell cigarettes they knew would kill. they knew their cigarettes caused and, of course, choice is fine, the cigarette you heard them testify up on the video screen. they made that choice. they knew they would kill one in three out of their customers, 440,000 people a year, and they knew that the cigarettes now, they can make were addictive. that choice, and nobody is here trying to throw them in jail for what they did. nobody is here trying to put them out of business for the choices that they made, but we all know when you make a choice, you have to accept responsibility for the choices you make. we learned that as kids. we have asked you up front, from the first day and mr. denton, mr. denton's family, they are willing to accept responsibility for the choices linda denton made. look at her of this trial, yes, hold her accountable. the difference is the cigarette choices and decisions. companies, they want to do anything other than own up to what they did, anything other than take responsibility for the choices they made. 18 now, i want to talk to you about the verdict form. but before the verdict form, i want to talk a little bit about the instructions the court is going to give you. the first one i want to talk about is instruction no. 9, if we could pull -- or put up no. 9. it talks about the burden of proof. and it is important. it says in this case, it is our responsibility to prove every essential part of the claims by a preponderance of the evidence. it gives you an explanation for that fancy term, preponderance of the evidence. you cannot see that highlighting. that is not the way most of us talk. a preponderance of the evidence simply means an amount of evidence that is enough to persuade you the plaintiff's claim is more likely true than not. we have been talking about all along, more likely right than wrong. more likely right than wrong? the issues that you have to decide. have we shown you that where -- what we are saying is and that applies to all of that is what and it is okay if you have doubts. you can have the question is, at all the doubts you want on both sides. the end of the day, when you weigh all the evidence you heard, if you believe that we have shown we are more likely right than wrong, even just by a little bit, you would decide that question in our favor. you may take that down. 19 so if during deliberation someone says, "i'm just i have doubts about that," remember, doubts are have the question is more likely right than wrong. not sure. okay. we shown you what we needed to show you? now, the verdict form, question no. 1 on the we are going to put it up there so you can see verdict form. what it looks like, but the question is, was linda denton addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine? you heard -- right. you heard from dr. burns, who has had a career in the field of understanding smoking, smoking behavior, cessation attempts, addiction. a career working in that field. evidence, and he determined, yes, yes, more likely than not she was addicted. in fact, he said way beyond that, he was certain she was addicted. and he looked at the he is spent you also heard from dr. mike cummings. he is another man from a different perspective, but he spent his life working with people trying to stop smoking, looking at the way cigarettes are designed to addict and to keep people addicted, and he said the same thing. yes, more likely than not she was addicted. he was certain. in fact, he went way beyond that. you heard from the family too. linda denton smoked one-and-a-half or more packs of cigarettes a day. that means 30 cigarettes or more a day. with ten puffs per 20 cigarette, that is 300 puffs on a cigarette a day, 300 doses of nicotine to her brain a day, every day, for more than 30 years. she smoked first thing in the morning. she smoked she had withdrawal when she in the middle of the night. she smoked even when money was tight, and tried to quit. she even spent hard-earned money to buy the nicotine patch when it first came out and to try that to try to quit. she smoked after her parents died and after her brother died from lung cancer, and she smoked after she had been diagnosed with cancer and pumped full of chemotherapy and radiation. that is not smoking just for the taste of it or the fun of it. that is the picture of addiction. the cigarette companies want you to believe she just smoked because she liked it. death wish and her choice was, "i choose cancer." no evidence to think that at all. she apparently had a there is she was not a reckless woman. she was not crazy. she was a married mother with four kids, she had every -- every reason to she was not wild. and she loved her family. want to live, and she did want to live, which is why she struggled and tried to quit smoking and why, when she was not able to succeed, she went to what she was told were the safer cigarettes. now, the only evidence besides what the family 21 said, what you know about the facts, and what dr. burns and dr. cummings said is the paid psychiatrist that the defendants brought in here to testify to you yesterday. now, he has never written anything in this area. done any research or gotten any grants. he does not work with the surgeon general's office or the national cancer institute. he is never and he told you less than 1 percent of his work, of his clinical work, is spent in treating people solely for nicotine addiction. just sixty percent of his work because forty percent of his work is spent coming and testifying in cases. and his clinical work, remember, is and he is the same man who used to come and tell juries cigarettes are not addictive, just like the ceos of the cigarette companies did. now there is an engle finding cigarettes are addicted, so now he has a new definition, and he wants you to apply a definition which is a mental disorder. a mental disorder before you meet his definition of addiction. used to say was bad, but now he is adopted it. you have to be diagnosable by a psychiatrist with and the definition he is using, by the way, he there is simply no comparison, no comparison between the weight and depth and breadth of the experience and knowledge of dr. burns and dr. cummings versus what dr. kaplan came in here and testified to you to say. 22 so certainly, certainly, it is more likely right than wrong, when you weigh all the evidence, she was addicted. possibly explain how she would smoke in the face of such tragedy in her own family? she was addicted to cigarettes. what else could the second question on the verdict form -- can you just slide it up so we can just see one question? in or whatever. zoom it did -- was linda denton's addiction to cigarettes now, that is containing nicotine a legal cause of her death? a little complicated, so i want to talk to you for a minute about instruction no. 11, which explains legal cause. mr. cofer talked about this at the beginning, but i want to make sure you remember instruction no. 11, which says -- this is the legal cause at the bottom. okay. instruction. the number's -- no. 10, perhaps. what it says is this, ladies and gentlemen -- you will get a chance to read it and hear it, so we might not be able to put it up -- addiction is a legal cause of death if it directly and in natural and continuous sequence produces or contributes substantially to producing such death so it can reasonably be said that but for the addiction, death would not have occurred. in order to be regarded as a legal cause of death, addiction need not be the only cause. what i'm reading is 23 on the page before that. but in order to be regarded as a legal cause of death, addiction need not be the only cause. addiction may be a legal cause of death even though it operates in combination with the act of another, some natural cause, or some other cause, if the addiction contributes substantially to producing a death. you can take it down. that is all right. and so the question for you is more likely right than wrong, did addiction substantially contribute to her death? mr. cofer gave you. jury instruction is saying. and i want to go back to the truck example that it is important to understand what this the law recognizes that sometimes multiple things so you could be in an intersection cause things to happen. and be hit on one side by a truck and another side by a car, and the law recognizes both those things can substantially contribute. and, in fact, if you are jaywalking while you get hit, that can be a third cause. together and lead to the death, the outcome, the injury, and that is why this instruction is written that way, because the law recognizes that is life. both those things can cause your death. there can be many causes that all work that is the way it works. none of -- and so in this case, if you think that ms. denton's parents contributed to her smoking, her friends, her family; this tolerance of society contributed 24 to her smoking; if you think her choices and decisions and her failure to succeed contributed, we admit that about her. those things are all fine to believe. they do not change the question here, which is simply did addiction also play a role? and dr. cummings and dr. burns both explained to you in great detail how it is that addiction causes someone -- you can take that down. -- to smoke over and over and over again, because they have to keep their nicotine receptors full and how addiction keeps someone from being able to succeed when they try to quit and how only 5 percent of quit attempts actually succeed. before they succeed. it takes people many, many, many times to try and what dr. burns and dr. cummings told you is covered exactly in the surgeon general's reports. exhibit 237 is the 2010 surgeon general's report, which says specifically: "nicotine addiction is the fundamental reason that individuals persist in using tobacco products, and this persistent tobacco use contributes to many diseases." even -- if you remember, even the reynolds rep on nicotine is a fundamental but that is the video admitted part of that. reason. what the surgeon general concluded, and it is also in the he would not say the fundamental reason. 25 1989 surgeon general's report, which is exhibit 572, which has two parts. "two additional factors make smoking among young people a preeminent public health concern: initiation of smoking and nicotine addiction. factors refute the argument that smoking is a matter of free choice." the age of these two so you heard from dr. cummings and dr. burns. you have the reports of the surgeon general on this. cigarette -- and the you can take that down. the cigarette companies did not bring in a single there was no scientist or expert to tell you otherwise. epidemiologist or addiction expert to tell you, "no, addiction was not the cause. all of her cancer." argued this definition of cause, which is -- addiction was not the cause at they just argued this -- this weak -- if you could pull our slide up. and you heard this in the depositions too, "now, they have to you have to admit addiction causes smoking." admit that, and they have to admit smoking causes cancer, so those things they are. but what they say is, "well, that -- we cannot link the two together. addiction causes smoking and smoking causes cancer, but we do not see how addiction that is not based on causes smoking, which causes cancer." 26 25 that is not based on anything. science. witness to come in here and tell you that. there is been no you can take that down. and certainly the arguments of counsel are and believe you me, if there was a scientist incredibly persuasive, but they are just arguments; they are not witnesses. or a doctor or a public health official who would come in here and tell you that was true, they would have come in here and told you that. so when you are weighing the evidence, just remember the question is more likely right than wrong, did addiction substantially contribute? it did not have to be the only cause. and the answer, we think, is way more than this, but death? what you have to decide is did we prove it more likely right than wrong? did it substantially contribute to her and if, during deliberation, someone says, "well, i just do not see how addiction caused it because she chose to smoke. she could have quit. harder," remind them we agree. should be held accounted too, and there is a place on the verdict form we will talk about, where you -- you will decide what percent of fault are linda denton's decisions and choices; what percent of fault are the cigarette companies' it is a decisions and choices. she should have tried we agree her decisions that is not a cause question. denton 27 question of figuring, out of the many causes, how do you weigh them among each other? and when you are thinking about that question, remember, ms. denton already paid the worst possible price she could pay for her choices and decisions. and to die knowing it was the cigarettes that she smoked that killed her, to know that she was leaving behind a family, kids she would not see grow up and get married and her grandkids. a husband she dearly loved. she had to know that she was leaving behind she had to die and when she died, she did not even know the things that we have heard and learned in this courtroom about how the cigarettes were rigged to make it hard for her to quit and that the healthy cigarettes she thought were going to protect her from risk, they were not any safer, and the cigarette companies knew. now, the only other thing i've heard from the defendants is, over and over again, millions of people quit. millions of people have quit. millions of people have quit. how does that help you answer this question on the verdict form about whether her addiction caused or contributed to you do not know her lung cancer? anything about those millions of people that they talk about. percent of the people who try to quit. we do not know how many of them relapsed, like 95 we do not know how it does not help you. 28 many of them were addicted. everyone's brain is nicotine has -- some people smoke and never get some people smoke a few and do not get addicted. and it is true, as it was explained by dr. cummings in great detail and also by dr. burns, it works differently. everybody's body is different. different. addicted. some people smoke a lot, but it is easy for them to quit. everyone is different. so those millions of people, it is this is the case of linda denton and these not their case. it is also not the case of the 400,000 cigarette companies. people who die every year from smoking or the more than 40 million people today in the united states who smoke, many of whom want to quit. and remember too, their own expert found -- he did so tell you this -- linda denton had a persistent desire to quit and unsuccessful -- unsuccessful efforts to quit. the only evidence you have heard is that it was addiction that substantially contributed to her lung cancer. in fact, the only evidence you heard was it was addiction that caused her lung cancer, that led her to light her cigarettes 30 times a day every day, to keep her nicotine receptors full, and it was addiction that kept her from succeeding when she tried to quit. more likely right than wrong, the answer to question 2 should be yes, it was a substantial contributing 29 factor, a legal cause. and the last piece of this is whether the smoking actually caused cancer, because if she had cancer from something else, then the addiction would not lead to it. dr. burns and then her own treating doctor, dr. pitocchi, came in here, one by video, and told you very clearly, "yeah, her cancer was caused by smoking. whatsoever about that." no doubt and and they explained -- they brought up -- if someone brings up in deliberations all these questions to mr. denton about linda's family and what diseases they had and when they were diagnosed and when they passed away from those diseases, if you think, "well, maybe that means she would have had cancer anyway," remember dr. burns testified there is no evidence whatsoever she had any genetic predisposition. and dr. pitocchi said the same thing. her other family the explanation is simple. members were smokers, and smoking is deadly. people die, and her family just proves it. one in three so, again, question no. 2, more likely right than wrong that addiction caused her disease, yes, it did. now, once you make those findings, i need you to pull out instruction no. 11. engle findings, and these are the rules. those findings, these rules -- instruction no. 11 are the once you make 30 you can zoom out. these rules apply to the case. these rules apply just as if you had sat and deliberated on each and every one of them. and if you remember, at the beginning of the trial, the judge asked, "you may have to apply facts. may not have heard all of the evidence, but you have to apply them just as if you made the findings yourself," and so that is everybody said, "we can do that, no problem." many important decisions have been where this comes in. made, and your job now -- those are the rules of the road for the case. they apply. you so the next question on the verdict form is please state, as to each defendant, whether question no. 3: the negligence on the part of the defendant was a legal cause of ms. denton's death. i'm not going to read it to you again, but you will the legal cause here, legal it includes there may be multiple causes, and hear it in the instruction. cause, legal cause, is the same in each one of these questions. you just have to look at whether or not it was a substantial contributing factor to her death. whether more likely right than wrong is it a substantial contributing factor to her death. and the question is so we already know -- 31 if you will put the engle findings up again. -- what you do not have to decide -- no. 7 -- no. -- not no. 7. no. 6. -- that all of the engle defendants were it is already been decided. negligent. they were negligent. it is not a discussion you need to or should have, whether or not they were negligent in what they did. but negligence just means failing to use reasonable care to avoid harm to others, not needlessly endangering others. determined they did it. so the only question you have is whether that negligence substantially contributed to her death, more likely than not. that is what it means. it is been and we know from their documents that before she picked up her first -- their first cigarettes, her first cigarettes, r.j. reynolds was carefully studying the smoking behavior and patterns of young children. their research to design and market their cigarettes to young children, including menthol, making it easier to breathe. they were using and it worked. they got linda denton smoking as a does it really matter if she was 13 she was a child. 13-, 14-, 15-year-old. or 16 when she started? expert told you that is a time when people's brains are still forming. children are incredibly vulnerable to addiction. and their own 32 it is in the surgeon general's report, and you heard it from dr. cummings, but you even heard it from dr. kaplan. and we also know from their own documents that the cigarette companies -- you can take that down. -- that the cigarette companies, long before linda denton was born, knew their cigarettes caused cancer. they met to talk about how to deal with it, and they decided to launch this conspiracy of doubt and denial and lies, and they worked together hand in hand to spread doubt where there was no doubt, to make a fake controversy. and as i said, you can look at the chart where the line was going and what a huge impact it had, and linda denton got picked up right there at the peak of it. dr. burns explained that these denials and lies were designed to keep people smoking. addicted smokers to keep them from stopping, and they never stopped. once during linda denton's entire life. they never stopped the denials and lies, never they were designed for it worked. she did just exactly what they wanted and we also know that at the same time they were her to do. denying the hazards, they were worried people would quit because they were scared about the hazards, and so they decided to market the illusion of filtration, filter cigarettes. 33 the very first cigarette ms. denton started on was supposed to help you breathe easy and smoke clean, and it had a filter. and she kept smoking filter cigarettes, and she moved on to the ones that were supposed to be healthier and better for her, the ones that cigarette companies knew were not any healthier or better. but they made sure that she never knew, and it worked. she did just exactly what they wanted. and we know too from their own documents -- and there is been no denial of this; no witness has come in here to tell you otherwise -- they studied how to make cigarettes more addictive, how to make sure they enhanced that nicotine kick with all that ph and ammonia and free nicotine and stuff. they worked very hard to understand it, and they used it to make them get people hooked, to make them easy to inhale, to make them -- keep people hooked, to make sure it had at least enough, the minimum, how low can we go nicotine, to keep people hooked and to make it so it was hard to quit because they had to keep the exit door closed. is it more likely right than wrong that the negligence that is already been found was the legal cause of her death? we agree one of the factors are her choices and decisions, and we are going to get to that, where you decide how to divide could there be other factors? yes. sure. 34 25 but certainly their acts, their negligence, more that up. likely right than wrong, caused her injury. and i want to talk about r.j. reynolds for a it was her first minute because linda denton smoked belair. cigarette, and she also smoked doral in the '80s, her son testified, which is another r.j. reynolds cigarette. you might remember those doral ads we showed you with those fancy filter things that were showing you how safe and better those doral cigarettes were. when you are thinking about how long she smoked belair and how long she smoked doral, i think it is important to look at instruction no. 2, which has to do with evidence. and it says -- yeah, if we can just go down to the -- -- direct evidence is testimony of one who asserts actual knowledge of a fact, such as an eyewitness. circumstantial evidence is proof of a chain of facts and circumstances tending to prove or disprove any fact in dispute. the law makes no distinction between the weight you may give to either direct -- oh, just take it down. sorry. i'll just read them. i'm the law makes no distinction between the weight you may give to either direct or to circumstantial evidence. denton 35 so there is direct evidence about her smoking doral and about her smoking the belair cigarettes, and mr. denton -- how many times did you see that chart from mr. denton's sworn interrogatory responses that she smoked belair from '65 to '67? smoking. that is a couple of years of he met her. he fell in love with her. she had been smoking. they she was an talked about her smoking. experienced smoker. menthol cigarettes she would been smoking and was looking for a change. she was tired of how much of the so the person who knows her best, who can tell you best how long she would been smoking the belair, is bobby denton, and you know what he thinks and what he said, and it got put on the screen a hundred times, a couple of years. and there is been, by the way, no evidence to the contrary. nobody came in here and said, "oh, no, it was some other there is manufacturer's cigarettes that she started with." absolutely no evidence to weigh to the contrary of what he has said. and dr. burns was very clear. each and every cigarette that a person smokes contributes to the cancer, each and every cigarette it takes for the assault on the lungs. and it is amazing what a miracle the body is and how we were created to have all these defenses, the hairs that 36 go across and then the cells that flake away, and you have to go through all of these to get down in and cause cancer, and it takes all of the cigarettes to contribute. so dr. burns testified quite clearly all the and he said something else, especially the cigarettes, including her first cigarettes, contributed to her cancer. belair, because that contributed, at the very beginning, to her addiction. cigarette causes and sustains and increases the addiction in the nicotine receptors in the brain, and those are cigarettes she was smoking as a young child. every cigarette causes the cancer. every now, when you get to the fault apportionment, you will decide how much do you think it was one person -- the rjr cigarettes, how much do you think it was philip morris so that is a fair question to ask, and you will cigarettes. be asked that question. but the only evidence you heard in this courtroom was, yeah, the rjr cigarettes, belair and doral, contributed substantially to her lung cancer. and believe me, folks, if there was a witness, a scientist, a doctor who was going to come in here and tell you otherwise, you would have heard it. opportunity, and you did not. they had every and this idea that the first cigarette somehow did not cause it, i go back -- i go back to the truck analogy. if the truck pulls into the intersection and it 37 hits a car and that car hits the next car, the truck cannot say, "oh, it is not my fault. it was this middle car that hit him." that is not what the evidence is that you heard in this case. that is just not the way it works. i guess i'll talk about that now. just as when you are considering linda denton's fault, if you decide, adding it all together, doral and belair, maybe three years out of her 30 years, so we think r.j. reynolds, only 10 percent at fault and philip morris is ninety percent at fault, that is absolutely your determination to make. and you may also decide those first cigarettes those are meant an awful lot; we think it should be more. the things that you determine -- you all determine. percentage of fault does not change the question of whether more likely right than wrong did the defendants' negligence cause her death. so the answer here to question 3, based on the evidence you have heard in the courtroom, is yes, both defendants -- as to both defendants, their negligence substantially contributed to her death. but the now, question 4, strict liability, here's what you if you pull out your instruction do not have to decide. no. 11, the engle findings, here's one of the engle findings. these numbers right -- no. 3: including r.j. reynolds tobacco company and -- the engle defendants, it is engle finding -- i want to make sure i have 38 if you could pull it up, that is great. -- philip morris usa, herein referred to as the so that is been the cigarettes were defective and unreasonably you do not have to have a debate about that. engle defendants, placed cigarettes on the market that were defective and unreasonably dangerous. decided. dangerous. is a legal product. unreasonably dangerous? and now your job is to apply this finding to the facts in this case. it does that mean it cannot be defective or there was another trial about that, and, again, dr. burns said it was the cigarettes. nobody has told no scientist or doctor or any witness and, again, the reynolds counsel has dr. pitocchi said it was the cigarettes. you anything else. has said it was not. the same argument, that somehow our cigarettes were too far removed, but there is been no evidence of that. there is been no evidence whatsoever. did the defective and unreasonably dangerous cigarettes contribute to her death? so more likely right than wrong, the answer's yes. now, question no. 5 on the verdict form, please state, as to each defendant, whether ms. denton relied to her detriment on a concealment or omission of material information by that defendant concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes and, if so, whether such reliance was a legal cause of ms. denton's 39 death. that is a long question. let me tell you again what you do not have to worry about and decide. the engle findings, if we could have those again. again, it is instruction no. 11, and you will have a copy of the instructions when you go back, so it will not be a memory test. instruction no. 11, if you go down to no. 4, yeah, and 5. the engle defendants concealed or omitted material information not otherwise known or available, knowing that the material was false or misleading, or failed to disclose a material fact concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes, or both. and no. 5: the engle defendants agreed to conceal or omit information regarding the health effects of cigarettes or their addictive nature with the intention that smokers in the public would rely on this information to their detriment. so those things have been decided. they omitted; and they did so with the intention that people they withheld; they concealed information not otherwise knowable. would rely on that. it is more likely right than wrong that linda denton fell into their trap. so your question here is simply whether and, again, the legal cause here, whether it is a 40 it is the same exact definition we have legal cause of her death, means -- it does not mean it has to be the only cause. talked about several times now. contributing factor, even if it acted with other causes? and it can be, and there certainly were other is it a substantial we are not saying the cigarette the cigarette influences on linda denton. companies are the only things that she heard and the only reasons that she made her decisions. companies knew before she started -- they knew that their they knew their sales were cigarettes were dangerous. dropping, and they knew less people were starting; more people were quitting. and they spent fortunes selling a doubt that they knew was not true. making phony health cigarettes, fortunes to keep her smoking, and they succeeded. and they spent fortunes and it is true she is not here to tell us everything that went on, but there is both direct and circumstantial evidence, and there is expert proof that you have heard that demonstrates that yes, she relied to her detriment on their concealments and omissions. started with filters. low-tar because she was worried. she was not sure how risky they were. we know she switched -- she we know she switched to light and we know she told friends and there is -- the circumstantial evidence is they spent millions of dollars to get her to act strong. 41 this way, and she did just that. now they want to escape responsibility for her doing what they were trying to get her to do just because she is not here to testify. and we had two leaders in the field come in here and explain exactly how this works and exactly how their efforts were targeted at addicted smokers like linda denton. and they concluded, more likely right than wrong, yes, yes, they caused her actions. and there is been no -- again, no witness from the defense, no one to come in here and explain to you how that is not so and why that is not so. and yeah, did she know her parents had died? she yeah, for sure. were there warnings on the packs? did. but that is why she tried to quit, and that is when the cigarettes kept her addicted and kept her hooked. and that is why she tried light and low-tar cigarettes, which turns out were just a fake dream, pipe dream. they knew they were not true, but she thought that it would help her. so when you consider this, just remember the in the combination of things, was this a question is not is it the only thing at all, the one truck that hit her. substantial cause of what happened to her? and the answer, based on the evidence you have heard -- which is only evidence showing that it was and no evidence otherwise -- yeah, it was. and, again, the best evidence is how much money 42 they did not spend billions they poured into their efforts. of dollars marketing doubt, marketing fake cigarettes because they did not think it would work. she did just exactly what they wanted her to do, and more likely right than wrong, yes, the answer to question 5 is yes. question 6 is very similar, whether, as to each again, i showed you instruction 11. defendant, ms. denton relied to her detriment on an act taken in furtherance of the defendant's agreement, which is the conspiracy. it is already been determined -- you already have to apply -- not only did these defendants engage in these behaviors, not only did they deny and lie and sell fake health cigarettes, they worked together, all in lockstep. they conspired. can you show them the engle finding, please? it is in instruction 11, and it is the next one down, which is they agreed to do it, which is they conspired to do it. so your only question there is, again, whether or not their actions more likely than not played a substantial role in her smoking and her death. and the answers, from dr. cummings and dr. burns in this case, were absolutely and it is fine, if in deliberations you think, they did. "well, part of it is her fault." we agree, and we ask you to consider that. up front. yes, yes, we agree. we have told you that the huge difference here is they will not agree to 43 take any responsibility for it, even though she was their she did just exactly what their biggest success story. internal documents show they were trying to accomplish. now, no. 7 is where i've been talking about. state the percentage of fault, if any -- well, state the percentage of fault which was a legal cause of ms. denton's death. now, important for you to know, on this question the defendants have the burden. much fault to put on linda denton. question in here where they have the burden, which is to show what they have proven to you about her fault. they have to show to you how so that is the one and i go back to the questions i asked you the yes, we want you to look at her first day we all met. decisions, and when you are weighing this question, look at how old she was when she made her decisions. information did she have, and what information did they withhold from her? how many people were her decisions likely to hurt? she made these decisions? and what price has she paid? what what hold did addiction have over her while and while you are thinking about those questions, how sophisticated and knowledgeable were they when think about the cigarette companies' decisions and their choices. they made their choices? how many people were their decisions likely to hurt? they know it? what information did they have? did what hold did profits, wanting a bigger bag 44 of money, have on the decisions they made? have they paid, if any? and what price and mr. cofer, he said it. i'm sure he will say it why did it he wants you to ask, why did she smoke? again. take her so long and so many efforts to be able to quit? and what did the cigarette companies do to cause her harm? we agree, fair questions. they are the very questions you should be asking. why did they design and sell what they do not agree with are the other side of why did the cigarette companies conspire why did they those questions. to deny and lie to people like linda denton? rig cigarettes to make sure they were addictive and that they would sustain addiction? filters and these low-tar and light cigarettes when they knew they were not any safer at all? and why did they work so hard at getting children, replacement smokers, smoking? and did not linda denton do just exactly what they wanted her are they really coming in here and blaming her and to do? her family and taking zero responsibility for a conspiracy and a plan that worked perfectly for her to do exactly what they worked so hard for her to do? and when you consider the fault, her fault versus their fault, consider especially the vast resources that the defendants put into making sure she did not succeed in quitting and the exit door stayed shut for her. 45 25 and remind them the millions of now, if someone says in deliberations she knew the risks, remind them, yes, that is why she tried to quit, and that is why, when she could not, she went to cigarettes that she thought were safer. dollars they spent to keep her from succeeding at quitting. i would suggest the evidence allows maybe as much as ten percent fault on linda denton, but, of course, you are the ones to decide, and you can make that amount higher or lower, whatever you think the cigarette companies have proved to you. the family has asked you to consider her fault, to they are not shying away from that. hold her accountable. but please, please know they accept that responsibility. they are counting on you to hold the they are trusting you. cigarette companies responsible for their share, only their fair share. now, the next question is no. 8, how much money and i told you before -- and there is the verdict should be. an instruction we will talk about -- the only thing you can consider here are the level of harms and losses, nothing else. and instruction 19, i think, talks about the elements of damages, and i want to go down to the next paragraph. the second paragraph. in determining the total amount of damages denton 46 sustained by ms. denton's survivors -- robert denton, cory denton, and robert denton, jr. -- remember, her two daughters were not minors so there is no recovery for them here. that is an outside reason to put any amount of money on the verdict form. cannot consider it. but any such award -- consider elements of damage for which there is no exact standard for fixing the any such award should be fair compensation to be awarded. and just in light of the evidence regarding the following elements. now, i'm going to talk about the elements in just it a second, but what does this mean, fixing compensation? means -- it means balancing the scales. what amount of money is the right amount of money, in your determination, for the harms and losses? and it is important to understand what it does not mean and what you cannot factor in, for instance, sympathy. you can feel -- of course, of course, you can feel sympathy, but you cannot raise the verdict because of sympathy, just like you cannot lower the verdict because you think it might encourage more lawsuits. and there are other outside reasons too that juries have to avoid. here. work their 40 hours a day. i think it is good to give an example they their boss pays them for the 40 think about somebody who works 40 hours a day. 47 25 here's the outside part. the boss pays the boss it will not do him any good." they work a little more overtime. hours. them a little more. cannot say, "well, i'm going to give him less money because i the do not think he needs it. boss can think that, but he cannot pay less based on that reason. it is an outside reason. and just like juries, if in deliberations one of the jurors says, "well, the family did not help enough," or, "we just do not like bobby denton," that is an outside reason. not allowed to raise or lower the verdict based on what you think about the family. or if someone says they are worried about what people will think about your verdict, if you give a full and fair verdict, remind the jurors that is an outside reason. but also you will be able to say, "over the course of this there trial, we became experts. was an awful lot of proof and too many documents," i'm sure, "but we learned enough to become experts. and if you would have heard everything we heard, you would have made the same decision that we made." it was a complicated case. you already know you have an important duty, which you also need to know that no one has is to follow the law. a right to make you go home having been on a jury that did not follow that law. so if a juror uses an outside reason in deliberations -- one of you says, "well, money denton 48 cannot bring her back. remember, that is an outside reason. let us lower the amount for that" -- so no outside reasons. in valuing how to -- how to come up with what that number is, it is important to look at how bad was the harm and how long was the harm. so let me give you an example. if you lost your wife for a couple of days, maybe -- you know, maybe she was in the hospital for a couple of days, and you had to take care of the kids, pay the bills, do the laundry, do the dishes, that is bad. you know, there'd be some money to make up for that but not much money, a few days out of a 30-year or 50-year marriage. that is very low on the scale, and that would be the kind of case where i'd have to ask for a few thousand dollars. now move up to the mid of the scale. let us say maybe your wife is in a coma for the injury is worse. several years, and you lose her companionship and her love and affection for several years. would take more money to make up for that kind of loss, and it would be the kind of case where i'd have to ask for a verdict in the hundreds of thousands of dollars. that is worse. now, it now move up to the top of the scale, what we are what happens when your wife, the love that is talking about here. of your life for 30 years, is taken away forever? the worst kind of harm somebody can do, and that is the kind of case where i'd have to ask for a verdict in the millions. 49 and the same is true for her boys. losing the guidance of your mom for a few days would be small. the guidance of your mom for a few years would be serious but not -- you know, it would be mid scale. forever, 36 more years, that is at the very top of the scale. losing her losing so let us talk about, again -- if you can pull up the slide that lists these elements. what are the elements of damage that you are to the loss -- and this is in the instruction again. i've just taken them out and for robert denton, there is the loss consider? it is in the instruction. broken then out here. of his wife's companionship. and by the way, the instruction the court will protection. read you says: in determining the duration of losses, you may consider the joint life expectancy of the survivor and of ms. denton. average to live. but you heard she had 36 more years on there is the loss of her so the loss of her companionship, the loss of her protection, the pain and suffering that he went through during the seven months while she battled cancer and he watched her slip away and then the loss of 36 more years they were meant to have together. if you go to the next slide. for cory denton, the loss of his mother's 50 companionship, the loss of her instruction, the loss of his mother's guidance, his pain and suffering for the seven months while they battled cancer and she died and slipped away and the pain and suffering of 36 more years of the life they were meant to have together. years old when his mother died. lost more years than he had with her. cory denton was just 18 he he had 36 more years. robert benjamin denton was 22 years old. these same elements apply to robert benjamin denton: the loss of his mother, the loss of instruction, the loss of guidance, and his pain and suffering. they did not give up on living. and i told you at the beginning, these are good they did the very folks. best they could, but that does not change the loss that they had. and specifically you have heard about mr. denton, four or five years later, getting remarried. instruct you that is not something to consider here in valuing what his loss was. the judge will when she was diagnosed with cancer, it was a death she went through seven terrible months with her sentence. family of chemo and radiation and trips back and forth to she the hospital. tried to live for her family, but in seven short months, her body gave in. she tried hard to beat back the cancer. and she left behind her children. she died at 46 51 with nearly half her life ahead of her, and nothing, nothing can bring her back, no question. nothing can give her kids the mother that they had, to see them through marriages and kids and careers. but you have to know something about what she was like to understand the loss they had. she would be 62. would you put up the picture of ms. denton? you know -- you know their love story. they met they got married and stayed happily when she was 16. and if she were here today, married for the next 30 years. she would be 62 years old. maybe this afternoon, her family would be getting together for one of her famous home-cooked meals. cakes for her grandkids, watching the olympics with her family. she would be enjoying what should have been her golden years and passing on her family traditions to the next generation. she could be baking her special homemade birthday now, i told you at the beginning, based on the overwhelmingly significant loss, i'd have to ask you for an overwhelmingly significant verdict, considering what happened to this family and the loss of the sanctity of life, the loss of the sanctity of family. likely right than wrong, it should be a verdict of $15 million, but that is up to you to decide after you weigh whether you can do less all the evidence, what you think. i believe more 52 or more, obviously it is your decision to make here, what did we show more likely right than wrong. but when you place the value -- or consider the value to place on the harms and losses to this family and how much it will take to make up for their loss, consider what the cigarette companies value -- you can take that down. -- and especially consider what they value when you get to the next question, punitive damages. you have heard the evidence, the facts and truths. you know they spent billions of dollars pushing lies and these scam health cigarettes. that ftc report said they spent $300 million in 1966 alone. $50 million just for cambridge in 1981. had a total of a billion dollars that year on marketing these cigarettes. to be true and fortunes exploiting fears of cancer to increase their sales. philip morris spent the 1981 ftc report they spent decades denying what they knew and the question i'm talking about is no. 9 on the verdict form, which is whether you find by clear and convincing evidence that punitive damages are warranted against the defendant under the circumstances of this case. and this is a higher burden, no question, but the evidence of what they did and why they did it comes straight from the cigarette companies' own documents. 53 and let me show you, if i could, the instruction on punitive damages, which is instruction no. 19. to you. and if you will go down to the bottom part. there is an awful lot here. i want to focus, if i can here -- it is on two pages. the standard for punitive damages, what you are can you put the two pages up? the judge will read it looking at -- the court: ms. barnett: the court: ms. barnett: why do not you just read it? okay. my copy's over there. oh. it is fine. no, just leave it up there. was their conduct gross and flagrant? did it show a reckless disregard to human life and the safety and welfare of the public? and at the bottom is the most important number, no. 4 down there, intentional. acts intentional? were their and there is no question, no dispute at all. and where was their witness to come and tell you we know it from their dr. burns and dr. cummings explained it a great everything they did was intentional. documents. deal. otherwise? and we did not really mean it, and that is not really what we did." "oh, that was just a few dumb things we said, 54 there is no one like that. they planned and intended intentionally to get her hooked -- to get her started, to get her hooked, to keep her smoking, to intercept her from quitting, and there is not been a witness who disputes that at all. the documents speak for themselves. the videos everything that was the cigarette companies even speak for themselves. congratulate themselves in their documents that their plan was brilliantly conceived and executed. done that you have heard about, everything, was done knowingly, intentionally, for profit. it was premeditated. and as sure as i'm standing here, those cigarette companies knew; they knew that their cigarettes were going to kill people. the video screen and said they kill one in three of their regular customers. they kill 440,000 people every year. and they knew they would kill their customers, and they knew they would go right on with business as usual, targeting new children to replace the ones who died, all in the name of profit and even though they promised the public back in the '50s, "if our product's harmful, we will take it off the market, and we will go out of business." you heard the videos. they sat up there on now, dr. -- sorry, mr. cofer will certainly point out that if you answer yes here on no. 9, there may be a day or two more of proof because there are certain types of 55 evidence we are not allowed to show you unless we get to that phase. but i want to thank you now -- here, you can take that off. i want to thank you now for your attention. we have all watched it, and you have worked so hard as a jury. and we also we know you take your job very, very seriously. know you are not the kind of jury that would say, "well, i'm just going to mark no because i'd rather go home and not have to deal with this for a couple more days." that kind of jury. you are not i wish that -- there is two final questions. very they have quickly throw them up there, questions 10 and 11. to do with the fraud and the conspiracy, and you will be asked at the end to say whether those things happened before '82 or after '82. and you know the conspiracy, the lies, the concealments, they started -- you saw on this chart, and i wrote it on mr. cofer's outline -- started in the '50s, went all the way through linda denton's lifetime. we showed you documents and videos from the '50s, the '60s, the '70s, the '80s, the '90s, all the way through her life. is -- should be an easy question here. after, or both before and after? after. stopped. and nobody came and said to you, "oh, it all yeah, it was before and in 1982 we did not do any more." so those are the so this was it before, 114 you think that that was a substantial contributing factor? did they really substantially contribute to paying that bill? i do not think so. for all of those reasons, we ask that you find in favor of reynolds. again, like everyone else, you guys have been a really great, attentive jury. i want to thank you. i also want to remind you that we do not get an you may be clapping opportunity to speak with you again. and cheering about that, but just remember what we said when you go back to the jury room because it is plaintiff's burden. met their burden in this case. they have the burden of proof, and they have not ms. barnett, whenever you are ready. thank you. thank you, your honor. the court: ms. barnett: the court: ms. barnett: it is fine. briefly. yes. sorry. no. you are fine. it is fine to defend yourself when you have done nothing wrong, but when you are wrong, you are supposed to stand up and accept responsibility. supposed to sidestep responsibility at the cost of the people that you harmed. you are not now, these cigarette companies denied 115 25 they denied responsibility for 15 years after her responsibility back in 1958 when they knew their cigarettes caused cancer. they denied responsibility when linda denton died. death, forcing us to come here and bring this case to you, and you have heard six days of the cigarette companies denying that they have any role or any responsibility whatsoever. and remember, yes, we admit ms. denton has they are the ones who do not remember -- responsibility. do not admit it whatsoever. and i have to ask you why. did mr. cofer put that big thing up there with the big yellow highlighted words about linda denton having family problems, and why does he keep coming before you and talking about her dropping out of high school? it is because they do not want you to think about what the cigarette companies did. why the time line i put up in front of you has what the time nothing, they do not linda denton was doing and what they were doing. line that they put up before you, what is missing? nothing about what the cigarette companies did. they do not want you to talk want you to think about it. about it. they have not shown you that anything that we proved was wrong or that anything that we showed you was inaccurate. and this idea that we just showed you snippets, i told you at the beginning we had a limited number of hours denton 116 we were counting on the cigarette if there were other documents that showed to put our case on. companies. otherwise, if we left out parts of documents and we were unfair, counting on them to let you know or bring in a witness and tell us we were wrong. like that. you did not hear anything and one thing mr. cofer said over and over and that question is not, not on your over again is that we have to prove that but for addiction, she could have quit. verdict form. instructions. contributing factor? for her death? she could have quit. instructions. that question is not in the court's the question is, was addiction a substantial was addiction a legal -- a legal cause not do we have to prove but for addiction so you will see the verdict form and the you will be able to figure that out. they say she could have quit. in fact, mr. cofer that is said it is a life accomplishment for someone to quit. they are selling where free choice is in this country today. a product that is a life accomplishment to be able to stop. she tried more than once. but ms. denton tried. according to all the witnesses, she tried hard. and, true, we do not expert agreed that she tried to quit. have every specific date and year that she made attempts. the testimony was several times. their it would be weird and suspicious, frankly, if 117 25 mr. denton could get up here and say on june 3rd, 1972, and on june 5th, 1978. these witnesses have done the best they can to tell you. that time line they keep showing you has the ones where they remember specific years. evidence of every quit attempt that she made, and it is not the testimony of the witnesses. she tried and tried hard, and she should be held accountable for her failures in comparison with other people's choices and decisions. that is not the while she was trying, what we know from looking at the cigarette companies' documents is they were trying too, everything they knew how to do to keep her from quitting, to keep the exit door closed, to make sure she was not successful. this argument about belair, it sounds like they are saying it is okay for kids to smoke cigarettes for a few years, no harm. that videotape did not say that. cigarettes. the r.j. reynolds person who testified on there is no safe level of and the characterization of dr. burns's testimony, i trust you to remember what he said about every cigarette contributing, especially the beginning cigarettes and especially contributing to addiction. believe that the proof is there, there is no question, and their counsel said nothing about the conspiracy. but even if you do not and the conspiracy of denials and lies and phony denton 118 health cigarettes and the conspiracy of studying addiction and rigging cigarettes and concealing information about the addictive nature; information, if you read the engle verdict, the engle findings, that was not otherwise knowable about health effects and addiction and information that was intended for people to rely upon. and parcel of all of that, and they are absolutely, absolutely responsible for the effects of their conspiracy, if she never smoked a single cigarette from rjr. r.j. reynolds was part this question about did she rely after 1982, after 1982 is when she was using the light, the low-tar, the so-called healthy cigarettes, so to say that we did not give you any proof of any reliance after '82, i think -- i'm sure everyone will remember that testimony and that chart we keep seeing. mr. cofer said actions speak louder than words. they do. these defendants spent fortunes to keep people, addicted people, including and like linda denton, smoking. they they wanted to open the entrance and close the exit. wanted to intercept people who were trying to quit. why? for sales. now they want to say it did not work. we know they spent fortunes to make their cigarettes addictive, to make them hard to quit. to keep the entrance doors open, for to close off the exits, and to intercept people. why? why? 119 25 sales. now they want to say it did not work. but let me ask you this question: if nicotine addiction -- if nicotine is not the reason why people are smoking their products over and over and over again, then why do not they make a nonaddictive cigarette so people could have a fair, real choice, and they would not have to worry about changes in their brain driving that choice? they do that? why do not and finally, ms. denton's actions, as i just went she is not here. over, speak loud. witnesses, but you know what she did. you know what the evidence is about her efforts to quit and her belief in these filters and the low-tar and the light cigarettes. they took our best choice, choice, choice is my final point. we keep hearing about her choices, and we want you to think about her choices. tell the truth and given her a real chance. do not forget, they could have made a choice to and the defense seems to be, "she should not have well, that sounds like something a child they say, "she should have listened to harry he said these things on tv in '64." believed us." would say. reasoner. that is one video out of a mountain of evidence we showed you, and in 1964 when harry reasoner was on tv, she was 13 years old, extraordinarily susceptible to marketing and to addiction. and by the way, i will not show it to you now, but denton 120 you remember, there is another part of what harry reasoner said, where he said, "cigarettes, when you hear these things, it is like an old friend. chance and give them a chance and give them another chance." you want to give them a and let me ask you this: if everyone knew -- if everyone knew and there was no more question, why did the cigarette companies spend billions of dollars spreading their message of doubt? smokers. they did it for the addicted they also could have made a choice, the truth about filters, light cigarettes, and low-tar cigarettes. then ms. denton would have had a chance to make a real choice like it is today. like i said, not to rig their cigarettes for addiction, not to figure out and measure how much do we have to have to keep somebody hooked? they could have made a choice, they could have -- they could have made that choice not to turn it into this designer product, what they called the perfect nicotine delivery device. but instead they chose to make it something very hard to quit, and no witness told you otherwise. they made them hard to quit. now they blame her for failing at trying to quit. and they could have made the choice -- and this is they could my last point -- to wait until she was an adult. have made the choice not to market, study, and try so hard 121 to get kids addicted. 21, 22, old enough to make a real decision. they could have waited till she was those are the choices you need to think about too, and thank you again very much for your time.