closing statement mr. walker: good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. the panel: good afternoon. mr. walker: i bet by now almost each of you can you say that question. i want to say, before i say anything else, on behalf of my team, mr. williams, ms. weizenecker, the other folks that are helping me, frankly on behalf of my client, r.j. reynolds tobacco company, i want to join in what mr. millard and i think mr. wichmann said, too, in thanking you all for your service. you have been here over a week now; it is 10, 11 days, something like that. and, you know, we do not get to interact with you like we do in voir dire, so we are all kind of over here, you are over here, you are in a little bit of a fish bowl and we are watching to see who is paying attention. and sure enough, each and every one of you paid pretty much close attention to everything in this case, even when it was hard, even when you were watching a video, taking in some other case or somebody's reading back and forth. and i know there was some times when i was struggling to stay attentive myself, but i hope you all did not notice that. but you all seemed to be engaged and taking notes and we really, really appreciate that. this is my time to tell you our view of the evidence. you know a little bit about what i'm going to say from openings. but now you have actually seen the evidence and we will try to bring it all together for you. and i want to start by pointing out that a couple of times in mr. wichmann's remarks and in mr. millard's remarks, too, there was a suggestion that we did not present any testimony. that we did not come to court with any evidence. and that is not quite right. and i want to tell you why that is not right before i do anything else. because you heard testimony from eight different witnesses. and although the plaintiff called those witnesses, each and every one of those witnesses actually gave testimony that supported the defense as well. and so while it is true that we could have called more witnesses, to give you some of the same information, we did not think that would be a good use of your time, frankly. so, for example, yes, we could have called a witness to tell you all of the different ways that mrs. dion was warned about the health risks of cigarette smoking. mr. wichmann: objection, your honor. they could have called a witness, that is speculation. the court: overruled. mr. walker: we could have called a witness to tell you that, but mr. dion admitted that right there from the witness stand, and so did many of the other fact witnesses that testified. we could have called a witness to tell you that mrs. dion had the ability to quit smoking the entire time that she smoked, but dr. hurt admitted that and dr. brady admitted, specifically, that mrs. dion had the ability to quit smoking in the 1990s and the '80s, '70s, and the '60s, and even as far as back as the 1950s. we could have called a witness to tell you that in spite of knowing the risks and being able to quit, mrs. dion really only put down her cigarettes three times in 40 years before she finally quit. twice in the '50s and once in the '60s. but we did not need to call a witness for that, because mrs. dion [sic] and the other witnesses, with a little bit of discussion, admitted those facts as well. the rest of the time you heard from the witnesses -- and i'll go through it in a little more detail -- mrs. dion mainly was talking about quitting. but no one actually saw her putting down the cigarettes and stopping other than those three times. and mrs. dion's son robert even said that as far as he could tell she never stopped smoking before the 1990s, but sometimes she would pretend to quit smoking. we could have called a witness to tell you that mrs. dion was not misled by some tobacco company telling her this type of cigarette or that type of cigarette was healthier or safer or better for her, but dr. cummings admitted when he was on the stand that reynolds' marketing never said that. one of the things i told you in opening that you would see, and i think you did see, was that the witnesses that plaintiff paid to be here would be some of the most biased witnesses you could find on planet earth. and that these hired guns for plaintiff's lawyers, not just for mr. wichmann, but others, would not give you straight answers to simple questions. i told you that you would see a drastic change in their demeanor, depending on whether they were answering questions from mr. wichmann or mr. payne, compared to how they would answer questions from me or mr. williams or ms. weizenecker. and i think you saw that. i'll give you some examples, specifically, of what you saw. these are the people that i've been talking about. do you remember dr. hurt? he is the one who scrupulously followed his own advice never to concede any points, to avoid giving yes or no answers, and to always, always get his message in. there were some times with dr. hurt that i thought if i just asked him, you know, where he went to school, he would have given me a long speech about whatever message he was trying to get in at that moment. dr. cummings, could not get a straight answer from him when i asked him questions. i just asked him to agree that he did not show you a single advertisement for winston lights, and he said, no, no, of course i did. we showed a slide that had a picture of the cigarette package, and that was the type of answers that you got from dr. cummings when he testified. and dr. brady, at least she was candid about it. she came in and took the stand, and at one point, when she was answering questions for mr. williams, she said, wait a minute, i do not really have to stick to what i testified to before under oath, do i? i can change my testimony, right? she at least was upfront about that. but of all of those witnesses, who all collectively had been paid well into seven figures for the testimony they have done for plaintiffs' lawyers, you were given a lot of reasons to distrust testimony that they talked about, because for those three witnesses, no matter what the facts, no matter what the evidence, no matter what the testimony, they are always going to say that the smoker was addicted and that there was this coverup, because that is what they are hired to say, and that is what they do over and over and over again. one of the instructions that you got from the judge talks to you about things you can look for when you are trying to decide who can you trust that took the witness stand. it talks about believability, it talks about some of the same things that i suggested that you look for. consider the demeanor of the witness while testifying. the frankness, or lack of frankness of the witness. any interests the witness may have in the outcome of the case. and, boy, you sure saw a lot of evidence, whether it was from what they were saying or just how they were talking, a smirk on dr. cummings' face, a glance shot over at mr. wichmann to see if he was looking for approval for something that he had said, dr. hurt trying over and over again to get his message in. we think you saw it and we think you will know how to apply this instruction. but this believability issue, this issue about credibility, it is actually not just about witnesses. because as the jurors in this case, you are really being called on to decide not just the credibility of individual witnesses, but the credibility of their entire case. and you might remember in opening statement i started off telling you how hard it was for me to sit there and wait my turn. and that you heard some things that frankly surprised me and that i hope that you would write down some of the claims that were being made in the plaintiff's case about what they said they were going to prove. because at the end of the case, i said to you then, you were going to see that many of those claims were simply untrue or were incredibly misleading, in in any event would not be supported by the evidence. now we are at the end of the case. and i was thinking about how to go back to that issue with you and try to make it easier, make it easier for you to see why i was saying those things. we are in campaigning season. we probably, even if you wanted to, could not avoid all the press coverage of the different candidates and the claims that they make. and you might know that right here in the tampa bay area, the tampa bay times has actually won a pulitzer prize for this fact-checking service that they have. i think it is called politifact or something, and they have this neat truthometer where they take a claim from a candidate, pick your candidate, they show the claim, and the truthometer tells you what those journalists have figured out about whether that claim was true or mostly true or false or mostly false; and i think the meter even goes all the way up to "pants on fire," which means untrue and it is a ridiculous claim. so i thought in this case, in the court of law, where the plaintiff has the burden of proof, in every single question that you have to decide on this case has to be based on evidence and common sense, that you are the fact checkers for the claims that were made in this case. and i want to take a look now at some of the accusations that they made at the start of this case and talk about whether they proved them. i want to start with this one. this was a claim that was made in the plaintiff's case in opening: that they, meaning reynolds, tricked the testing machines, knowing the machines did not smoke the way humans did. what did the evidence turn out to be during the trial? that claim was false. the facts that you heard about during trial, not someone's accusation, was that that -- that reynolds told the federal trade commission 50 years ago -- we showed you the document, it is in evidence -- that people do not smoke like machines. that reynolds recommended against adoption of the machine-testing method the ftc wanted to adopt, and that the federal government required those machine ratings anyway. and the evidence was that the tobacco companies simply complied with the law in using those ratings. there was no trick. the companies did not have some information that no one else had. these are the facts. there was another claim, this claim that reynolds sent out the message: smoke our light cigarette, it is healthier for you. that was another claim that was made in opening. that claim also was false. in fact, during the plaintiff's presentation of the case, they showed you zero ads claiming that light cigarettes or even filter cigarettes were healthier. they showed zero winston light ads to any witness. and dr. cummings, when i asked him about it, agreed with me that none of the winston lights ads ever said that they were healthier. even mr. dion this morning, when i asked him about it, he agreed, that he is never seen an ad for winston lights that said that they were healthier. it is just not true. here is another one that you heard about, the other plaintiff's claims, that they -meaning reynolds -- in secret defined the youth market as 14 to 24. this is another claim that once the evidence came in, it was demonstrated to be false. i showed you the actual documents, including documents that they showed you but just did not show you the part that actually addressed their claims. and you saw in black and white, in so-called secret internal company documents, when the people who wrote these documents were not trying to impress the public or anywhere else, where they said: reynolds' policy is that smoking is a matter of free, informed adult choice. that when they say "younger adult smokers," they were not talking about people under 18, they were talking about people over 18. and the companies' business is not to motivate people to start smoking, particularly minors. and, finally, we should not in any way influence nonsmokers to start smoking. and by the way, this is an example of the type of claim that was made in the plaintiff's case where we were urging you to say to yourselves, and frankly to them, what does this have to do with marion dion? we made it clear, i made it clear with dr. cummings, that marion dion was only underage between 1932 and 1950. and they did not show you a single document indicating that there was any effort to recruit underaged smokers during those years. in fact, all of the documents that they rely on which say things like this, if you actually look at the document, but the ones that they rely on, like the ones mr. wichmann talked about today from the '70s, and the '80s, one document mr. wichmann talked about from 1975, mrs. dion was 33 years old. whatever marketing plan was discussed in there, whether it was for 18 to 24 or whatever else you think was there, it did not apply to mrs. dion. another one they showed from 1982, she was -- or '84, she was 52 years old. that document has simply nothing to do with mrs. dion. they put the flintstones on that slide, and that you heard from dr. cummings, the sponsorship of the flintstones was for precisely one year before it became a saturday morning cartoon, when it was immediately pulled. and mrs. dion was nearly 30 years old at that time anyway. those allegations are false, and more importantly for your job in this case, they have nothing to do with marion dion. now, i could go on with these. because there were a ton of allegations that were made in this case that we tried to answer when dr. hurt was here, when dr. cummings was here. these ftc reports that mr. wichmann showed you that the judge instructed you were not to be considered for the truth of the statements in those reports. remember that instruction. this article that mr. wichmann talked about about a gallup poll, you can look at that article if you want. what you are going to see is it is someone not from gallup criticizing some expert, who did not testify in this case, about showing a certain type of poll and not showing another type of poll that we discussed at length. if you were to look at that article, you would see, as mr. wichmann said, that it had to do with the difference between awareness polls and belief polls. what we showed you -- and i'm going to talk about in some detail -- were belief polls. this was sitting here, i do not know how long it was, during dr. cummings' testimony. these were polls that looked at what people actually believed, not just what they heard. i'm not going to do a truthometer for all of those claims, because, frankly, it will not help you when you are back there trying to deliberate about this case. those things do not have anything to do with mrs. dion, and you are going to see that every question on the verdict form is about one and only one smoker, and it is mrs. dion. but there is one issue that i need to address that does relate to mrs. dion, another claim that was made at the beginning of this case, and it is this one. and this one is actually very important. this was the idea that you heard about, not just in openings, but that they have tried to say even in closings: that mrs. dion tried everything that was available to her to quit. everything that was available. i wrote it down very carefully and i hope you did too. that was the claim. what did the evidence show about whether mrs. dion tried everything that was available? not true at all. you heard from everybody that knew her about a dozen or more things that mrs. dion did not try. things like stop smoking clinics, smokenders, going to the doctor, going to a psychiatrist, going to a psychologist, hypnosis, acupuncture, the great american smokeout that we saw some public service announcements for, quitting cold turkey, making a new year's resolution, and so on and so forth. i do not even think that we have listed all of them. but it is not just that this statement is not true, but it is misleading. because you have to think why -- why would someone say that she tried everything that was available, when you know that the witnesses are going to admit she did not do any of these things. because what the hope is, is that you will conclude that she was sincerely trying to quit smoking all those years, over that 40-year period. but that is not what the evidence was either. the facts are, from mr. dion who testified today, that if you -- in terms of not what she said, but what he actually saw, how many times did he actually see her putting down the cigarettes to stop smoking? three times in 44 years. you heard the testimony of karen martin, who said that she was not aware of any time when mrs. dion tried to quit smoking before 1990. you heard the testimony of their daughter kimberly, who said she could not remember a single time before 1990 when mrs. dion tried to keep [sic] smoking. and then, of course, there is robert, who testified that she tried to quit smoking by continuing to smoke but simply smoked a different product. and that there was times where she said she was quitting, but really she was just pretending. the fact of the matter is, mrs. dion was not sincerely trying to quit smoking for that 40-year period. so the question, then, is, if their case is so strong for the money that they are asking for, this $11 million, why make these claims? why rely on biased witnesses who you know their testimony is not going to stand up to scrutiny when we really look at it? and the answer, i'm sorry to say -- and it will be more obvious when you get into the facts -- is this is not a good case. you have already heard that there is this engle class out there with other smokers who are making claims. you have heard that witnesses like dr. hurt and dr. cummings, they are not telling you something no other jury has been told. they are making these same claims, showing the same demonstratives, telling the same story dozens and dozens of times a year. and maybe there is some other case out there with a smoker who was trying repeatedly, unsuccessfully to quit smoking, but the evidence in this case simply did not support that. now, what i want to do, as i tried to do at the beginning, is to pull out from all of the information that you saw, what are the key facts that relate to mrs. dion? we put them on a board this time. i hope you all will be able to read this. the court: can you all see that? mr. walker: it looks like it. and these are the things that i will be talking about for what i want to say to you today about the evidence in this case. first, the entire time that mrs. dion smoked, she was surrounded by warnings about the health risks and addictive nature of cigarettes. she knew the risks. two, over a 40-year period, she put down her cigarettes in an effort to quit twice in the '50s and once in the '60s. quitting was not a priority for her until the 1990s. three, she quit when she was ready and she could have quit earlier. and we are really going to talk about that one because dr. brady admitted she could have quit earlier. think about that for just one moment. she quit successfully in the 1990s. they say that mrs. dion was addicted and that that meant she could not quit. if she was, well, what happened in the 1990s? did she suddenly stop being addicted to cigarette smoking? they say she had all of these brain changes. well, if so, those changes did not spontaneously disappear in the 1990s. the companies did not stop advertising in the 1990s. there was still nicotine in cigarettes in the 1990s. the only thing that changed in the 1990s was mrs. dion's priorities. and you heard mr. dion say today, remember -- i think mr. millard asked him, you told mr. walker that in the 1990s, mrs. dion said that she just did not want to smoke anymore. had she said that before? and mr. dion said, no. that was the first time, was in the 1990s, when she said to him, you know, i just do not want to smoke anymore. and guess what? that is when she quit. number 4, nothing the tobacco companies said had any effect on mrs. dion's decisions to start or continue smoking, there was no reliance. and, finally, no one forced mrs. dion to smoke. not reynolds, not b&w, not howard cullman or joseph cullman that they showed you in those clips, not addiction, not anyone. no one put a gun to mrs. dion's head and forced her to smoke. now, what i want to do is to go through the verdict form with you and talk about the evidence that you saw in connection with the questions that you are going to have to answer. this is the first question. and you will see, because i said that every question is about marion dion, i've tried to highlight -- but i think that is red, it might be orange -- where her name appears in every question. was she addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine? and if so, was such addiction a legal cause of pri -- of her primary lung cancer and death? and you should understand that that question actually breaks down into at least three parts. and i think you will see that if you look at it. one question is: was she addicted? the second question, did she have a primary lung cancer caused by smoking, a cancer that originated in her lung and was caused by cigarette smoking? and even if you think that they proved the two of those things, the most important question of all: was addiction a legal cause of cancer and death for mrs. dion? and that phrase, "legal cause," has a special meaning that the judge gave you instructions about that we are going to talk about. but i do want to spend at least a minute or two on the first two questions because you have to decide them and you heard evidence about them. let me start with addiction. you heard some evidence about whether mrs. dion was addicted. and primarily there were two witnesses on this. the first was dr. hurt, they called. dr. hurt's the witness who has made $50,000 in this case, and charges $5,600 a day, whether he takes the standard for eight minutes or eight hours. and he is the one that used that what i called a rigged test, the heaviness of smoking index, which is the test that once you take it, it always spits out the same result that you are addicted. you might remember that dr. hurt said to me, well, you would not give it to somebody who is never smoked or somebody who has not ever smoked. that would be like giving a pregnancy test to a man. and i said, well, let us think about that. if you had a pregnancy test and you gave it to a man, and the result came back that that man was not only pregnant but that he was in his first trimester, there is a problem with the test. it does not work right. it does not help you distinguish between people who are pregnant and who are not. that is the heaviness of smoking index. no matter what the facts are, a person who has never smoked, a person who smoked one cigarette or 100 cigarettes or 100,000 cigarettes, it is always going to spit out the answer that that person is addicted. then there was dr. brady. dr. brady, after asking if she could change her sworn testimony, the best that she could come up with -- and this is going to be important when we come to it later -- was that mrs. dion, according to her, met criteria for addiction sometime around 1970. in 1970 mrs. dion was 3 8 years old and a lot had happened before 1970, when dr. brady says there is evidence that she was addicted. but how did she figure that out? well, she did not use the rigged test that dr. hurt used. instead, she used the test that dr. hurt, their addiction expert, told you was not rigorously tested, not validated, not usable or equipped to assess tobacco dependence. that is the test that she used to tell you that by -- that in 1970, mrs. dion was addicted. she also told you this, and mr. wichmann even showed it, that there was this definition of "addiction" that is from nida, which is an organization that you heard about in this case, and she said that addiction is a chronic, relapsing brain disease that is characterized by compulsive drug-seeking and use despite harmful consequences. well, if we take a look at that definition, can that definition really be applied to mrs. dion? did she -- did she have a chronic, relapsing brain disease? was she chronically relapsing? relapsing means that you are trying to quit smoking, you put down the cigarettes, you fail, and you start smoking again. that is relapsing. can you say that someone's chronically relapsing when they only tried twice in one decade and once in another decade? then it says it is characterized by compulsive drug seeking and use, despite harmful consequences. what were the harmful consequences that mrs. dion smoked in spite of? there were not any. the entire time that she was a cigarette smoker she did not have any harmful consequences. in fact, it was just established this morning, i think, that by the time she had quit, she was not coughing up blood, she did not have a cough, she did not have any chest pain, she did not have any chest problems of any kind. she did not have any health problems at all. she was not smoking despite harmful consequences. she did not have any harmful consequences. if you believe dr. hurt that the dsm is an unusable test for these reasons, then dr. brady's testimony is of no moment in terms of their meeting their burden of proof. if you believe dr. brady that this nida definition is the definition of "addiction," then mrs. dion does not meet that. she just does not. there is one other thing that dr. brady said, and i thought of it while i was sitting here listening to mr. wichmann, and she is the expert who came and said that she is actually done some research into the differences between how men and women smoke. so we showed her -- mr. williams showed her the article that was a peer-reviewed article that she was one of the authors, where it says that unlike men, women do not smoke primarily for pharmacological reasons -- that is nicotine; that when it comes to women, according to the article that she had signed on to, women smoke primarily for social reasons. now, that might not be true for everyone. does it fit for mrs. dion? the evidence is it does. you heard, i think from robert, about i think he called it mrs. dion's crew, the crew of women, friends who would come over and they would all smoke together. he said it was like one of those smoking rooms at the airport. that is social smoking, not because of nicotine. you heard that she had a girlfriend who was a heavy smoker, and she would come over in the afternoons, and she and mrs. dion would talk and socialize and smoke. that is exactly the type of thing that dr. brady was talking about: it is not about nicotine in that instance. well, what did the experts say who were not paid all this money, who did not come in the door trying to change their testimony or be evasive in the answers? who would those people be? her treating physicians. she was going to the doctor back during this period, and none of her treating physicians said that she was addicted. there is an exhibit in evidence that is full of medical records. you will not find a single medical record that said she was addicted. even the doctor who gave her a prescription for the patch did not say she was addicted. then, just like now, if you go to the doctor and say, i'd like to quit smoking, they are not going to pause to decide if you are addicted. they are going to give you what you need or what you are asking for to help you quit, whether you need it or not. dr. kane, whose testimony was read, he is the one treating physician whose testimony you heard, he did not say she was addicted. plaintiff has the burden to prove addiction and he did not carry it, but frankly, i'm not going to spend another minute talking about addiction, because it is not a key issue here. you do have to decide, i mentioned the b in 1b is about medical causation. and you heard some evidence about whether mrs. dion even died of primary lung cancer caused by smoking. and that may have come as a surprise to some of you because it came late in the case. you know, you are listening to all this stuff about the tobacco institute and advertising, and then, you know, into the second or third week of trial you find out, wait a minute, she did not have any symptoms of lung cancer? they never biopsied her lung? this is what the evidence was. there was no medical record that said that she had primary lung cancer caused by smoking. there was no autopsy proving that she had cancer that originated in her lung, let alone that it was caused by smoking. the death certificate that you were shown did not indicate that she had cancer caused by smoking. her lung was never biopsied. think about that for a moment. you are being asked to award $11 million in a case that you have been told is a lung cancer case, you have to decide whether it is primary lung cancer, and no one ever actually looked in her lung to determine whether there was cancer there, whether she had a malignant mass there. there are no pathology slides, there are no radiology films. she did not have any symptoms that people typically have when they have lung cancer. not just when she quit, because i said she was healthy then, even when she goes in and she gets her diagnosis of cancer, she was not coughing, she certainly was not coughing up blood, she did not have shortness of breath, she did not have enlarged lymph nodes that you would typically see in people with smoking-caused lung cancer. there was not a centrally located mass, and you did not have clearly differentiated cells that could help you understand where the cancer came from. you might remember that dr. kane even said, yeah, i did not rule out the possibility that she had an adenocarcinoma of the uterus. now, and you also heard that she did not get treatment to her lungs. she received radiation therapy, but not to her lung. those facts ought to raise some questions in your mind about whether the plaintiff has met his burden of proof even on medical causation. but just as i did with addiction, i'm not going to spend a minute longer on that. it is not a key issue in the case. the key issue in the case is this question of whether or not addiction was a legal cause of mrs. dion' cancer and death. even if you think she was addicted, even if you think she had primary lung cancer and that is what caused her death, even if you think she had primary lung cancer caused by smoking, you still have to decide whether or not addiction was a legal cause of her cancer and death. that is what it says on the verdict form, and that is when we have to confront this term "legal cause." what does it mean? well, first, you heard the evidence that addiction does not prevent people from quitting. everyone can quit. addicted smokers can quit. and adults have to make the choice for themselves. this is the instruction that the judge read, and you will have a copy when you go back to deliberate, about what legal cause means. it is a long instruction, but there is some keywords that if you were to read this instruction to yourself 20 times, you would see that these are the most important parts. addiction to smoking cigarettes containing nicotine is a legal cause of loss, injury, or damage if it directly and in a natural and continuous sequence produces or contributes substantially to the injury so that it can be reasonably -- it can reasonably be said that but for an addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine, the injury would not have occurred. and then there is a second paragraph that repeats that language about looking at whether the addiction was substantial enough to contribute to the injury such that but for the addiction she would not have smoked long enough to be at an increased risk for cancer. now, the question is, you heard evidence that there is nicotine in cigarettes, including the ones she smoked, and you know that she was eventually diagnosed with some type of cancer. the question is: did addiction to that nicotine lead inevitably, or at least in her case, to her getting cancer, or was there a person, a human being, a living, breathing sentient, rational, thinking person who, along the way, had choices to make about whether she would continue to smoke or take steps to stop smoking. even if you think she is not addicted. i'll say it again: if she is addicted. even if she was addicted to the nicotine in cigarette smoking, in order to have smoked long enough to even be at an increased risk for cancer, that human being, in between the cigarettes that she smoked and the time that she smoked, had a decision to make about whether to overcome the addiction if you think that she had one. did mrs. dion have the ability to put down the cigarettes, addicted or not, had she tried and avoided being at an increased risk for cancer? dr. hurt and dr. brady both said yes. and we are going to talk about the evidence that would lead a person to say yes. we need to spend just a moment talking about nicotine because in a case like this it is in the interest of the plaintiff to suggest to you that nicotine is this mind-altering drug that takes over your brain and prevents you from understanding warning labels and prevents you from making decisions about how to live your life. from making decisions about whether to ask people for help in quitting smoking. from making a plan and carrying it out. we know mrs. dion was able to do that because she did it in the 1990s. but what about these allegations about the role of nicotine? this is the evidence that you heard: no one becomes a smoker because of addiction to nicotine. nicotine does not intoxicate people the way alcohol or some drugs did -- do. it does not impair judgment. it does not interfere with the way the brain works. it does not prevent smokers from choosing to try to quit smoking. we know from one of the demonstratives that dr. hurt brought that if you looked at all smokers, you would see that there are a lot of daily smokers who say they want to quit. these are people who reported that they want to quit. but about -- only about half of those who said they wanted to quit are actually doing something about it in a year. there is real information in that, folks. saying that you want to quit is not the same as doing something about it. the evidence was: all smokers can quit smoking if they are motivated and committed to do what it takes to quit. you heard that from dr. hurt; you heard that from dr. brady and dr. cummings. you might remember toward the end i showed him a pamphlet that he wrote in 1988 for the american cancer society called smart move. and we have not come to it yet, but you are going to see where dr. cummings' own writing, from during mrs. dion's lifetime, talks about how anyone can quit smoking even if they have smoked for a long time, even if they are heavily addicted. but the reality is, you cannot quit if you are not trying to quit. no one quits smoking if you are not trying. and quitting sometimes is hard. mr. wichmann said that i -- you know, that me or someone at our table was saying, oh, no, it is easy to quit, you just make up your mind, snap your fingers and you are done. we are not saying that at all. we are saying the opposite. we are saying that to be successful at quitting smoking, you have to want to quit smoking. you have to have an internal motivation, not because your spouse or your kids or somebody else wants you to stop, but you want to stop and you are prepared to do what it takes to succeed. we know that over 60 million americans are alive today who made the choice to quit, and, more importantly, took action to stop smoking. those are people with the same kind of brain changes dr. brady talked about, the same dopamine release, and frankly the same exposure to advertisements that you keep hearing about. so how do we apply that evidence to know whether addiction was a legal cause of mrs. dion's cancer? we know she had the ability to quit because dr. brady said so. but when was it that she needed to quit in order to avoid being at an increased risk for cancer? the way i would phrase it is: when did it matter most? when did her smoking behavior and her decisions and her choices matter most? and you heard about that from dr. kane. dr. kane basically said, in answers to mr. williams' questions, if you had never smoked a day in your lives, and you pick up a -- somebody offers you a cigarette and you smoke it, you are not at an increased risk for cancer. you just are not. it just does not work that way. if you smoked a pack of cigarettes, put them down, never smoked again, you are not at an increased risk for cancer. if you smoked a pack a day for a year, you are still not at an increased risk for cancer. a pack will not do it, a year will not do it. dr. kane was not sure exactly how many years you need, but he said you need at least five years to be at an increased risk. so from the time you start smoking, five years has to go by before you are at an increased risk for cancer. that is on the front end. what about on the back end? it says on the package that: quitting smoking now greatly reduces serious risks to your health. why do doctors tell people who smoke for 20, 30, 40 years, really no matter how long they smoke, there is still a benefit to you in quitting? because, you heard from dr. kane, that the body is an amazing organism. even if you smoked for 30, 40, 50 years, the minute you put down the cigarettes and stay quit, and have a sustained effort to stopping smoking, the body starts to repair itself. you might remember the larry hagman video, a public service announcement about this. and within about 10 to 15 years, your increased risk from a smoking-caused cancer that you had from smoking at least five years or more starts to drop. and by the end of 10 or 15 years it is back down to the risk of a person who never smoked cigarettes. because even people who never smoke are at some risk for lung cancer. so what does that mean? how do we apply that to mrs. dion's timeline? i tried to put this together. i hope you will find it helpful. this is a timeline to talk about what are the smoking choices that mrs. dion made that mattered most? they said -- you heard today mr. wichmann asked you to accept that mrs. dion started smoking at age 15 or so. well, she turned 18 in 1950, okay? that means that for the first five years that she smoked, certainly the entire period leading up to when she became an adult, which is less than five years, she was not at an increased risk for cancer. if she had stopped smoking the day she turned 18 and never smoked again, she would not have gotten -- could not have gotten lung cancer, certainly not caused by cigarette smoking. on the back end, how do we apply the 10 years? she had her diagnosis of cancer in 1994. 10 years earlier than that, then, is about 1984. what that tells you is that if she had quit smoking in 1984 or earlier, then her risk, the increased risk of cigarette smoking would have gone down to that of someone who never smoked and she would not have gotten cancer, certainly not any cancer caused by smoking. that is why for all of the witnesses i kept asking: what was she doing in the 1950s, in the 1960s, in the 1970s, and the 1980s? that is why i was so interested in asking the witnesses about what she knew and what she was doing about what she knew in those critical years when quitting would have made -- could have made the difference to her if you think that her cancer is caused by smoking. now, what was she doing in those years? was she addicted and could not stop smoking? did she have an addiction that was so substantial -- remember the judge's instruction that she could not stop -- or did she know the risks and just was not ready to stop? that is where this first issue comes in about knowing the risks. and in particular in those years that i mentioned. this is really, really important, this issue about what she knew. because as i said in opening, it touches every other issue in the case. if she chose to smoke, knowing that smoking would be bad for her, as opposed to some addiction that took over her brain, an addiction did not cause her illness, and your answer to the first question should be no. if she knew the risks the entire time that she smoked, then she is responsible for what she did with that information. that is the second question on the verdict form. if she knew during the period that she smoked that cigarette smoking was harmful to health, could cause lung cancer, and things like that, then it really does not matter what some tobacco spokesperson was saying on tv. she knew better. and so i want to talk with you about the evidence about what mrs. dion knew about the risks during the time that she smoked. mr. millard said, well, you have to step back in time. i could not agree more. this is the evidence that you heard. mr. and mrs. dion met in 1949; mrs. dion was already smoking when they met. mrs. dion was smoking camel, the brand that her older brothers smoked. they both went to the same high school and that high school did not allow smoking on school grounds. this is 1949. polling data that we showed you from 1949, almost 70 years ago, revealed that a majority of americans believed that smoking was harmful to health, and mr. dion was one of those people. he already knew back in high school that cigarette smoking was bad for his health and he knew that cigarette smoking could affect his lung capacity. moving into the 19- -- that was at the end of the 1940s. moving into the 1950s, mr. and mrs. dion married in 1952. mr. dion starts talking to her about smoking and asking her to quit. you heard that evidence just this morning. that is almost 15 years before anyone put a warning label on a package of cigarettes. mrs. dion was getting very personal warnings about smoking from her husband. and by the way, when he started warning her about the health risks of cigarette smoking in the early '50s and telling her to quit, that was also 20 years before 1970, when dr. brady said there is evidence she was addicted. but mrs. dion was not interested in quitting, and she did not try to quit. the dion family either subscribed to -- or read a lot -- local newspapers wherever they lived, magazines throughout their marriage. i have a list here of all the newspapers. you all probably wrote it down earlier in the case. papers from lawrence, massachusetts, nashua, every place they lived. and you heard that mrs. dion was the type of person who read the headlines, liked to keep up with current events, and really every single person that you heard from said that. now, mr. wichmann wants you to think that they are subscribing to these papers, the newspaper comes to the house, and mrs. dion, who was interested in keeping up with current events, ignored all the news in the newspaper and just started reading advertisements for cigarettes. you are going to get an instruction about common sense, and i think that you are going to find that that argument defies common sense. so what were the articles that were in those papers in the early 1950s? well, we showed you. this is from reader's digest, that they subscribed to; and boston area papers, like the lawrence evening tribune. these are just from the early 1950s. "cancer by the carton, heavy smoker risks cancer," says doctor. lung cancer increased link to smoking. and you see the spread from life magazine. it was all over the news. polling data from just two years after the dions married indicated that the message from all that press that i just showed you was getting out. have you heard or read anything recently to the effect that cigarette smoking may be a cause of cancer of the lung? ninety percent of americans had read or heard something along those lines. moving past 1954 into the mid-1950s, there is persistent and varied and constant media coverage of smoking and health. it was on tv. we showed you the see it now message. that was the one where the person from the american cancer society said that people should be warned, and they are being warned. what they choose to do with the information is their own business. it was on tv. it was in the redbook magazines that mrs. dion subscribed to and read. it was in the boston area newspapers like the boston herald and the lawrence evening tribune. you have got a few examples of that. and it was in time magazine, another of the popular magazines in america. this is basically from '55 into '57 or so. now, in 1957, kind of on the heels of this coverage, mrs. dion is pregnant with their third daughter, and mr. dion encourages her to quit for the health of the unborn baby. he said something very interesting that i noticed today, and i hope you noticed it too. he said that mrs. dion was not concerned about her own health, but about the health of the baby. and if you think about it, that makes sense. mrs. dion had made her own choice about whether to smoke or not. but the baby had not made that choice. so while she was not as concerned about protecting her own health, she was prepared to put the cigarettes down for the health of the baby. mr. wichmann showed you a news statement from face the nation, from 15 years later, 1971, where some tobacco representative said something about whether smaller babies -- or whether small babies are healthy. the dions did not believe that. fifteen years before that statement was made, they already understood that cigarette smoking was bad for health and certainly for the health of -- of an unborn baby. in any event, mrs. dion puts down the cigarettes, picks them up after a few days, and makes no further effort to stop smoking. not just for the rest of that pregnancy, not even after the baby was born. she does not put the cigarettes down again for another three years, until 1959. in the meantime, however, this is what people at the time were talking about whether the public was being warned of the health risks. the surgeon general said: we have informed the public through excellent coverage of the press, radio, and tv. and, basically, the national cancer institute's director, john heller, said that same thing. in 1958, we showed you this coverage from better homes & gardens, another magazine mrs. dion subscribed to, where it was talking about research indicating that a mother's smoking can harm an unborn baby. in 1959 she is pregnant with karen, and just like she did last time, she puts down the cigarettes, picks them up, makes no further effort to quit smoking. this is still about a decade before dr. brady says that she was addicted to smoking. into the 1960s, mr. dion is still telling mrs. dion to quit smoking. and mrs. dion's own father, burt, a very heavy smoker, dies in the 1960s, and the family talks about that his death was probably caused by smoking. their daughter cynthia starts telling mrs. dion that smoking was bad for her health, and she does not dispute that to anyone who says that to her. in fact, according to their daughter cynthia, mrs. dion knew that smoking was bad for her. into the 1960s, the coverage continues. one of the dion family members mentioned she liked to read about dear abby. it was covered in dear abby. in 1964, the surgeon general's report comes out that you heard about. dr. cummings said about that report that it was one of the most publicized health stories ever in the history of this country, and it is front-page news all over the country. and it is -- they started airing prime time specials about it on every channel. all the magazines, all the newspapers, all the tv channels were covering this. do you remember this from harry reasoner? (a video clip was played and transcribed as follows:) harry reasoner: in this kind of a country, it comes down to you, whether you like it or not. no one is going to forbid an adult to smoke. and it is now quite clear that no one is going to tell him it is good for him either. the decision is his, the decision and the health that may depend on it. (the video clip concluded.) mr. walker: the decision that mrs. dion made was to continue smoking. in 1966 warning labels go on all packages, right down the side of the package and the carton, if you bought cartons. we even showed you an example of that. this is a pack of winston cigarettes from 19 -- this time period between, really, the late 1960s, and the warning label that is right there on the side of the pack. mrs. dion was not interested in quitting, though, and this is still years before dr. brady says that mrs. dion was addicted. articles continue to come out about smoking and health in the magazines and newspapers that were delivered to the dions' front door, magazines like good housekeeping. in 1968, mrs. dion was pregnant with their daughter kimberly, their youngest daughter. she makes her third time where she actually puts down the cigarettes. she repeats the cycle. puts them down, picks them up in a few day, makes no further effort to stop smoking for the rest of the pregnancy, and actually does not put down her cigarettes again after this time in 1968. she does not put them down again for another 25 years. that same year that kimberly was born, this statement was made by the director of the national clearinghouse on smoking and health: you could stand on a rooftop and shout "smoking is dangerous" at the top of your lungs, you would not be telling anyone anything they did not already know. the newspapers are continuing to report on it on tv as well into the late 1960s. by 1969 polling data is showing that 71 percent of americans were not just aware, but believed that cigarette smoking was one of the causes of lung cancer. that is this first bar on this graph that you saw. by the end of this period, in 1969, 13 million americans had made the decision to quit smoking. mrs. dion just was not one of them. moving into the 1970s, mr. dion is still encouraging mrs. dion to quit smoking. mrs. dion's brother herbie, a heavy cigarette smoker, passes away from a heart attack in the '70s, and the dions discuss again about how his death may have been related to his smoking. and he is one of those older brothers that smoked camel cigarettes from way back when mrs. dion was younger. by 1970, i already mentioned that, the warning label changes. and they are changed to say: "warning: the surgeon general has determined that cigarette smoking is dangerous to your health." this is one of the warnings that the judge instructed you complied with federal law, and that the companies had no obligation to make additional warnings beyond this. you will see that in the instructions. i guess this is the instruction that you will see. after july 1st, 1969, the defendants had no obligation to place any additional warnings on their packages and advertisements. the coverage continues into the '70s. these are from the early to mid '70s, articles not just talking about the risks of smoking, like lung cancer totals doubled for women, but now also talking about how to quit. good housekeeping, how hypnosis may help you quit smoking. you will stop smoking on june 11th. advertisements for stop smoking clinics that were available. these are boston area newspapers. she does not try hypnosis. she does not try going to a clinic. she does not try any of those things. in 1971, that warning appears in all advertisements. and in the early 1970s, their daughter kimberly is now older. she was born in '68, she is now older. she starts telling her mother during car rides that the smoking is making her sick. by the late 1970s the great american smokeout was launched. 1976, including public service announcements telling people: just quit for a day. and then see if you can quit for two days, and so on. millions of americans trying. mrs. dion simply was not one of them. by 1977, gallup polls indicate that 81 -it is now up to 81 percent, the second bar on the graph there, believe that cigarette smoking is one of the causes of lung cancer. but mrs. dion is still not trying to quit. by the end of the '70s, 30 million americans have made the choice to stop smoking. mrs. dion just was not one of them. into the 1980s, mr. dion is still encouraging mrs. dion to quit. their daughter kimberly is still doing the same thing. she is now in school. she is in middle school. and she learns about the health risks of smoking there and comes home and tells her mother about that in the early 1980s. and goes on to tell her many more times over the years about the health risks of smoking. on tv and in the paper, the same coverage is continuing. we showed you the larry hagman public service announcement about this, and also some of the coverage from the boston globe about this same topic. by 1981, the roper organization that did the polls that were relied on in one of the ftc reports mr. wichmann talked about, said the public is highly aware of the reported dangers of quitting [sic]. in 1983, mr. dion's and mrs. dion's son robert quit smoking. flesh of her flesh, blood of her blood, he had smoked since -- at a very young age, for about 20 years, i think the testimony was, two packs a day. he quit. she congratulates him, tells him that she is happy he did it, but she does not ask him how he did it. she does not say to him, hey, what worked for you? what might work for me? and then we hit 1984, which was the point in time -- that is ten years before her cancer diagnosis -- if she had stopped smoking anywhere along this road that we just went down together, she would have avoided the risk of lung cancer. and you saw how after that the present warnings went into place, and the new poll hit almost 95 percent. what does all of this tell us about the true legal cause of mrs. dion's continued smoking? thank you. it tells us that she was not smoking out of ignorance. she was not smoking cigarettes because she never heard from anybody her whole life that cigarette smoking was bad for you. it tells us that addiction was not a legal cause of her continued smoking either. throughout this entire time period in the '50s, '60s, '70s, and '80s, most of the time she spent it not trying to quit. addiction does not stop you from quitting if you are not trying. i want to give you this analogy. imagine if you are driving a car, okay? we are going to say that maybe the car has faulty brakes. and the faulty brakes we are going to call addiction. faulty brakes means you step on the brake, the car does not stop, it keeps going. okay. let us think of addiction that way. addiction is not going to prevent you from stopping, but it can make it harder for some people to stop smoking if you are addicted. but what about the person who is driving the car, even if it has faulty brakes, they are on their phone, they are sending a text, they run into another car. they never put their foot on the brake to begin with. did the faulty brakes cause the accident or was the accident caused because the person never put their foot on the brake? that is what addiction causation is all about. for the 4 0 years that we just went over, mrs. dion knew the risks, but she was never really putting her foot on the brake. let me give you one other example. maybe it is not a car. maybe it is your brother-in-law. maybe you have a brother-in-law who is like living in your basement, right. he is unemployed; he is not working. and i do not mean to -- i do not know anything about any of your brothers-in-law, but he is not working. let us say it is 1993, he has not held down a job in 40 years. he is telling you he is trying to find work. he is telling you that it is tough out there, the market is tough, it is hard to find a job. then you find out that he only filled out an application for employment twice in the 1950s and once in the 1960s and had not filled out an application for a job for 25 years. how many of you would say that your brother-in-law living in your basement not working could not find a job, or was it that he was not trying? that is also what addiction causation is all about. now, i want to be clear about a couple of things. robert said, some of the plaintiff's lawyers said, well, she was switching to another brand, right? think about that for a moment. she says she is quitting smoking, or they say she was quitting smoking by continuing to smoke. switching from one brand to another is not quitting. it is just more smoking. it is not quitting. we saw a list of all the things that the evidence shows she was not doing. and i want to be clear about something because mr. wichmann said we are blaming her, we are attacking her because she was a good mom, that she was busy. i've not done anything like that, and you will not hear me do anything like that. we are not criticizing mrs. dion. we are not here because we sued anybody. we are here because during that time period, for very reasonable reasons, quitting was not a priority for mrs. dion. it just was not. you heard about all of the things that she had going on during that time; clothing, feeding teaching, generally raising her five kids while mr. dion was at work. i'm not judging her for doing that, but when they come in and ask for $11 million and try to tell you that she was trying all the time to quit, doing everything she could get her hands on to quit, that is when you got to take a step back and say, well, what does the evidence say about whether quitting was really a priority for her in the '50s, '60s, '70s, and '80s? and look what happened in the '90s. in the '90s their daughter moved out, they are in a different state, they are in a retirement community. she does not have all those same responsibilities. she was busy, sure, but she was busy doing things for herself now, right? she was able to turn her attention to the things that she wanted for herself. and something that she wanted for herself that she had never said before was that she did not want to smoke anymore. and she had a number of firsts the minute she made that realization. for the first time she went to the doctor. for the first time she asked for help. for the first time she tried nicotine replacement therapies that had been around since the early 1980s, mid-1980s. and she did something she had not done in 25 years. she put the packs down and eventually stopped smoking. the plaintiff wants you to believe that nicotine replacement therapy is what made all the difference, this patch that you kept hearing about. in fact, their son robert even said, well, she never really stopped. it was the patch that made her stop smoking. that is not what the evidence was. the evidence says the nicotine patch is not this miracle cure that makes you quit smoking. it is not a magic bullet. it does not make people quit; it is replacement therapy. and that is the key word. the idea of the therapy of nicotine replacement is that you put down the cigarettes, you are not getting nicotine from the cigarettes, you are getting nicotine from whatever the replacement therapy is, like the patch. but mrs. dion did not put down the cigarettes when she started with the patch, so was she replacing the nicotine or was she adding to it? can we really say that the nicotine patch has made all the difference to her in stopping smoking when she was still smoking when she got the patch? it is a little bit like someone saying, well, i'm going to cut sugar out of my diet and i'm going to use a sugar substitute, and then they buy a pack of donuts -- a package of donuts, just like they would any other day, and they start pouring sugar substitute on top of it. is the sugar substitute making them cut back on their sugar? no, they added on top of what they were already eating. that is what mrs. dion did when she got the patch. she was getting nicotine from the cigarette. she added the patch and added to it and cannot explain why she quit. and think about this. if the nicotine patch had been available before it was, if it was available in the '80s or the '70s or the '60s that we just went through, do you really think that mrs. dion would have tried it? she was not even going to the doctor to find out what was available then. the bottom line is, the fact that she used the patch does not show that she needed to quit. it shows that she finally wanted to quit. these were the choices that mrs. dion made during this period. she knew the risks. she was able to quit. she did not seriously try to quit. and all of that means that the answer to question 1 on the verdict form should be no. the next question -- and by the way, if you answer this question no, your job is finished. there are no more questions for you to answer. we believe you should check no, but it is my job to go on explaining the rest of the verdict form. you are going to have to decide this question about the percentage of any fault attributable to reynolds and to marion dion. we looked just a moment ago at the choices that would have mattered to mrs. dion, the choice to smoke as an adult, the choice not to try to quit, the choice of how to try to quit, and most importantly, the choice about when to try to quit. only mrs. dion could have made those choices. how could reynolds be even ten percent responsible for mrs. dion's choices about when to try to quit or how hard to try to quit? this is what the evidence was that you heard: that pamphlet that dr. hurt had, only you can decide to quit. smart move from dr. cummings: you have to make up your mind to quit. the surgeon general: now is the time to quit. no one can make you quit. no one can do it for you. this is dr. koop that you heard from. a cigarette does not light itself and jump into your mouth. the choice to light up is always yours. we are not criticizing her choices, but they were her choices to make. when you are thinking about a percentage to put down, think about this. as an adult, mrs. dion smoked for about 42 years, which turns out to be about 2,184 weeks. she put down cigarettes for a week or less, twice in the '50s, once in the '60s. if you do the math, that means that she spent 99.9 percent of the time not trying to quit, not putting down her cigarettes. 42 years, three weeks worth of effort. not criticizing it, but this is the evidence that you have to decide. we believe that the percentage of fault for the choices that mattered to mrs. dion in terms of the legal cause of her death were one hundred percent hers and 0 percent reynolds. the next questions on the verdict form relate to whether she relied on something that the companies said or did. this is the "no reliance" point on this chart. and the key questions here are who said it and did she rely. you saw a lot of different statements about filters and low-tar, low-nicotine cigarettes, statements from the government, statements from the american cancer society and others, and statements from representatives on behalf of the companies. and they were different statements. these are the ones she got, not from the company, but from the public health community. talking about how it would be better, if you are not going to quit, to smoke lower-in-tar, lower-in-nicotine cigarettes. how to take some of the danger out of smoking. you did not see that in any of the advertisements you were shown, but you did see it from people outside of the companies. it is easy to attack reynolds and other tobacco companies, but they should not be attacked for statements they did not make. did she rely on any of this? the testimony you heard, including today, was she never said she relied on any of it, that she was aware of the risks the whole time. was anyone else relying? we showed you these surveys starting in 1959. they want you to believe that the tobacco industry had the nation's ear, everyone was on pins and needles, waiting to see what the tobacco companies had to say about whether smoking caused lung cancer. that is not what the evidence was. only 3 percent of people were listening to the industry. in 1958, 5 percent. 3 percent in 1970. these are the people from the video that mr. wichmann showed you today: cullman, horrigan, browder, ti spokesmen. 97 percent of americans did not think that these people were reliable. it is like if you go to a store and you are trying on an outfit and the salesperson says, my god, that looks amazing on you, you do not think the salesperson is lying, but you do not necessarily think they are telling the truth either. you take what they say with a grain of salt. that is what the american people did, as you can see from these studies. they were listening to organizations like the american cancer society, and we showed you what they had to say. on the verdict form for these questions, 3 and 4, about whether mrs. dion reasonably relied on something from the companies, the answer should be no to both. they made a lot of allegations about advertising. this is what the evidence was that you heard. she did not start, continue, or even discuss advertising. take a look at this. robert dion, when he was here, he claimed that he and his mother saw an advertisement on tv for winston lights cigarettes. this is the evidence about that. there were never any television ads for winston lights cigarettes. in 1971, a law was passed banning cigarette advertisements on tv, and that was three years before winston lights even came out. just as mr. dion told you, they never saw a tv ad for winston lights, and their son robert simply got that wrong. he did not get the year wrong, because it never happened in any year. i do not know what he thinks he saw; maybe it was the american cancer society or someone else, but it certainly was not an ad for winston. what was the theme of the actual winston ads? we looked at those, too, in a lot of detail, and you have got a bunch more you can look at if you want. it was all about flavor and taste. there is nothing in there that is $11 million worth of fraud that could have suggested to mrs. dion that she should smoke filtered cigarettes. the answer to these questions should be, no. whether it is based on company statements, that she was not listening to, the american people were not listening to, or whether it is based on ads, these questions about reliance should be answered no. next is the question about damages. frankly, you should not get this far. you already know what our arguments have been. we believe that no damages should be awarded in this case, based on all of these facts that i've talked with you about. i do not have much time left. i need to talk with you, very briefly, about punitive damages. this is the last question on the verdict form if you get to it. state whether by clear and convincing evidence punitive damages are warranted. i'll talk to you briefly about punitive damages generally. they can only be awarded for things that were a legal cause of mrs. dion's illness and death. they can only be awarded to mr. dion. you cannot set it up for some charitable organization. and they are over and above the decision that you will make if you come to it about damages that would fully compensate mr. dion. and this is why you have to decide, not based on the greater weight of the evidence, not those scales they talked about, but on the standard of clear and convincing evidence. it has to be more compelling and persuasive, of such weight that it produces a firm belief or conviction without hesitation. most of the evidence that you heard does not rise to the level of conduct that should be punished. they talked about filters; the public health community encouraged filters. they talked about light cigarettes; the public health community encouraged light cigarettes. they talked about compensation; we showed you where that was published every which way in the public health community. and these -- we even showed you the studies that came out talking about the lower rate of death in filtered cigarette smokers. and we talked about the other side of the story, all the good things that reynolds was doing over this time period. i will not go through them individually, because you have all seen them. but some examples are this: you learned from the figlar testimony, do you remember that, all of the money that was funded, research projects, all the published work that was done about that, the green monster that i showed you, that big heavy book. the memo from the company's head to the research department talking about if there is a safer cigarette, let us see if we can find it, and the billion dollars that was spent developing this premier cigarette that the company published a book about trying to reduce the health risks of cigarette smoking. i'm not here to tell you that reynolds was or is a perfect company. but i will say this to you: there were people in the company during the time periods that they discussed who genuinely believed that the case against smoking has not been proven, and they were not the only ones that believed that. and there were people during the time period who were saying, thank goodness for filter-tipped cigarettes, nothing has saved more lives than a switch to those cigarettes. if the companies had not -- had refused to make the type of cigarettes the public health community said would save lives, then they would have something legitimate to complain about here in this courtroom, but that is not what happened. i must be at the end of my time. i know we are after 5:00. you know what the key facts are from our point of view. when i sit down, i will not have a chance to speak to you again. this will be my last time talking to you in this case. you can rejoice or, you know, not feel any kind of way about it. when i sit down, they will stand up and they will have another chance at some point to argue to you in response to what i said, and i hope that you will remember what we have argued and know what our responses would have been. we are in your hands. we have done the best we know how to put in the evidence, and i've done the best i know how to explain to you why we believe that a defense verdict is the only appropriate verdict in this case. i will say one last time that we very much appreciate your time and attention. it is been a long case. it is not easy to sit and listen to lawyers go on for hours and hours. we, all of us, really, really appreciate it. thank you.