mr. acosta: good morning, ladies and gentlemen. it is the end of the trial, and i reserved about an hour. and hopefully i will not take that long. it should be quicker than that, but we have to get -- have some guidelines. first of all, i want to thank you for your attention during the trial. there was a lot of information that was crammed into just a few days, and we hope you found it interesting. and we really do appreciate your paying attention to the evidence in the case like you have. the reason we are here, there is just one reason we are here. we are here because the cigarette companies refused to take any responsibility for the death of charlotte douglas. zero. we have admitted some responsibility, which i will talk about later. but they do not admit any. they do admit that cigarettes caused her to die. they do admit that cigarettes caused her lung cancer. they do admit that cigarettes caused her copd. they defend on the basis that she cannot be a class member, because if she is not a class member, then their position is she cannot use the findings against -mr. geraghty: objection, your honor. your honor has given instructions that cover this, and i think this is inconsistent with the instructions. the court: overruled. mr. acosta: so their defense to avoid the findings is that she was not addicted to nicotine. that is pretty much what the trial is all about. their position is she chose a lifestyle. well, if you go back in a time machine, think about who created that lifestyle. who made the choice to do that? it was the defense. the defendants started this all out. the defendants sold cigarettes to people with the intention that they buy them, that they get addicted to them, and that they keep buying them. that is -- that is what their business plan was. and they have been doing it for a long time. mr. geraghty: your honor, there has been no evidence of any of this. the court: overruled. mr. acosta: and there is evidence of it. and i will show it to you. as we go through this, you will remember that there were documents that were entered into evidence through dr. benowitz. one of them was an r.j. reynolds document. and it talked exactly about how, happily for the cigarette industry, happily for that industry, that cigarettes were habituating to people who smoked them. and i will talk about that a little bit more in a second. but the cigarette companies created a lifestyle. they got people to smoke. charlotte douglas, charmie, smoked exactly the way they wanted her to smoke. exactly the way they wanted her to smoke. that is what they wanted her to do. now they take a 180 and they say, well, she could have quit. she should have quit. she should have quit smoking back in 1966. she should have quit smoking back in 1970. she should have quit smoking every time she tried to quit smoking. well, it is a bit ironic, because here the cigarette companies want everybody to smoke, that is what they wanted them to do back then, and yet now they say, well, she should not have done it. well, if she should not have done it, nobody should have done it, and there would not be any cigarette industry and there would not be a whole lot of dead people. it is very hypocritical, the position that they take. they are telling you that we are blaming the victim. that is what they do. they blame the smoker. they blame the smoker for what they did. what did they do? they were negligent. they sold defective and unreasonably dangerous cigarettes. they concealed information about addiction. you know, back in 1966, you heard about the caution label. that caution label said, caution: cigarettes may be harmful to your health. may be harmful to your health. they did not warn that it was addictive. they did not warn that it caused lung cancer. they did not warn that it caused copd, like they now admit after they had a class action trial against them where these things were found, because they denied them. that is why there was a trial. they denied it was addictive. they denied it caused cancer. so there was a big trial. mr. geraghty: objection, your honor. none of this is in evidence in the case, your honor. the court: overruled. mr. acosta: it certainly -- it certainly is part of the engle class membership issue. so smokers that qualify as class members now do not have to go back and prove all that stuff all over again. so we put on evidence that mrs. douglas met the criteria. it is fairly simple. it is simple criteria. if you are addicted to nicotine and it causes you to get sick before november of 1996, you are a class member. and that is it. and that is what we are asking you to find, because when you find class membership, then all the rest of it falls into place. since they deny it, we have to put on evidence, and we did, dr. goldman, dr. benowitz, and dr. sumner, a treating doctor. and you saw some of the records. you heard some of the testimony. you saw that there was a big stack of depositions. not all -- it would have taken a week to read all that stuff to you, and it would have been really boring, so we did not do that. but i think we hit the highlights for you so that you have a pretty good idea about the addiction in this case. you know, there was a question that one of you asked one of the witnesses, and i think it was something to the effect is there any way you can tell to a certainty if someone was addicted? and that was a good question. but in court it is rare that anybody can ever prove anything by a certainty. even the prosecutor in a criminal case does not have to prove that a criminal defendant is guilty by a certainty. it is -- in a criminal case, it is beyond a reasonable doubt. and in a civil case, the plaintiffs burden, our burden, is simply to tip the scales. that is what greater weight of the evidence means. so we have a scale. if we tip just a teeny bit, if we win by one point, then we have met our burden of proof. that is -- that is the law in a civil case. all we have to do is to tip the scale. so when you consider whether or not charmie douglas was addicted, basically it is was she probably addicted or was she probably not addicted? if you think she was probably addicted, then we have tipped the scales. so what kind of evidence did we have about addiction? first, we had dr. allan goldman come in. dr. goldman is the chairman of the department of internal medicine at usf. he has been out there since 1974. one of the top doctors in the college of medicine there. he trains other doctors, teaches medical students, runs the department which has a number of subspecialties -gastroenterology, radiology, all kinds of departments within the department of internal medicine. he is a lung doctor. dr. goldman started the lung department, the pulmonary division, at moffitt cancer center when moffitt was built. he started that. he is done research. he is published many, many journal articles. he has seen thousands and thousands of patients. he has privileges at all the hospitals. dr. goldman looked throughout medical records. he was asked to assume some things about mrs. douglas's quit attempts and so forth. and he concluded, of course, she was addicted. of course, she was addicted to nicotine. i mean, one of the things that you can use in your decision making is your own common sense, you know. charlotte douglas was a person -- now, you know, there is some -- it is -- i hope we are not splitting hairs on this, but there is evidence that she began smoking at a little bit of a younger age than the defendants want to accept. and this is it. can i have the elmo on, please? it says she has smoked a pack of cigarettes a day for 40 years. well, that was in 2001. if you go back 40 years, that is 1961. she was born in 1946, so that would make her 15 years old. she had a high school friend, charlotte parker, that you heard about that had home room with her, and said they were friends her senior year, and she did not remember her smoking. well, maybe. but we have a record, and the record puts it back to '61. she was smoking when mr. douglas met her, and that, i believe, was in '66. they got married in '68. so somewhere back in there, she was -- she was smoking. and then by the late sixties, early seventies, that is when she first tried to stop smoking. and she was not successful the first time, like most people. and then she tried again when she was pregnant. she had children in 1974, 1976, and '77. then she went to the schick center, which is a center for -- where people go to try to stop smoking. and she went with a friend. she was able to stop for a couple of weeks, and then what did she do? she relapsed, which is very common. that is what happens to most smokers. see, these cigarettes, this nicotine, although it gets out of your body in a few days, and eventually these receptors in your brain go back to normal, but if you remember dr. benowitz, he said there was a second thing that nicotine does, and that is that it changes the neural pathways in the brain. and those remain forever. when people are addicted, they are addicted for forever. a good example of that is somebody that first smokes and they get nauseated or they get dizzy from their first cigarette. they cough. they cannot take it in. and they eventually build up a tolerance to nicotine so that they can smoke 20 or more a day. if you have never been a smoker, you never been a smoker, you pick up a pack of cigarettes and decide you are going to smoke all of them in a day, chances are you are not going to be able to do it. you are going to get sick. that phenomenon is called tolerance, once you are able to do it. so a smoker can smoke a pack a day or two packs a day. there are some records indicating that mrs. douglas got up to two packs a day in the early nineties, and then back and forth. but she tried the schick center. she tried in the eighties. one of her sons remembers her using these aristocrat filters, he thinks they were called, where you keep changing the filter on the cigarette to make it more difficult to draw. she tried cold turkey. she tried with her husband. she tried a number of different things. people that knew her thought she was addicted. she said she was addicted. mr. douglas was asked in his deposition, and he said, no, i did not think either of us were addicted. at the time, he is thinking that addiction was somebody hitting rock bottom out on the street somewhere. he did not think of himself that way. but when he thought of it in terms of she smoked a lot, she could not stop, then he said, yeah, under those circumstances, she was certainly addicted. her daughter talked to her about it. mrs. douglas said she could not quit. she tried over and over and over again. she tried nicorette gum, she tried candy, she tried lifesavers, she tried the patch, she tried zyban, she tried wellbutrin. and she tried these a number of times, a number -she cut up cigarettes into little -- i mean, straws to look like cigarettes, like fake cigarettes to try to stop smoking. she swallowed a plug of tobacco to try to stop smoking, which made her vomit. she cried when she could not have a cigarette, someone remembered. and these are just things that people remember. you know, mrs. douglas, of course, died, and nobody can ask her. but there was one person that testified that could and did. and that was dr. sumner. dr. sumner. you saw him walk up, take the stand. he treated her for about ten years. he was her primary care doctor. he is the first line of defense for people, you know. when people -when smokers go to the doctor, the first one they see is a primary care physician, usually. and what does he do? he counsels them. he tried to help charlotte douglas. she wanted to quit. he gave her a tape. he gave her a brochure. he gave her the patch. he continually counseled her. she tried. she was not able to do it. he does not have an ax to grind in this case. he is not a retained expert. he was just a treating doctor. he was her doctor. he remembered her. he came in and he told you, yes, she was addicted to nicotine, and, yes, her addiction was a substantial contributing cause of her copd. and she was diagnosed with copd in 1995. actually, the first indication was in 1994, when an x-ray was done which showed bullous emphysema. so we have dr. sumner, who said she is addicted. dr. goldman, who said she is addicted. and then you heard from dr. benowitz. now, dr. benowitz teaches psychiatry. dr. benowitz was a senior editor of the 1988 surgeon general's report. and dr. benowitz went through a number of slides, talked about -- i'm not going to put them back up, but you may remember some of them about -- there is one that is a big graph and it showed how a few people are able to quit every year. it is -- it is kind of astonishing that 15 million people try to quit smoking a year, and only 3 percent are successful for a year. but that was not just dr. benowitz's position. i put up this brochure from philip morris. and you saw how philip morris printed in their brochure what the fda said about addiction. not everybody gets addicted. but the vast majority of people who smoke get addicted to it. mrs. douglas got up in the morning, the first thing she did is smoke a cigarette. the last thing she did before she went to bed was smoke a cigarette. she smoked cigarettes all day. she would go outside to smoke a cigarette, when she needed a cigarette. even if -- even if there were some other reasons why she smoked -- which i'm sure there are. smoking is pleasurable for most people that smoke. that is what addiction is. it is exactly what addiction is. dr. benowitz explained that when you smoke cigarettes, the nicotine goes up to your brain and in just a few seconds, 8, 10, 15 seconds. and once it gets there, it opens a lock in a receptor, which releases about ten hormones. one of them is dopamine. it makes you feel good. it does not sound so bad, except that what happens is your brain gets used to the nicotine opening the lock. so when you do not have nicotine, the lock is closed and none of those hormones get released, which makes a person that smokes feel bad until they get another cigarette. so then the craving starts, and they light up another cigarette, and now they are okay again. and it is an addiction cycle. and it reenforces itself until you get another cigarette. and that cycle goes on every day. and it is very difficult to break that cycle. and, you know, for some people, it is nearly impossible. charlotte douglas eventually got so sick, she had severe copd by 2006, and she was diagnosed with lung cancer. even then what she is doing is she is telling the doctor, well, i'm not smoking, but she is taking the cigarette up and taking a puff on it. dr. goldman says when people do that, they are still getting some of that nicotine. she did everything she could to avoid cigarettes from the early 1970s all the way until she was finally diagnosed so sick she could not smoke any longer. now, if somebody like her is not a member of this class, this engle class, who is? who would ever qualify as an engle class member if it is not charlotte douglas? i want to show you a couple of things so you can see how this -- how this works. the jury instructions that the judge read to you included language like this: addiction to smoking cigarettes containing nicotine is a legal cause of disease or medical condition if it directly and in a natural and continuous sequence produces or contributes substantially to producing the disease or medical condition, so it can reasonably be said that but for addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine, such disease or medical condition would not have been suffered. dr. benowitz testified people do not get copd, they do not get lung cancer if they were not addicted to nicotine. i mean, that is what causes those diseases. if -- who would smoke into those diseases and continue to smoke after they got copd, like mrs. douglas did, if they were not addicted? he -- and dr. benowitz said that but for -- but for nicotine addiction, we would not have those diseases. then the next paragraph says, in order to be regarded as a legal cause of disease or medical condition, an addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine need not be the only cause. an addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine may be a legal cause of a disease or medical condition even though it operates in combination with the act of another or some natural cause or some other cause if such other cause occurs at the same time as an addiction to cigarettes. so basically this instruction is telling you that to be a legal cause, nicotine can act in conjunction with other things. and if it does and it contributes substantially, then -- and in this case, copd -- that is what -- that is what nicotine addiction does, is it causes people to get copd -then this instruction would apply. i highlighted these findings just so you can -- you can see them. and sometimes when you actually see it in writing, it means a little more. this is what they did. they concealed or omitted material information not otherwise known or available, knowing that the material was false or misleading, or failed to disclose a material fact concerning or proving the health effects and/or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes. they agreed with other cigarette manufacturers -- that is a conspiracy -- to conceal or omit information regarding the health effects of cigarette smoking or the addictive nature of smoking cigarettes, with the intention that smokers and members of the public would rely on them to their detriment. well, the cigarette companies, they wanted charlotte douglas to rely on the warning. they say, you know, there was a caution label in 1966. she should have listened to that and not used our cigarettes, not done what we wanted her to do. well, by omitting information, they did not put that cigarettes were addictive on the caution label back in 1966. they did not tell her it would cause cancer. they did not tell her it would cause copd. so there is your reliance. and that is just one of the issues that you are going to be asked to determine. it is a fact issue. you will just decide that fact. it is not going to affect the way you fill out the rest of the verdict form. but you are going to be asked whether or not she relied. and people rely on companies to tell them the truth. they rely on companies to tell them the truth. and you will remember that dr. benowitz put on a document back -- that was back in 1959. philip morris listed the number three reason people smoke is addiction. there were some scientific articles that were discussed -- one from 1942, one from 1963 -- that discussed addiction. philip morris did not tell anybody their cigarettes were addictive and then denied it up until 2000. they denied it was addictive. they did not want people to know it was addictive. in fact, one of the documents that you will get to take back into the jury room says they played down the role of nicotine. they did not want people to know that they were addicted, that it changed the function and structure of the brain, which is exactly what nicotine does. that is what dr. benowitz said. now, i want to -- before i forget, there was testimony that mrs. douglas smoked reynolds cigarettes in the sixties. and she was smoking reynolds cigarettes when the douglases met -those were winstons and salems -- and then she switched over to larks in 1970. larks are made by liggett. and then at some point she interchanged with benson & hedges, which are made by philip morris. that evidence is undisputed. because one of the things that we had to prove in the case is that she actually smoked the defendants' cigarettes -- not just cigarettes in general, but their cigarettes. there is no dispute -- they did not put on any evidence to dispute it -- that she smoked larks, benson & hedges, and winstons. now, there was some indication that she smoked those funny looking cigarettes sometimes. but you could tell by looking at those, that is not the kind of cigarette a person smokes during lunch. she smoked larks and benson & hedges and salems, at least a pack a day, sometimes more. one of the medical records shows that she had what is called 60 pack years of smoking. a pack year is a pack a day for a year. so if she was a 40-year smoker, according to that record i showed you, then she would average a pack and a half, to make 60 pack years. so the companies have admitted that cigarettes caused her death, caused her cancer, caused her copd. now we have to prove that it was their cigarettes, so now we have legal cause. that makes legal cause. the reynolds company takes the position that, well, three years. if it was three years of reynolds cigarettes -- if it was three years of reynolds cigarettes, you were given information about how it is a dose -- these are dose response diseases. that is, every dose counts toward creating or developing the disease when the disease finally appears. so they all combine, all the smoking combined to create that risk that smoking is going to cause a disease. and so that is what dose response means. i can give you an analogy. if someone were to take 89 aspirin, no problem. they take one more aspirin, and it kills them, because 90 is too many. that is a dose response situation. you could take one of the aspirin away -- let us say you took the first three aspirin away -- then you would not -- you still have to reach 90. but the three are combined with the others. let me give you another analogy. reynolds says three years is not enough. well, let us say that there were five cigarette companies, and she smoke for 15 years and got lung cancer, and she smoked for three years, each one of the companies. if their theory was correct, none of the companies would be responsible. that is why we have that instruction that says that -- that the causes can combine. it is for this very kind of situation, where there is lots of different causes that add up. that is dose response. that is why reynolds shares some of the responsibility in this case. now, let me show you the verdict form so you can see how this is going to work. the first question you are going to be asked is, was charlotte douglas a member of the engle class? and, of course, we think that you should check yes. because if you say no, then your verdict is for the defendants, and they win the case. if you say yes, then you answer the next question. and was smoking cigarettes manufactured by one or more of the defendants a legal cause of charlotte douglas's death? and the answer to that should be yes, because she smoked their cigarettes. they do not dispute that. they admit that they caused copd. they admit that they caused lung cancer and her death. so that makes that legal cause. then -- this is where it get a little trickier, because then you are going to be asked for each company. and the reason we have this in here is because of reynolds taking the position that three years is not enough, so we have to ask you for each company. and so if you think that each company contributed to her lung cancer and death -see, we are already by, at this point, the fact that she is a class member if you mark yes to class membership. so all we have to show for that is that an addiction to nicotine was a substantial contributing cause of her copd. now we are beyond that, and now we are into the rest of the findings. then you are going to be asked, no. 3, did she reasonably rely to her detriment on the concealment or omission by one or more of the defendants of material information not otherwise known or available, or their failure to disclose material facts concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes. and no matter what you answer to that question, you go on. and then you answer this question: please state the percentage of any fault that was a legal cause of charlotte douglas's death that you charge to charlotte douglas, philip morris, r.j. reynolds tobacco company, liggett group, llc. the total has to be one hundred percent. then you are asked -- there is a dot on there that is always bugging me. no. 5. what is the total amount of any damages sustained by james douglas for the loss of his wife for services, comfort, society, and attentions from the date she became ill from lung cancer, and the loss of her companionship and protection and his mental pain and suffering as a result of her death in the past and in the future. and you put numbers there, total them up. and then you will be electing a foreman. one of you will be the foreperson who will sign it and date it. so this is -- this is the job you have when you deliberate. your decision has to be unanimous. and you-all -- it is your decision. you know, people vote in this country, and sometimes, no matter who you vote for, it may not make a difference, because so many people vote. but here this is -- your vote really counts. this is, you know -- this job of being on a jury is important, you know. our justice system goes back a thousand years. we are one of the few countries, you know, where juries get to decide things like this. other countries, it might be a magistrate or a -in the olden days, it was, you know, a duke or someone like that. but now it is juries. and so you are going to be asked to go back and decide the -- those issues that i just showed you. one of the things you will get to do is to take back into the jury room with you the evidence in the case. and this is just the plaintiff's evidence. i think there is a folder for defendants' evidence. they have some evidence that they introduced. and then there is a couple of big boxes of medical records back there. and then the defendants put in some smaller -- they selected some of the -- some records that are separate, and they put them in a small exhibit. so you have got all of the medical records in those two big boxes. every record that we could find on charlotte douglas is there if you wanted to look at it. the death certificate is there. this valentine is there. you will get to see it and read the whole thing. you might remember mr. douglas reading from a paragraph that his wife wrote. and this valentine, i think it was around the 2000 -- 2002, 2003 time frame. and then you will decide how much these defendants should have to pay in restitution for what happened to his wife. she was 62 years old when she died. sixty-two years old is not very old. you saw -- you will see in the evidence as well pictures, pictures of her. these are my pictures, so i'm tearing them out, but you will get the ones without the tears on them. that is when she is sick. this is before she was sick and after she is sick. this is a priceless loss. what you decide to make them pay is up to -- is totally up to you. sometimes juries want to hear from the lawyer, they want a number. sometimes they do not. there is no way for us to know. i can tell you that a million dollars a year for the remaining portion of their two lives would certainly be in the ballpark. but it is totally up to you. and i do not want to presume that you do not have your own ideas as to what you think the cigarette companies should have to pay in restitution for this, this death. we ask that you divide the award up. that liggett take fifty percent; that philip morris take 35 percent; that reynolds take ten percent, and that charlotte douglas take 5 percent. five percent is basically the number that are able to quit each year. so that might be a guide. i'm going to sit down, and then the defense lawyers are going to get a chance to talk to you, and unlike the opening statements, i get to come back and have the last word. so it is probably going to be running it close to lunch by that time. so i'm going to try not to keep you from lunch. but please keep an open mind until i get a chance to talk to you. thank you very much. mr. acosta: may it please the court. ladies and gentlemen, i'm going to try to just hit the points that they made and show you a couple things, a few things. mr. boyce started out for r.j. reynolds, you know. one of the first things that he talked about was did they -- the date that mrs. douglas began to smoke. and, you know, i'm not a hundred percent sure why we are fighting over this so much. but i want to show you another record from 1966 that they did not show you. this requires just a little bit of interpretation. but 1966, she is already traveling around for a cosmetic firm. and it says, habits noncontributory. well, what habits would a person have that are noncontributory to a bout of pancreatitis, which is what she had going on at that time? it is probably smoking. and a person at that point in time traveling around for a cosmetics firm, that is what people did back in the mid-1960s. next, mr. boyce talked to you about dr. goldman. and you should try to remember what you remember of dr. goldman's testimony, because, you know, lawyers have a tendency to put a big spin on things. and the same goes for me. if i say something that you think is wrong, go by your own memory, do not go by what i'm telling you. but i would ask you to try to remember that, for example, when dr. goldman was asked if nicotine caused cancer, he said those studies have been out in the last year. and i do not know if you remember, but i specifically asked that when we did dr. benowitz's deposition, that we give you the date. and the reason i did that was because his deposition was taken over a year earlier. dr. goldman testified that the studies were new within the last year. they have distorted that to make it look like dr. goldman was not telling you the truth, but he was. as far as the nci, the national cancer institute, dr. goldman said, as i recall, that there was some things that were authoritative and some that were not. some were outdated. so there was not any huge conflict there. now, one of the things that mr. boyce did not talk about is the concept of latency. lung cancer and copd are latent diseases. dr. goldman talked about this. they do not -- they do not appear for a long time, but all of the exposures in between create that risk, you know. he showed you that chart. the 10 to 14 year -- the lowest step on that chart was 10 to 14 years. he said, well, there is no risk. there is no risk, because you do not get it until 10 or 14 years. that is when you get the disease. well, the risk exists during the whole 10 to 14 years. it builds up until that is when you get the disease. he was distorting the way dose response and risk works. so the fact that mrs. douglas used reynolds cigarettes for three years, that three-year period would have put her at a low very risk if that was all there was, you see. but that is not all there was. those cigarettes combine with the other cigarettes, those cigarettes she was addicted to. and they maintained the addiction. and then the next set of cigarettes that she smoked, the lark cigarettes, those maintained her addiction. they all add together. and i think you might remember me showing you through dr. kaplan and the surgeon general's report this particular model. it takes a long time for all these carcinogens. they have to go through this process before it turns out to be lung cancer. but all of those carcinogens, this is a combination, an accumulation of carcinogens that cause cancer. that is how it works. and that is what dr. goldman said. the defendants, although they touched on the second part of the causation instruction, i want to make sure that i explain that again, because this is very important. they want you to think that the only test for causation is this, quote, but for test, even though the evidence showed that that was met. when you get the instructions, you see -- and i am thinking you will be able to take a set back in the jury room with you, but i'm not sure about that. the first paragraph has this but for test, and then the second one is the one that fits with what we just have been talking about with reynolds. and it says, in order to be regarded as the legal cause of the disease or medical condition, an addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine need not be the only cause. an addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine may be a legal cause of a disease or a medical condition even though it operates in combination with the act of another or some natural cause or some other cause if such other cause occurs at the same time as an addiction to cigarettes and such an addiction to cigarettes contributes substantially to producing a disease or medical condition. there is no but for requirement in this particular -mr. boyce: objection, your honor. he knows that is still but for causation. he is misstating the law. the court: overruled. mr. acosta: that does not appear in this part of the instruction. and that is because in certain kinds of cases where you have lots of little things that happen, not -- any one of them might not be the cause. any one of them might not be enough to cause it. so this is called a concurring cause instruction. and it allows for the accumulation of all the small causes to be the cause without any one of them being the but for cause. there was a statement made by ms. luther that mrs. douglas had made an informed choice. well, that flies right in the face of these findings. these findings say that the information that they concealed, that they agreed to conceal was unavailable. it was not known. it was something that no one knew except the cigarette companies. that is what they were found to have done, to have agreed to conceal information. so how do you have informed consent when you do not know? and i already mentioned that they did not tell her it was addictive. they did not put that label on their cigarette package in 1966, or that it caused cancer or copd. that was not on there. what was on there was it may be. maybe it would or maybe it would not, that is what was going on back then. there was argument about nicotine and choice and all that. and i want to show you and read to you from one of the documents that is in evidence -- actually, i'm going to do it -- just remind you about the other one, because we have already shown it. one of the documents that is in evidence tells you that -- that they cannot defend a case if the person was addicted because they had no choice. that is in -- from them. that is from the cigarette companies' documents. that was this one right here. we read that before: you cannot defend continued smoking as free choice if the person was addicted. but they are in this case. and they made a point about how dr. goldman, you know, has testified in 32 cases or he is involved in 32 cases. well, they are the reason he is involved in 32 cases. this is -- this document is plaintiff's exhibit 1724, which you will get to take back. i wrote 1972 on the front, because that is the date. the nature of the tobacco business and the crucial role of nicotine therein. and this is how it starts out. tobacco products uniquely contain and deliver nicotine, a potent drug, with a variety of physiologic effects. now, i am going to skip because it is a rather long article. i'm just going to do the highlighted portion. his choice of product and pattern of usage -he is speaking of a smoker -- are primarily determined by his individual nicotine dosage requirements and, secondarily, by a variety of other considerations including flavor, irritancy of the product, social patterns, and needs, physical and manipulative gratifications, convenience, cost, health considerations, and the like. so reynolds is saying that in 1972 that the reason people smoke primarily is determined by nicotine dose, not all those other things. then he says, thus, a tobacco product is, in essence, a vehicle for delivery of nicotine designed to deliver the nicotine in a generally acceptable and attractive form. that is what the cigarette is for. our industry is then based upon design, manufacture, and sale of attractive dosage forms of nicotine. and our company's position in our industry is determined by our ability to produce dosage forms of nicotine, which have more overall value, tangible or intangible, to the consumer than those of our competitors. happily -- happily for the tobacco industry, nicotine is both habituating and unique in its variety of physiologic actions; hence, no other active material or combination of materials provides equivalent satisfaction. so nicotine was extremely important. they knew how important it is to their product, because it addicts people. that is what they put it in there for. in fact, you might remember dr. benowitz, he defined this term "sine qua non." that means without which it would not happen. if nicotine is without which it would not happen, you would not smoke if you did not have it, of tobacco products. if tobacco products are recognized as being attractive dosage forms of nicotine, then it is logical to design our products and, where possible, our advertising around nicotine delivery rather than tar delivery or flavor. now, i'm just going to skip a bunch of this to this part. indeed, the first smoking experiences are often unpleasant until a tolerance for nicotine has developed. i do not know if you remember dr. kaplan yesterday. but he said, oh, no, tolerance. well, smokers develop nicotine -- in order to be smoke 20 cigarettes a day, you have to have tolerance, because if you -- if you did not, you would not be able to get by the unpleasant effects, the foul smell, the irritancy, the nauseation, the coughing, all the things that nonsmokers experience when they try to smoke cigarettes. they recognized that tolerance exists for nicotine, something that dr. kaplan did not want to acknowledge. then they say, we have deliberately played down the role of nicotine. hence, the nonsmoker has little or no knowledge of what satisfactions it may offer him and no desire to try it. well, we talked about informed consent a minute ago. well, there you go. how would somebody have informed consent when the cigarette companies are deliberately playing down the role of nicotine and they are not telling their customers that it is addictive? i think that is all i have for that one. you will remember the nordine study, which also talks about most people want to quit and most people cannot. that is another r.j. reynolds document, which you will get to take back. you know, there was talk by defense counsel about mrs. douglas gaining weight and mr. unger who testified by his deposition. this was a fellow that could barely speak english, did not speak english very well, and thinks that mr. douglas was trying to control his wife's weight by saying do not keep putting the schnitzel on the plates. and in his deposition, that is what he was talking about, is that mr. unger was piling the plates high with schnitzel and mashed potatoes. that is what was in his deposition, you know. but the gaining weight thing, that is a symptom of addiction. if somebody gains weight after they stop smoking, that is a symptom of addiction. the defense wants to make it sound as if somehow this lady's smoking was because she experienced stress. well, we do not have too many medical records on it, but you might remember when she went to see dr. sumner i pointed this out. this is her intake form in 1993. it says, stress, average. i asked him to interpret that, stress, average. this was not a stressed out lady. she was depressed sometimes, not stressed out. by the way, there was talk about withdrawal symptoms. withdrawal is not required for dependence under the dsm. you do not have to have withdrawal. some people smoke just to avoid withdrawal. that -- dr. benowitz talked about that. withdrawal is one of the -- one of the seven or eight criteria, but it is not necessary. what is necessary under the dsm, if this is what you are going to use to do it -- and, remember, the surgeon general cited to it but chose not use the dsm criteria. but if you do use it -- this was shown to you. you see the top, it says, maladaptive pattern of substance used leading to clinically significant impairment or distress as manifested by three or more of the below. so if you have three or more of the below, you automatically make the threshold. dr. kaplan did not want to look at it that way. dr. kaplan wanted to look at it a different way, so that this person would not be -mrs. douglas would not be -- would not qualify under this criteria. and then he -- then he -- he says, oh, there is no tolerance. well, we just showed you something about tolerance. and then if you look at no. 3, it says, the substance is often then taken in larger amounts or over a longer period than was intended. well, if somebody tries to stop and they do not want to smoke anymore and they continue doing it, would not that be over a longer period than intended? what dr. kaplan said is, well, when she started to smoke, she did not say she was only going to do it for ten years, or something to that effect. that is not right. she qualifies under this. and, remember, this dsm, this applies to all kinds of substances, not just -- not just tobacco. he did say that she had two. and, you know, when i asked him, i said, well, dsm-v, the new one that is proposed, they have brought it down to two to be -- to qualify for addiction. and he said he was not familiar with it. but, of course, he was familiar with recent studies on other things where he contested -- he contested statements like this, that 89 percent -80 to ninety percent of the -- of regular smokers have nicotine dependence. well, that is inconsistent with the way he is interpreting the dsm. if the dsm is interpreted correctly, then you get 80 to ninety percent of the smokers. the way he wants to interpret it, you do not. and that is because he is a hired gun to come in here for a cigarette company and tell you these things that they put together for his testimony. dr. kaplan has no hospital privileges. he cannot put anybody in the hospital. he cannot see -- he cannot see his own patients in the hospital, because he has no hospital privileges. he never did any research. but here he is sitting here interpreting this thing, which is basically subject to a lot of interpretation. but if you look at it the way i just mentioned it, i think you will see that she would qualify. but perhaps the most important is this right here. there is a whole -- there is a section on nicotine dependence. and it is got a diagnostic code, a 305.1. i showed records. that is the diagnostic code. 305.1, tobacco use disorder, that is addiction. that is dependence. here it is again in another record. and she is been using the patch while in the hospital. here is another one, tobaccoism with severe copd. there is also a habit element, and i gave her nicotrol. well, the habit element is an element of the addiction. it is not the other way around. tobaccoism in this context is an addiction. these are in the records. and mr. geraghty put up that chart. who did it have on it? it had dr. goldman on it; it had dr. benowitz on it; and it had dr. kaplan on it. where was dr. sumner? he did not talk about dr. sumner's diagnosis? he did not talk about how dr. sumner said she was addicted and that her addiction caused her copd. they do not have an answer for that. dr. benowitz testified because -- testified as a generic witness. of course he did not know about her specific case, because he was not told about it. that is not the purpose of his testimony. his testimony was generic to explain what nicotine addiction is and how smokers get addicted. all those questions about, you do not know this about her; you do not know that about her; you do not know this about her; and you do not know that about her were just for show, because he was always a generic witness in these cases, not a case-specific witness. now, this is kind of silly, but the american cancer society document that they discussed, about, you know, if you answer three questions to -- and you can quit smoking if you can answer them yes. well, the american cancer society, if they want to try to get people to quit smoking, they are not going to put up what philip morris put on its website about the fda and how only three percent a year are successful, because they probably would not be encouraging very many people if they had to put up negative information like that. they want to encourage people to smoke -- i mean, to stop smoking, and that is why they have those easy questions to be answered. you know, the thing about nicotine and cigarettes is that it is -- it is one of those things it is easy to start and it is hard to stop. and the more you smoke, the harder it is to stop. and it gets harder and harder as the addiction gets deeper and deeper. now, all we can say is that if anybody was addicted, you know, it was charlotte douglas. she did everything she could, and she could not get out of from under it, and she got copd. and if there ever was a class member -- if she is not a class member, there should not be any class members. so please, please mark yes for her class membership, and then finish the rest of what the engle class started out to do. thank you.