closing statement mr. gustafson: good morning. the panel: good morning. mr. gustafson: you are likely to be thanked by every lawyer that gets up here and talks to you today, so i'm the first one and i want to say thank you. you all have been tolerant and patient -- tolerant of us and patient with us. it is been a long trial. there is been a lot of evidence. and what you do here matters. you bear witness. douglas duignan. the medical records tell us that he started smoking when he was 12 years old, before the federal government ever forced one of these defendant's to put a caution label on a pack of cigarettes. it was back when these defendants were denying that cigarettes were dangerous. when they were denying that cigarettes caused lung cancer. when they were denying that nicotine in cigarettes was addictive. the very things that make up class membership in this case. doug duignan was a 12-year-old boy when he 4488 got started. he was the same age that the documents from these defendants show that they focused on in their marketing efforts to get new replacement smokers. he did exactly what they intended that he would do. and they enjoyed a lifetime of profits off of his lungs. and you know from the evidence that the cigarette culture that arose in this country in the 20th century was a creation of these defendants. you know that now. they created the cigarette century in america that lead to all of this death. they did that. they did it on purpose. when cigarettes became symbols of maturity, rights of passage in boys and girls to mature, the defendants knew that and they exploited it. and so in mr. duignan's birth cohort, boys his age, over fifty percent of boys in his birth cohort smoked. it was normal for him to be a smoker. it would have been unusual if he did not start smoking when he was a kid. and it would have been really unusual if he were able to just put them down and walk away without any trouble. and you know now why that is. 4489 nicotine addiction. the golden goose that these defendants protected all those years, talking about lung cancer over here does it or does not it, it is not proven, it is not proven, and nobody talked about nicotine addiction until doug duignan was 38 years old. that is the first time the surgeon general came out and said nicotine was addictive. it is not just -- it is not just someone's choice or their behavior. it is an addiction. even though these defendants knew that most smokers start as kids, when their brain is still developing, and when addiction takes the strongest hold, and that addiction leads to disease and premature death, these are the things they knew, and they knew how to take the nicotine out of cigarettes, they knew how to grow tobacco without nicotine in it, and they not only chose to keep the nicotine in it, they engineered cigarettes to maintain addiction. and they tried to make it as hard as they could make it for people to quit. their own documents tell us that. this case, by its nature, requires us to 4490 go back in time so that you can evaluate the very different time that douglas duignan grew up in. the time that this engle class is all about. it is all about those people who grew up back then, started smoking back then. and then defendants were happy for him to be part of that class back when he was buying their cigarettes. but now that he got sick and died, they want to exclude him from that class. so he is born in 1950. that is smack dab in the middle of the cigarette century. when he was born, a higher percentage of doctors smoked than nondoctors. think about that. cigarettes sponsored cartoons and family shows, patients were smoking in the hospital, super bowl quarterbacks and major league heros smoked cigarettes. newscasters smoked on tv. patients smoked in the hospital. cigarettes were sold in vending machines to anyone who could pull the lever. and back then, philip morris executives were telling the public that if cigarettes were ever proven to cause human disease, they would stop making them. so as the plaintiff, we have the burden of 4491 proving that douglas duignan was a member of the engle class, that he was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, and that his addiction caused his lung cancer and death. that is our burden on class membership. and we have to prove these things by the greater weight of the evidence, as the judge just read to you, not beyond and to the exclusion of all reasonable doubt, like in a criminal case. not by clear and convincing evidence, but by the greater weight of the evidence. so did we tip the scales in our favor? so the first question on the verdict form is going to be: did douglas duignan have primary lung cancer? did we tip the scales and prove that he probably had lung cancer? we overwhelmingly did that. not only that, it was undisputed, unrebutted evidence in this case that the cigarettes, the brands of cigarettes that he smoked that were manufactured by these defendants were the but for cause of his lung cancer. they brought you nothing to rebut that testimony from dr. ruckdeschel and dr. burns, 4492 nothing. engle class membership, it is specifically about -- you got 12 questions on this verdict form. the first three questions are class membership. it is specifically about was he addicted and did his addiction cause his death from lung cancer. and so the first question is: did he have lung cancer? and what was the evidence on that? you recall dr. ruckdeschel was the first live witness we called in this case, an international authority on lung cancer. a former ceo of moffitt, he ran the place for 15 years and turned it into an internationally recognized cancer center. very different from when he arrived there. he has written hundreds of peer-reviewed articles on lung cancer. and he teaches other physicians how to diagnosis and treat it. and what did he tell you? the first thing is, a single solitary mass in the lung. that is the presentation of primary lung cancer. and that is what mr. duignan had. a great big tennis-ball size mass in his right lung. not a bunch of different spots, a bunch of different 4493 nodules in the lung, like a shotgun, because that would be the presentation of cancer that had metastasized to the lung. what mr. duignan had was a single solitary mass, that is the presentation for primary lung cancer. and then he told you about the associated hilar lymph nodes, right here in the mediastinum. that is where primary lung cancer first spreads to is the hilar lymph nodes. and he had the enlarged hilar lymph nodes that were associated with that mass. it is described on the ct scan of his chest that was done on september 22nd, 1992. and he had brain metastasis. dr. ruckdeschel explained that brain metastasis is common with lung cancer patients. and he also had bone metastasis. lung cancer commonly spreads to the bone. and he had it in his left hemipelvis and he had it in the skull. and once it spreads like that, you remember dr. ruckdeschel talked about it being like ants, these cancer cells are like ants, and they can go anywhere in the body. he talked to you about it can go to the thumb, it can go to your inguinal lymph node, it can go 4494 into your mesentery, which mr. duignan had it right by that left hemipelvis where he had the bone metastasis. and if he could not access the lung mass on the bronchoscopy because tube could not turn the corner and reach back there to it, which happened here, you do the thing that is the easiest and carries the least risk to the patient, and that is instead of opening their chest and trying to get a piece of the tumor that way, or taking a big needle and sticking it through the chest wall into the tumor, you just go and get a twofer down here at the inguinal lymph node. it is easily accessible and it and carries the least risk for the patient. and that is what they did. they determined that he not only had adenocarcinoma, but it had spread to that lymph node that is in his groin. and when they did that, the doctors tell us after they did that that it was lung cancer. and dr. ruckdeschel testified to you there was not any doubt. so september 18, 1992, operative report by dr. iyer. dr. iyer's the surgeon that does the 4495 procedure. he cut out the lymph node, he sent it to pathology, and he waited for the pathologist to tell him about the frozen section and what that pathologist thought it showed. and what does it say? frozen section report revealed large cell carcinoma, metastatic to the lymph nodes with lung primary. he was told it was a lung primary. and then he noted that in the progress note after he did this op note. left groin lymph node, exhibition biopsy performed. large cell carcinoma consistent with lung primary. and withstood procedure well. and what is the next day? dr. parikh, the neurologist that was evaluating mr. duignan for the intractable, horrible pain that he presented to the hospital with that no one had been able to figure out. and dr. parikh tells us, the patient probably has cancer of the lung with mass to the brain. dr. rao, the medical oncologist, the cancer doctor, he tells us his impression was possible lung primary with metastasis is most 4496 probable. and then he says there, other etiologies or causes include large cell lymphoma or extragonadal germ cell tumor with widespread disease. now, you have heard the testimony not only from dr. brant, the treating radiation oncologist, but also from dr. ruckdeschel on this issue. he had a 42-year-old man with a great big mass in his lung that can either be lung cancer, lymphoma, or an extragonadal germ cell tumor. what can you cure him from, because he is got a brain metastasis, bone metastasis, and a lymph node with cancer in it. and so what are they hoping for, for a 42-year-old man with a 39-year-old wife and two kids? they are hoping for something they can cure. they can cure lymphoma; they can cure a germ cell. and so they did the special stains on that, and unfortunately for mr. duignan, those stains came back showing that it was not lymphoma and that it was not a germ cell tumor. he had lung cancer. he had widespread metastasis, which means he could not be cured. dr. rao has then a progress note where he talks about discussing the case with dr. shah, 4497 pulmonologist. and he appreciates dr. shah's notes and he discussed the case with him. so far metastatic carcinoma appears to be the diagnosis, primary is probably the lung. and then he refers to the official path report, not the frozen section that dr. iyer got during the biopsy procedure, but the permanent sections where they embed the tissue in wax and they slice it up and put it on a slide, and that takes a couple of days, and they are going to do these special stains. and he is talking about that. the official path report and serum tumor markers are pending. in the meanwhile, the patient is going to be referred for radiation therapy for the whole brain. referred for radiation therapy, dr. brant, whose deposition we read to you. what does dr. brant say when he sees mr. duignan on september 23rd, 1992? he thanks dr. rao for referring him to him, and it is widely metastatic adenocarcinoma with brain metastases. and he says, "it is my impression the patient has widely metastatic adenocarcinoma, probable lung primary." and he 4498 also had the symptomatic brain metastases that was causing the shrinkage of his left arm and his left leg and that pain he was having. now, the defense wants to show you what dr. brant wrote in a letter a few months later. and dr. brant testified under oath that he worded that letter that way, because dr. rao had been looking for these lymphomas and these germ cell tumors, and so he put "undetermined primary" in that letter because he did not want to offend dr. rao because he was new in town and dr. rao sends him patients. what did dr. brant say about whether this was primary lung cancer or not? "there is not any doubt. i see patients every day where the bronchoscopy is negative and the people have lung cancer. there is no question in my mind. i say probable he had lung cancer." he had a big mass in his lung, it metastasized. everything fits. just like dr. ruckdeschel talked about. "i thought he had primary lung cancer, metastatic. it is obvious he had lung cancer. it is extremely clear in retrospect that what he had was metastatic lung cancer. it was very 4499 clear that he had lung cancer. there is no doubt. arguing this point is ridiculous. my opinion is that the patient had lung cancer and died from it." what does dr. rao's progress note tell us? september 26th, brain and bone mets from adenocarcinoma of the lung. and then after he got in hospice and dr. roberts is following him at home and making notes, terminal lung cancer with mets to the bone. he had lung cancer. and then dr. roberts, after all the dust settles, dr. roberts has to certify the diagnosis on october the 20th for the hospital to know how to bill for the things that were done, and he tells you, the principal diagnosis, what brought him to the hospital, as dr. burns explained to you, was the terrible intractable pain that he had been having, and that was caused by a secondary malignant neoplasm of the brain and spinal cord. but the secondary diagnoses, the underlying reason was malignant neoplasm of the bronchus or lung, and then he had secondary malignant neoplasm of the bone and bone marrow, 4500 and he had a malignant neoplasm, secondary malignant neoplasm of the lymph nodes of the inguinal region. we know that because he had that procedure where they took it out and they tested it. this was -- this was weeks after the dust had settled. and what was the diagnosis at that point? lung cancer. primary lung cancer. and when he passed away, dr. roberts, consistent with all the other medical records in the case and the opinions of the treaters, says, "lung cancer due to cigarette smoking." now, the defendant comes and says, well, it could have been colon cancer. and what do we know about that? there is not any physician, you have got the medical records over there, both of us put medical records in evidence. no one is saying he had colon cancer, no one. dr. chirieac, their own expert, did not say he probably had colon cancer. he actually said he probably had lung cancer. and the defense concedes, they brought an expert, dr. chirieac, who conceded it may be primary lung cancer. most of the time when somebody goes and they have an unknown primary 4501 and they determine subsequently what the primary site is, more often than any other cancer, it turns out to be a lung primary. and he agreed with that. and he is not telling you all that this is not a lung primary. then what does he tell us? he concedes that it presented like lung cancer. "and you learned, though, doctor, and the films show multiple spots in the lung, that is more suggestive with a cancer that has metastasized to the lung, you learned that, right?" and he agreed. "and in this case, it is described as a large mass." and he agreed with that. and then he had -- he had to be shown his testimony. "have you ever learned that a single solid mass in the lung is more consistent with lung primary?" and his answer was: "it is more suggestive, yes." he admitted it presented like a lung primary. but there is more. "and if it is primary lung cancer, we know the first place it goes is the hilar or the mediastinal lymph nodes, correct?" the first is hilar. he agreed, it goes to 4502 mediastinum. it can also go to the brain first. well, classic lung cancer, as he admitted, metastasizes to the brain, and the ct showed that mr. duignan had brain metastasis. and it also spreads to the bone, lung cancer does, and the bone scans show that he had two bone metastases. it presented like primary lung cancer. the defense expert conceded that. he also conceded that it is probably lung cancer. "your opinion is that although it is probably lung cancer, it could be something else?" that is what he admitted. and he said the only other organ it could be from that he can tell you of is the colon, which nobody said it came from. but what does the defense expert tell you about the colon? he concedes that this presentation is inconsistent with colon cancer. he discontinued both of the medications. remember, there was that reference when he was in hospice and he is taking the nonsteroidal antiinflammatories, and he had some bleeding, and he canceled those medications. he had no more bleeding after that. 4503 dr. chirieac agreed with that. stopping voltaren and the other nonsteroidal antiinflammatory is not going to make colon cancer bleeding go away. he did not have colon cancer causing bleeding. and we learned that most cases of liver metastasis develop from colon or rectal cancer. 60 to seventy percent of people with colorectal cancer eventually develop a liver tumor. and here we have mr. duignan with widespread metastasis, but nothing in his liver. that is inconsistent with colon cancer. and then we go to the last slide on this. he had no liver metastasis from colon cancer, and not one doctor who ever saw him diagnosed him with colon cancer. and nobody did it in here either. he did not have colon cancer. he had lung cancer. now, we are required to prove this, this first question: did he have primary lung cancer? and we have to prove it by the greater weight of the evidence. and the greater weight of the evidence is clear that he probably had lung cancer. those were the final diagnoses of his doctors. it was the final opinion of 4504 dr. brant and dr. roberts and dr. rao and the rest. and you have to evaluate the testimony that you have heard here. the court gave you an instruction about believability of witnesses and expert witnesses. you should consider the demeanor of the witness while testifying and the frankness or lack of frankness of the witness. as you consider that, and it is not fun, it does not feel good, but the defense expert, dr. chirieac, he had to be impeached with his prior testimony ten times when he came here and testified to y'all. that means he went to his deposition, he swore to tell the truth, and he said what we understood to be the truth of his opinions, and then he came here and he told you all something different from what he said earlier. and we have to impeach him with it, and it is not fun. but he had to be impeached on basic things. first, the fact that he has to rely on pulmonologists and oncologists to help make diagnoses of patients like this, he would not admit that here. he said it was illegal for 4505 them to make these diagnoses. and then he had to admit, yeah, i do have to rely on them. he had to be shown his prior testimony so that he would admit that to you here. he had to be impeached about admitting that mr. duignan's treating doctors diagnosed him with lung cancer. he had to be impeached about that. he had to be impeached about the fact that a single solid mass in the lung suggested it is a lung primary. he would not admit that to you until we showed him what he said before the trial. and we had to force him to admit that it was probably lung cancer. we brought you dr. ruckdeschel and we brought you dr. burns, and they were not impeached even one time. dr. chirieac had to be forced to admit what he testified to earlier ten times, and it is important to evaluate that and evaluate -- not whether he is got good training and works at a good place, but whether you can believe what he says over dr. ruckdeschel and dr. burns. ask yourself if you can really do that, given his demeanor here, his lack of frankness he 4506 showed, and how he had to be shown over and over again, you are saying something different today than you said. so the plaintiff we would submit clearly satisfied our burden of proof that he had primary lung cancer. dr. ruckdeschel, dr. burns, dr. parikh, dr. brant, dr. iyer, dr. roberts, dr. rao, dr. shah. and dependent on the version of dr. chirieac you believe on direct, he said he was not sure. and then on cross, he admitted it was probably lung cancer, which i showed you. it was undisputed, unrebutted testimony that mr. duignan's history of smoking one to two packs a day for 30 years since the age of 12 was the cause of his lung cancer, the defendants' brands of cigarettes that were testified to about here. so we would submit that your answer to question number 1 should be yes. if you answer no, the case is over. it is over for the duignans. if you answer yes, you move on to questions 2 and 3, which have to do with addiction and legal cause. question number 2, was he addicted to 4507 cigarettes containing nicotine, he clearly was. we will talk about that in a minute. and then was an addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine a legal cause of douglas duignan's lung cancer and death? now, notice the question there is was his addiction a legal cause, not the legal cause. because that is important because the question on the verdict form, just like the jury instructions that y'all are going to take back in the room with you when you deliberate, the jury instructions and this question tell you that mr. duignan's addiction does not have to be the only cause of his lung cancer and death. his addiction can be one of many causes of his death. his addiction to nicotine is one of the legal causes. reynolds' and philip morris' concealment of the health effects and addictive nature of cigarettes is another cause. their negligence, their defective products. reynolds' and philip morris' conspiracy with other companies to hide what they knew about cigarettes. those things make a difference. it was unrebutted, undisputed testimony in this 4508 case that addicted smokers receive those messages differently than those of us that are not addicted smokers. and the defendants knew that, and that is what their whole program was about. so the jury instructions recognize that these things can work together to contribute substantially to mr. duignan's death. the addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine need not be the only cause. it can operate in conjunction with other forces because the law recognizes the complexity of the world that we live in. very rarely do things like this happen based on just one event or one force. usually it is a number of things that operate together that produce an event that takes somebody's life like this. and our law recognizes that. so you will get the legal cause instruction that goes with the one i just showed you. addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine was a legal cause of lung cancer in mr. duignan if it directly and in natural and continuous sequence produced or contributes substantially to producing lung cancer so that it can be said 4509 that but for the addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine, the lung cancer would not have occurred. contributes substantially. did the addiction play an important role in his continued smoking in getting lung cancer? and then but for the addiction, if he was not addicted to nicotine, would he have smoked one or two packs or more a day for 30 years, would he have he done that? if he were not addicted, would he have exposed himself to the dozens of carcinogens in cigarette smoke every time he took a draw, day after day, hundreds of times a day for 30 years. that is what addiction does. defendants knew that nicotine was what kept addicted smokers smoking. 1963, r.j. reynolds, was brown & williamson, but brown & williamson is a part of reynolds now. "nicotine is addictive. we are then in the business of selling nicotine, an addictive drug effective in the release of stress mechanism." 1972, r.j. reynolds. "for the typical smoker, nicotine satisfaction is a dominant desire. therefore, in designing any cigarette 4510 product, the dominant specification should be nicotine delivery." they ain't talking about the taste of a turkish blend, a camel cigarette, they are talking about the reason why people do this over and over and over again every day. 1972, r.j. reynolds. "tobacco products contain and deliver nicotine, a potent drug with a variety of physiological effects. our industry is based upon design, manufacture and sale of attractive dosage forms of nicotine." not on taste. not on taste. on nicotine. what does philip morris tell us? 1977, they dehumanize smokers when they study the effect of nicotine. "we provide a product that is an essential commodity and habitual act. put a hungry rat in a cage, put a lever in the cage, the rat will push the lever. smoking the cigarette is the lever press." hard to forget that. were these defendants wrong when they said these things in their secret confidential company documents? you know they were not. ironic twist, everything they said to themselves in these secret documents that no one saw until the end 4511 of the 20th century, years after doug duignan died, everything they said to themselves was true, and everything that they said to the public was a lie. everything. was medical science wrong when they found changes that take place in addicted smokers' brains compared with people that are not addicted? we know they were not wrong. they did not even challenge this. the defendants knew that addiction interfered with choice. 1967, the federal trade commission commented on it. "there is no indication in any advertisement that after a person smokes cigarettes regularly for a while, smoking is no longer a matter of choice for him but becomes a matter of need." down at the bottom, 1989, surgeon general report: "these two factors refute the argument that smoking is a matter of free choice. most smokers start smoking as teenagers and then become addicted." and while the '67 ftc report, which is in evidence, contains all kinds of things -- well, that is in evidence, and the 1989 surgeon 4512 general report is in evidence. and they make important statements, and they are very meaningful, the things that they say, but most powerful statement here is the one made by the tobacco institute, bought and paid for and conspired with by these defendants. and what does the tobacco institute say? "cigarette smoking is more addictive than using heroin, hooking two-thirds of the people who ever smoke. we cannot defend continued smoking as free choice if the person was addicted." they knew. that was 1980. they knew. and the truth of it is borne out in what happens in the world out there when addicted smokers try to quit. because motivated smokers, smokers who want to quit, 68.8 percent, and then smokers who try to quit, 52.4 percent, only 3 percent of them are successful long term. in any given year, 3 percent. just like the tobacco institute said in turn, it is a powerful addiction and it is not a free choice once you are addicted. and the nida definition that dr. burns showed to you about addiction talks about that very thing, 4513 addiction is defined as a chronic relapsing disease that is characterized by compulsive drug seeking and use despite harm and consequences. and what did you hear about in this trial about douglas duignan? you saw the definition of nicotine addiction. he started when he was 12 to 14, he developed that addiction before he ever went and got incarcerated. he smoked one to two packs a day for 30 years. he chain smoked at times. one to two packs a day, 20 cigarettes in a pack, about ten draws on a cigarette, according to the defense expert yesterday, that is 200 doses a day of nicotine, and with that comes all those carcinogens. you smoke for the nicotine, but you get the cancer. he smoked in bed. he fell asleep on the couch while smoking and burned the furniture, destroyed a bed doing that. woke up in the middle of the night to smoke. smoked first thing in the morning. his life revolved around avoiding places he could not smoke. he could not sit through a movie that he paid for without going out and smoking. tried quitting cold turkey numerous times. 4514 martha testified it was three to four times a year for years in the '80s. tried a special filter that he bought at the store to stick his cigarette in, to wean himself off cigarettes. tried reducing the smoke using that wind-up timer, one cigarette an hour. smoked the butts out of the ashtrays when he ran out of cigarettes. would search for money under the couch when he ran out, and he had all the withdrawal symptoms that are listed even in the defense manual that they brought you. he had them all, nervous, irritable, argumentative, grouchy, frustrated, fidgety, he had difficulty concentrating and trouble sleeping when he was trying to quit. he switched to light cigarettes because he thought they were safer. he continued smoking even after being diagnosed with cancer. and then when he was dying in hospice, and he is not even responsive to people, he is reaching for cigarettes, reaching next to his bed where they have always been there, where they have always been in his pocket. it was unrebutted, undisputed testimony in 4515 this case. and when someone starts smoking cigarettes at 12, 13, 14 years old, when they develop an addiction in that developing brain, you know, our kids grow up like weeds in front of us and the last thing that fully develops is our brain. as a male i can tell you, i'm a different person today than i was when i was 22. and that is the way our brain development works, it takes longer. and when these kids, 12, 13, 14 develop addictions to nicotine, or any other addictive drug, it changes the structure of their brain. undisputed, unrebutted testimony that that results in a stronger addiction throughout their life. and that was doug duignan. so they brought you a dr. rosman. and he went through the criteria that he uses, that dsm criteria, with almost no explanation as to why he said mr. duignan did not meet a single criteria in the dsm. and then you find out the truth. he is not even using the criteria right. we had to impeach him with the american psychiatric association manual on how to use and grade 4516 people using that criteria. and when they gave examples of it, the examples they gave were doug duignan. but every criteria he just said -- and you only need three to be addicted on the dsm criteria, and he had all seven. he had tolerance, he had withdrawal, he took the substance in larger amounts or over a longer period than he initially intended, persistent desire or unsuccessful efforts to cut down or control it, a great deal of time is spent in activities necessary to obtain or use the substance, important social, occupational and recreational activities are given up or reduced because of substance use. and he continued the substance use despite knowledge of having a persistent or recurrent physical or psychological problem. he smoked until he died. he had lung cancer and he was going to die and he continued smoking and it is in the medical records. that is nicotine addiction. they brought someone that they proposed was an addiction expert who did not even attempt to talk with you about the mechanics of addiction, the 4517 physiology of addiction, the power of addiction, especially in people who start when they are kids. the permanent changes to the brain caused by nicotine addiction. it was -- it was -- it was unrebutted, undisputed evidence in this case that the false statements by these defendants, the lies they told have a different affect on addicted smokers than non-addicted smokers. and then when they tried to cross examine dr. burns, who writes the textbook chapters on nicotine addiction in internal medicine textbooks that are used by people training to become doctor and once they become doctors it is on the shelf. he wrote those chapters. he has been involved in every surgeon general's report since 1975. unimpeachable, background, credibility. someone who really knows about nicotine addiction, and they cross examined him with dr. koop's website. turns out it was not written by dr. koop. well, what does it say? research scientists recently found there is something in just the smoke from cigarettes separate from the nicotine that reduces the mao inhibitors 4518 that dr. burns talked to you all about that. reduces the mao inhibitors that metabolize dopamine, and thus, increases the level of dopamine in a smoker's brain. and it makes smoking tobacco even more addictive. douglas duignan smoked because he was addicted to nicotine and it is what made him struggle to quit. one to two packs a day, comes out to seven to 14,000 cigarettes in a year. 219 to 438,000 cigarettes over his lifetime, and the exposures, the doses, day after day after day, 2 to 4 million, 2 to 4 million lifetime doses of nicotine and carcinogens. so as -- as the defense expert yesterday, it takes about ten minutes or so to smoke a cigarette, maybe less. and if you smoke 20 cigarettes a day, that is 200 minutes a day spent smoking, 400 minutes a day if you smoke two packs a day. mr. paige talked with the defense expert said if you locked him in a room and had him smoke all these cigarettes, it would take him between 6 and 12 years or 9 and 12 years, if you remember that. well, what does that mean 4519 on a daily basis? that is 200 to 400 minutes a day smoking, three and a half to six and a half hours a day he spent smoking cigarettes. the only thing douglas duignan did, more than smoke, was work. and they said that he was not addicted. there was no evidence in this case that doug duignan was somehow immune to the addictive effects of nicotine. none. the evidence was he craved it. it was all he thought about when he was not using it. and he exhibited withdrawal symptoms when he did not get it. a grown man that was so desperate for nicotine he would smoke the butts out of an ashtray if he ran out of cigarettes. and what did the defense addiction expert tell you about that? he would look for some unused portions of cigarettes just to have some nicotine in his system until he could afford it. that is addiction. he would smoke dirty cigarettes out of a dirty ashtray just to get some nicotine in his system until he could afford to buy a pack cigarettes. if you replace the word nicotine with cocaine or 4520 heroin or methamphetamine or crack cocaine -- mr. ware: objection, your honor. the court: approach. the court: state your objection. mr. ware: my objection is this was specifically brought up by the court, as i understand it. this comparative to cocaine, heroin, so forth are drugs. mr. williams: rjr objects. it is inflammatory. the court reporter: i cannot hear you. the court: she cannot -- she did not hear you. oops, let us see. i think she is missing -- come a little closer if you want to say that. i'm looking for my notes in the order in limine. you are saying there was an order in limine? was it a motion in limine? mr. michael: i'm not sure. it was not a specific order in limine, but your honor said that you do not want references to crack and other -- the court: that was in the expert testimony as far as the term "freebasing." i 4521 think the point that was being made was the relative addictiveness of this substance compared to other substances. i think that is a valid point to be made. i think there is evidence about it and i'm going to allow it. (sidebar concluded.) mr. gustafson: may i, your honor? the court: please. mr. gustafson: thank you. please the court. so if you took this statement and you replace the word nicotine with any other addictive drug that is been talked about in their own documents, heroin, cocaine, we would not even be having this conversation. he was rummaging around in the trash to get heroin, he was rummaging around in the trash to get some cocaine that he needed to have in his system until he could afford to buy it, then we would not be talking about whether he was addicted or not. these nicotine people think a little differently about it because you can go buy it at the winn-dixie or at a gas station or whatever. it is just as addictive as the 4522 others. and we know that when he was a teenager he was so desperate for nicotine, when he was incarcerated he hand rolled and smoked that nasty tobacco from the tin that he could not stand because it was all he could get. it is something that he did not even like, because it was all he could get. and it is the repeat, daily repetitive dosing to get nicotine, and with that comes 70 carcinogens every time you draw a hit. that is how nicotine addiction causes lung cancer. addicted smokers do not wake up in the morning and forget to light up a cigarette. it is part of what they do, it becomes who they are, because of the changes in their brain. addiction is what drives that behavior. and the surgeon general talked about it. it is the primary reason for why people smoke. "nicotine addiction is the fundamental reason that individuals persist in using tobacco products, and this persistent tobacco use contributes to many diseases described in this report." what did the defense addiction expert have 4523 to say about that? he does not agree with it. that addiction does not make people use the thing they are addicted to. it is an extreme position. how does nicotine addiction cause disease? it causes the repetitive use, and this has been described in the schematic on the surgeon general's report and then surgeon general koop described this, how nicotine addiction causes disease back in 1988. (a video clip was played and transcribed as follows:) we should also give priority to the one addiction, tobacco addiction, that is killing more than 300,000 americans each year. (the video clip concluded.) mr. gustafson: and philip morris usa incorporated and r.j. reynolds tobacco company knew about it a long time before c. everett koop said it in 1988. philip morris, in 1977, "without the chemical compound, the cigarette market would collapse and philip morris would collapse and we would all lose our jobs and our consulting fees." r.j. reynolds in 1982, "we cannot ever be 4524 comfortable selling a product which most of our customers would stop using if they could. that is to say, if the exit gate from our market should suddenly open, we could be out of business almost overnight." of course their secret documents are right. they are right about nicotine being addictive. they were right about why people cannot stop. they were right about causing cancer. addiction is what caused doug duignan to smoke until he got sick from it and died of lung cancer. without nicotine addiction that does not happen. without nicotine addiction he quits. he does not fail repeatedly in his quit attempts. philip morris and r.j. reynolds, they know this to be true. they always knew it to be true, and they know it today. and they knew it years before doug duignan died. when you get to questions two and three on the verdict form, we would ask you to check "yes" on both of these. it is clear that he was addicted and it is clear that the nicotine addiction is what caused his death from lung cancer. 4525 he had primary lung cancer caused by repeated daily dosing of carcinogens if his quest to keep nicotine in his system. the nicotine that he craved and was addicted to. if you check "yes," he is a member of the engle class. if you check "no" on any of those first three questions, this case is over, and r.j. reynolds and philip morris get to go away free. a "yes" answer means the engle findings apply. smoking cigarettes causes lung cancer, adenocarcinoma of the lung, large cell carcinoma, small cell carcinoma, squamous cell carcinoma, the four different cell types of lung cancer. and certain other smoking-related diseases. nicotine in cigarettes is addictive. reynolds and philip morris placed cigarettes on the market that were defective and unreasonably dangerous. reynolds and philip morris concealed or omitted material information not otherwise known or available, knowing that the material was false or misleading, or failed to disclose a material fact concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking 4526 cigarettes or both. and reynolds and philip morris agreed with other companies, conspired with other companies, and the council for tobacco research and the tobacco institute to conceal or omit information regarding the health effects of cigarettes or their addictive nature with the intention that smokers in the public would rely on this information to their detriment. that was their plan. and r.j. reynolds and philip morris sold or supplied cigarettes that were defective and r.j. reynolds and philip morris are both negligent. these findings, once he is a member of the engle class by your verdict, these findings apply to this case, to doug duignan, to his family, to philip morris usa incorporated, to r.j. reynolds tobacco company, to everybody, the court, and the government. it is binding on everyone. this is one of those stories that has only one side. they did what they did for money. it did not matter who died, it did not matter how many, so long as they keep their money. and that is where y'all come in because this is a 4527 reckoning. your verdict is a reckoning. by your verdict you bear witness to what they did. what you do here matters. mr. paige is going to address the remainder of the issues. thank you for your patience with me. closing statement mr. paige: good morning. so following up on what jimmy said, again, thank you all for being here. it does not seem like that long ago, though we have been here a long time, right. you have heard a lot of evidence and you guys have been attentive and listening and i know some of it has been repetitive, but it seems like if you think about the timeline, it seems like yesterday we were in that big jury room downstairs and all those people, and then you are the seven who really got the privilege to be here and listen to this because now, you know, over our lives and how we live everybody thinks that they know a lot about smoking and health and cigarette industries and i would imagine if you all, you know, learned a lot in this trial about what happened and why we are here and how important these cases are. and this case is important. and we know that you all have your own lives and you have important things going on in your lives. you 4532 have your own jobs and families and the fact that you have been here paying attention and listening is important. and, you know, it is a privilege for me to be here before you all. you all do not know me and i do not know you and it is an important case and what you are going to do is here important. and so following up on what jimmy talked about, i'm going to be talking about punitive damages is one of the things i'll talk about. punish. holding them accountable for their lyings, you know, for what they did to people. intentionally for money, for profit, profit over human lives and there is a book that many of you may know it, but it is everything i know -- "everything i need to know i learned in kindergarten." okay. be nice to people. do not lie to people. do not hurt people. they did everything they should not do. and when you do that, in society, they can say smoking is a legal product. nobody's going to jail for it. this is a civil case. and in a civil society when you do the things they do, you have to be held accountable. and the way to hold them accountable -- you know, when mrs. duignan 4533 testified they said, you remember the defense witness said -- he started out happy birthday, and then he went into all the -- scenes that happened in their lives that he overcame. and douglas duignan, he did make mistakes and he did go to jail for thee years when he was a kid. and you know what, he was -- i told you in opening statement you will meet these people. they are nice people. they are good people. he was a good man. mr. ware: objection, your honor. the court: come on up. mr. ware: i object to counsel's testifying about the character of the plaintiff and his family in this case and i move for a mistrial on that basis. the court: i think that is ridiculous. that is denied. i want to tell you all that in florida practice, it is considered extremely bad form to interrupt a closing argument. and i do not want to consider any marginal kind of objections that are made, you know -- if you need to make it for the record in your 4534 professional judgment do so, but -- mr. ware: your honor, i try to be very restrained in this respect. this is twice. mr. michael: and in like two hours. if i can just state one sentence of the grounds. your honor excluded kevin duignan's felony conviction, and counsel has now just argued to the jury that there is been no evidence but that this is a good family. that is excluding evidence and using it against us. the court: let me just read. it is certainly -- certainly off task. people -- they are nice people. they are good people. he was a good man. that is fair argument. mr. paige: thank you, your honor. the court: but it is time to get to the point. mr. paige: thank you. mr. williams: your honor, this all came up afterwards when, you know, when mr. gustafson was finished. the court: okay. understood. (sidebar concluded.) mr. paige: okay. so anyway, i was going 4535 to talk about punishment. and one of the things -- and i'm going to talk about something first, but i just want to say that punishment, when you decide punishment, you have to consider what they did, right? and one of the things that the judge has instructed you, that you will see that you have to consider, is the reprehensibility of their actions. how bad was it what they did? reprehensibility. think about it. we have talked about these numbers. and you probably get numb to it 500,000 people died a year. 30 million people. and these are just numbers. it is numbing after a while. but if you think about it, if you sit there and think about how many people that is every day over 30 years when ninety percent of them are starting as teenagers, there is nothing more reprehensible. and so at some point, when i get to the -- i'm going to talk about punitive damages and why you all -- why it is so important that you have the power and the responsibility to really judge what they did and let them know that. in opening statement, i think mr. ware said that they made a few wrong-headed 4536 statements. this was not a few wrong-headed statements. this was a massive conspiracy for 50 years by grown men who were making money and they did not care about other people. and that is -- in a civil society, that is not right. that is not right, that is not nice, it is not nice to do to other people, and it is wrong. and they have to be held accountable. now, so the first thing i want to talk about is apportionment of fault. and i want to be clear about this. because we did admit in our pleadings that doug duignan bears partial responsibility. and i want to be clear with you all what that means and what we are admitting and how that applies in this case because there are several claims. so there are claims for fraud in this case, the conspiracy, the concealment. and in a fraud claim, when somebody does something intentionally, on purpose, to hurt other people, the law does not -- we do not have to -- you do not have to apportion fault. it does not permit that. so we are not admitting partial responsibility in combination with the fraud. if you find for us on the fraud claims, which 4537 are very important, the court will not under florida law reduce those damages or reduce the percentage of fault. but for the negligence, the strict liability claims, the defective product, for their carelessness, we admit in combination with what they did, that doug duignan does bear partial responsibility. but what he bears partial responsibility for i want to -- you have to remember, the judge instructed you what is negligence. you know, you are going judge his negligence. what would a reasonable person do under similar circumstances, right? so we do not judge him on the standards today what we -- what people teach their children today or how people act today, it is back -- we have to go back to 1950. and again, if you think in time how long ago 1950 was to us today, if you think about when doug duignan was born, if you go back 50 years when he was born, you are going back to a point in time when there were only 140 cases of lung cancer in the world. nobody was smoking inhalable cigarettes. they were not even around. there was no death. there was no lung 4538 cancer. there are reasonable alternatives to cigarettes. there -- when you have inhalability and nicotine addiction and youth smoking and so on, you have a problem. but when doug duignan was born in 1950, it was a different world. so when you compare his fault, you know, i just want to be clear, he started as a kid. he was 12 years old. that was normal back then. you know, he became an addict. he tried to quit over time. and later in life, later in life when he failed, when he was trying, we admit, and i think i said in opening statement, if somebody tries five times, it is natural to think they should have tried six times. if they tried ten times, they should try 12 times. whatever it is. you can never try enough. you know what, if he had more time, probably he would have succeeded, because we know over time fifty percent of people do succeed. they do succeed over time that you keep trying. and he was so young. he was so young when he got cancer, so young when he died, and he was trying. 4539 but when he was born, he was growing up, in the world he lived in, you consider his negligence, his carelessness. everybody was smoking. doctors were smoking, patients were smoking, athletes were smoking. famous athletes. you know, this is in 1960. len dawson, super bowl i. so when you are judging doug duignan, his share of responsibility, what did he do wrong, when you compare it to their negligence, their carelessness, their defective product, i submit to you, early on in the 1960s, in the 1970s, he was doing what everybody else was doing. doctors were smoking, teachers were smoking, astronauts were smoking. all the kids in the neighborhood were smoking. more doctors -- fifty percent of doctors were smoking. he is a kid with an eighth grade education. in fact, he is a kid, when you talk about targeting people, he needed to be educated. and you have to go like, what did he know? what did he know? did he know more than doctors and astronauts? he was doing what everyone was doing. so i submit to you, early on, in the '50s, 4540 '60s, the '70s, he was not doing anything that he -- he was doing what they wanted him to do. he was doing what they wanted him to do. he was smoking. you know, they had warnings on the packages. sure they did. they were mandated to put warnings on, caution, it may be hazardous, it is not dangerous. it was not until 1985, not until 1985 that they even warned on the pack that smoking causes lung cancer. so as jimmy said in opening, this was the culture that they wanted. you know, they wanted people to smoke. they paid a lot of money for it, $250 billion, $250 billion creating this culture of people smoking. you know, back then fifty percent of people smoked. now it is 15 percent. it is going down. you have seen the lines. and it is going to keep going down. and that is a good thing, right? but he got caught up in the middle of it. they were spending $10 million every day, every day, to create this culture. $10 million a day, every day. that is what they spent to get people smoking. ninety percent of them start as 4541 teenagers. and they say, you know, we did not -- you cannot prove that he smoked because of an advertisement. and we cannot. you have to use your judgment. your judgment. what do you think happened? they did not like the stepfather. the brother said that he hit them. they did not want to be like him. they were not trying to be like the stepfather. they just wanted to be like everybody else. everybody else was smoking. people they looked up to. famous athletes. famous movie stars. they watched the flintstones, and they smoked. so to say that they had nothing to do with it, to believe -- and maybe they do believe they had nothing to do with it, but it does not make sense. and here are some of the advertisements of his time, very different than what we have on tv now. (a video clip was played and transcribed as follows:) narrator: what cigarette do you smoke? you will be interested to know how the doctors of 4542 america answered that question. doctors in every branch of medicine were asked, what cigarette -- you will feel better. female speaker: did you say i'll feel better smoking philip morris? narrator: yes, you will feel better. singers: do not miss the fun of smoking, do not miss the fun of smoking. barney rubble: let us take a winston break. fred flintstone: that is it. winston is the one filter cigarette that delivers flavor 20 times a pack. winston's got that filter blend. barney rubble: yeah, fred. unidentified speaker: marlboro. the man who knows filters knows that cellulose acetate is the modern effective filter for cigarettes. this is the unfinished cellulose acetate that goes into the filter of just one marlboro, and these finely spun filaments smooth out the smoke and round out the taste. singers: a lot to like with a marlboro. filter, filter, flavor, flavor, pack or box. 4543 (video clip concluded.) mr. paige: and he smoked filters, and he told his family that he thought they were safer. why would not he? why would not he? and there are some of the advertisements from the cigarettes he smoked. he smoked primarily philip morris brand. that was not -- that was his main brand, his favorite brand. but he smoked these other brands from r.j. reynolds. he started out smoking tareyton. that is what his brother testified to. he smoked camel when he was younger. that is an r.j. reynolds brand. he smoked doral lights the last couple of years of his life. all these brands, whether they were philip morris or r.j. reynolds, they all had these filters that were supposed to be safer. so when you are comparing, you know, you all are learning things now, the surgeon general did not come out until 2010, and i'm going to go over that report and talk about how filters and lights are not safer, but when you are comparing his fault, what did he do wrong, what did he know, what did he know as a 12 year old, as a 22 year old, with an eighth 4544 grade education who was trying his best. he was a good father to his kids. he was smoking filters and lights. if you compare that fault to their defective product and their negligence, i submit to you, they bear a big part of responsibility, each of them. you know, r.j. reynolds is three companies. they are r.j. reynolds, brown & williamson, american tobacco, philip morris. and then you have doug duignan, with an eighth grade education, who is doing the best he can. and then this is marlboro. we know the marlboro story. you saw the long video, but i'm going to play a short one to show how normal it was and how people just like doug were switching over to marlboro. (a video clip was played and transcribed as follows:) narrator: television advertising of cigarettes ended in the u.s. in 1971, but marlboro made a smooth transition to print and outdoor advertising. this successful transition was largely due to the death of the 4545 marlboro country idea. over the years, marlboro smokers have recognized the quality of marlboro and its leadership position resulting in continued growth. in 1955, marlboro sales in the united states were a modest 6 billion. however, within only one year, volume nearly tripled and marlboro sales to smokers took off domestically. marlboro is far and away the leader in the cigarette industry, and the trend is continually upward. in 1990, marlboro sold more than 344 billion cigarettes worldwide. marlboro is marketed in more than 150 nations and territories, making it the most widely distributed consumer packaged goods product in the world. as early as 1954, philip morris' management recognized the potential of marketing a filter cigarette. in much the same manner, line extensions such as marlboro lights have taken advantage of changing tastes and attitudes of smokers to build the brand. marlboro was among the first to introduce 4546 a lights line extension, and this kind of aggressive marketing has paid off as marlboro lights has grown to become a significant part of the marlboro business. (video clip concluded.) mr. paige: so can you show the chart? so here we have this chart, and you look at how the consumption, how the sales were increasing. you know, from 1950 when he was born, to the 1960s when he was a teenager, through the 1970s. and it does not start to go down until about 1982 is when the consumption starts going down. and we will talk about how it could have gone down earlier in 1953. but in 1982 is when people really started quitting more. and, you know, you ask yourself, and you can ask me, and it is a fair question, he knew at some point, at some point he knew smoking was bad, right? and that is a fair question. but what did he know? how much did he know? did he know what you all know today? did he know that much back in 1982? did he have doubt, did he think that filters were safer? did he think that lights were safer 4547 when he was trying to quit with an egg timer? was he at a disadvantage from what we have today? but up until 1982, i ask you to ask yourself, what did doug duignan do wrong that a reasonable person back in the '60s and '70s who is a teenager and in their 20s was not doing as well? and so i submit to you, when you apportion fault, and that is why i'm going to talk about apportioning fault, and it is just -- a way that you can look at it is you have to look at his smoking over time, right. because what he was doing as a teenager was not the same thing as what he was doing when he was 38 and 40 years old. and so i submit to you, for the first 20 years of his smoking, from about 1962 to 1982, when he was a kid, when he was smoking just like they wanted him to smoke, when he was switching to marlboro like everybody else, and he was doing what the doctors were doing, and he was doing what the astronauts were doing, he was doing what the athletes were doing, willie mays, hank aaron, len dawson, and he was doing what all his friends were doing, i submit to 4548 you that they bear the whole responsibility during that time period, even though they could say, hey, we were required to put this warning on the cigarette. but what did he know? what did he know about carcinogens and nicotine being as addictive as cocaine and heroin when he was a kid? now, in 1982 when the smoking starts coming down, the last third of his smoking history, i would submit to you he bears some, some -- you know, jimmy spoke about addiction, that it is not a choice, you know, it is not a free choice. it is not like you wake up in the morning and say, hey, you know what, i want to quit today, and it is that easy. it is not that easy. you all know that. so if it was that easy, he would have quit. his wife would not have caught him in the shower smoking. his kids would not have caught him on his hand and knees under the couch looking for coins to buy cigarettes. so when you compare the fault during his last ten years of smoking, when he was trying to quit with the egg timer and he was trying to quit with the special filters and he was trying 4549 to quit with cold turkey, when you compare that to the actions, the defective product, the defective product, and the negligence of philip morris, brown & williamson, american tobacco, you compare the actions of an addict versus their defective product, did he try hard? sure he did. he did. could he have tried harder? everybody could try harder. and he could have tried harder, and we admitted that from the beginning. but his share of the responsibility for the last third, i submit to you, should be divided equally between doug duignan, philip morris, and r.j. reynolds. and if you do the math, for the first 20 years, he bears no responsibility, and the last 10 he bears a third, i would submit to you -- and there is the brand history. we know that he smoked more marlboros, but he also smoked all those other brands from r.j. reynolds. he smoked the tareyton and the camels when he was a kid. he smoked winston and raleigh and viceroy. and kevin talked about how in the '80s, he was smoking a lot of r.j. reynolds cigarettes. but i would submit to you that a 4550 fair apportionment of fault would be sixty percent on philip morris, thirty percent on r.j. reynolds, and ten percent on doug duignan. and that is just a mathematical way that i figured that out, you all may figure something different, and i submit to you that is a way that you could look at it. now, from there, there is other questions. so that is going to be a question on the verdict form that after you -- after you hopefully decide that he is a class member, you have to apportion fault. and so that would be the next question on the verdict form. once you move past that question on the verdict form, we have to talk about the fraud claims. the conspiracy, the concealment, punitive damages and compensatory damages. and so i want to talk about the concealment claims, the conspiracy claims. because these were things that they did on purpose. and they are not to be confused with their defective product, they are not to be confused with their carelessness. because these were actions that they did on purpose. because if you will remember, back in 1953 4551 when they had that meeting at the plaza hotel, and if you think back in time, you know, that was such an important event, wasted, it was a wasted opportunity, but they could have -- there was nothing stopping them, there was nothing forcing them from doing the right thing. they could have came forward at that very moment and gotten together, grown men in a room, and said, hey, you know what, we have this new product we have been developing, we are now marketing, we are making a lot of money. we did not realize it was going to be so deadly and addictive. we have a problem on our hands. i think we have to be honest about it and not do it. because back then, you know, people were not as tolerant as they are today about what, you know, what we know about this product. and they knew that if they wanted to keep going, they had to lie about it. they could not admit back in 1953 -- if they wanted, they could have, but not if they wanted to make money -- they could not have admitted in 1953, our product is deadly, our product is addictive. they would have had a big problem 4552 on their hands, which would have actually saved millions of lives. and that is the issue of a conspiracy, and that is the real problem, because if you think about it, they had all these men, grown men in a room, all making money, all worried about their own families, how much money they are going to make. and it only takes one, one guy to have the courage to come forward and say, i'm not going to lie. i'm not going to go along with this. and you think about all the scientists, all the ceos, all the vice presidents, and not one of them, not one of them had the courage to come forward and help anybody, not one of them, for 50 years, knowing that they were talking about the youth marketing, knowing what they were doing, knowing they were hurting people, innocent people. i mean the engle class, people from the '40s and '50s, who are the grandparents of today, deserve better. they deserve the truth. it was not fair what they did. you do not do that. you would not do it today. nobody would do that today in their right mind, be in a room 4553 and say, we are going to lie about something that is hurting people. we are going to lie to the government. we are going to lie to the public. we are going to lie to our kids. so that is what they did. so they had every opportunity. you know, they talk about the warnings on the packs. well, every time they put a warning on the pack, they could have helped somebody. they could have came forward. they did not have to dispute those warnings. they could have came forward and admitted the truth for years and helped people, and things would have been different. so here is the forwarding memo. and this is what they discussed in their meeting. and they talk about -- they knew. it is fortunate for us that the cigarette -- you know, knowing. think about it. they are not saying, hey, it is unfortunate that people are getting hurt. they are saying it is fortunate. this is a habit people cannot break. boy, would not it be wonderful. they are not saying, boy, would not it be wonderful if we could help people. they are 4554 talking about that they can produce a cancer-free cigarette because they know what it will do to the competition. it is money for them. and then they decide to link arms and walk together and lie. and they lied to the american public, and they did it for 50 years. the first thing they did was the frank statement when they went to all the newspapers and they told the public, there is no proof that smoking causes cancer. they knew that was a lie. and they said, we accept, and they should accept -- and think about it. a corporation's making a deadly addictive product, right? and they come forward and they say, we accept an interest in people's health as a basic responsibility paramount to every other responsibility in our business. well, that should be what it is, right? they are making money. they are hurting people. they are killing people. they know that is happening. and they are telling the public the opposite. the opposite. we accept your health as a basic responsibility. you can trust us. you can trust us. we are going to look into it. if it is true, we will remove the 4555 dangerous ingredients. do not worry about it. we have not found anything that is harmful. we have not found anything that is harmful. there was no internet, no google back then, maybe there was a reader's digest article, but they had the reader's digest articles, there was nothing stopping them from reading the reader's digest. and then they went forward for decades. and they talked about, we accept -- if you look at the frank statement and you look at what they were telling people, it only makes sense what they were saying. in 1954 they are talking about if any one of us believed that the product we were selling is harmful, we would go out of business. because that made sense in 1954. that made sense back then. you know, it was not -- they did not have 50 years of lying and, you know, all their power and their resources and getting things their way. they did not have that yet. so in 1954 that made sense. and they talked about later how our strategy was brilliantly conceived and it was a holding strategy. so they were able to push -- push 4556 their lies back for 50 years, when 30 million -- 30 million people died and ninety percent of them started as kids. and they were okay with it, they did not have a problem with it. not one of them. not one of them had a problem. 1972, james bowling, vice president of philip morris, mr. ware's client. if our product is harmful, we would stop making it. that is what they were telling the public in the '70s, because the public would not stand for it. you know, again, it is a legal product, but legal does not make it right to lie. legal does not make it right to lie to people and hurt people on purpose for money. that is not right. in 1976, these two gentlemen gave interviews that we read, me and dr. proctor. and they said "if a company as a whole believed that the cigarettes were harmful, we would not be in business." and then mr. bowling, again, said -- is that bowling or -- mr. philipson: second one is bowling. mr. paige: "i think i'm a fairly reasonable human being. and i'm not in any way 4557 removed from the other members of society. i certainly would not be in the business if i thought it was harming people -- if it was harmful. harmful to people." and that goes back to their promise in the frank statement in the 1950s. telling people, we understand, we are making -- we know we are making an addictive product. they knew it was deadly and they told the public the opposite. they told everybody otherwise. and to now come forward, 50 years later, when doug duignan is just one, he is one of the victims. and that is why this case is so important. because you got to meet the family of one of the victims, a 12-year-old boy who was born in a little town, little town, met his wife in first grade, in first grade, overcame -- they both overcame great difficulties in their childhood, and they were a happy family. and when somebody's 13 years old and you are going to get them to do something bad for themselves, and you are a grown up, you better think about what are the long-term consequences. what is going to happen to that kid when he grows up? what am i really 4558 doing to these people, to this family? you know, every kid, you know, we should protect; not addict kids. they should be protected. they should be guided, not mislead. and that is the tragedy of their business model. think about it. they know they cannot make money and what jimmy was talking about, as you get older, as you get more mature, you think of things differently, right? when you are a kid, you might do things you would not do when you are an adult. so they were marketing and targeting 25- and 30-year olds and 40-year olds. they would not have a business. they would not be in business. if they were acting fairly and honestly and on the up and up with people, saying, hey, we have a deadly, addictive product, we are killing people, we are going to take every effort in the world to educate people in the public, educate kids. it is our product, it is our responsibility. we have to make sure no kids smoke. they were not doing that. and we are only going to go after adults. they did the opposite. and they knew. they did not know doug duignan personally, but they knew doug 4559 duignan, just like every other kid, had a right to be left alone and protected and not addicted, and they did not do that. and that is why in the '50s, the '60s and the '70s, which was very different than today, they could not get away with saying, hey, our product is addictive, it is killing people. they were saying, it is not harmful. if it was, we would not be doing this, we would not do this. it is not right. you know, this is a civil society, this is a civil court, and there are civil penalties that people need to be punished by so they know that their conduct is not tolerated. not only so they are punished, but that other companies know that they have to be deterred. you know, one of the reasons for punitive damages is -- your responsibility -- is to let not only philip morris and r.j. reynolds but let other companies know, that if you are going to lie, that everybody tries to make an honest living. you know, doug duignan, he made mistakes, you know, he paid for them. he worked hard. he worked for construction. he worked -- you know, he worked hard to provide 4560 for his family and it is not fair to have other people in our society, that is not the right way to do things. and to think that they can just lie and hurt people, and so when you punish somebody, when you award punitive damages, you are letting them know that they are not getting a free pass. and you are deterring other companies, that they know that we better not do this. and this is going to be a better world. this is going to be a better place, because if you do that, if you do what they did, you are going to be punished like they are. and we are not going to give them a free pass. and that is why, you know, you go back to when you were in the jury room with all those people, and you are all of the seven people left, it is so important how much power and responsibility that you all really have for such an important issue. and again, i would submit that each of you, when you think about what you had thought about smoking and their conduct that you learned a lot from dr. proctor and dr. burns during this trial, and their documents. 4561 so internally, you know, there is no secret that they knew when they were lying, they knew that their product caused cancer. you know, you look at all their documents. these are all in evidence. every one of those documents. and this is from, you know, 1950s and 1960s where they knew that their cigarettes were causing cancer and they were killing people. and all along these lines -- and these are why these are important, because what they knew -- if you look at this one line from 1953, here, you know, this is from when the truth started to come out, and that is when we talked about opportunities to save people, opportunities to do the right thing. and if you look at the affect that their lies had, that that line reversed started going back up as did the death rate, the lung cancer rate. and that is why we ask you to consider not only the harm that they caused this family, but the reprehensibility of their conduct and the harm that they caused others when you decide whether or not punitive damages are warranted. this is just -- we will go through some of the documents quickly. internally they talk 4562 about doubt, confusion, deceit. this is when they knew. they knew people were dying. they knew people were getting hurt. they knew that people were believing them. they took polls. they had polls where they knew there were tens millions -- millions of american smokers and you think about their business model again. they are going to target not only kids, but they are going to lie to people who are addicted, you know, vulnerable people. you know, that is another thing. you do not take advantage of people who are vulnerable. vulnerable. you try to help them. so not only do they try to capitalize on kids, but they capitalize on people who are addicted. and they try to provide them with a crutch, a rationale to continue smoking because they know when somebody who is addicted to nicotine, and they try to fail, and they do not -- and they try to succeed, and they fail, the first thing an addicted smoker will do, any addict, will say, it is a different drug, say, hey, i like it, i like it, you know, it is my choice. when they provide those type of stories for them. but an addicted smoker, 4563 give them the filter. the filter. the light cigarettes. so, you know, i tried to quit, i did not make it, but they are providing them with these rationales and these crutches and they are not playing fair for them. they are hurting them by not helping them, they are actually hurting a lot of people. and then less-educated people. you know, we have those documents. i mean, think about it. internally they talk about, we are going to go after kids, and then if we -- once we get them addicted, we make sure we give them crutches and rationales to continue smoking. and then in the '80s, as people are quitting and more doctors are quitting, we will start marketing to the less-educated members of our society and we will make sure that we get our money however we can. because the doctors, they are not going to smoke anymore. the astronauts are not going to smoke anymore. so instead of helping people, educating people, their internal documents talk about marketing strategies for the future. this was in 1985. marketing to less-educated people. 4564 doubt is our product, the most important story. the most important story. we know what the most important story should have been, but to them and to now come here and say, doug duignan should have known, doug duignan, his brother -- his brother, in 1971, said that he liked smoking and the doctor told him to quit smoking. well, that does not even make sense. martha lived with him. martha said he never went to a doctor. okay? and even -- and a doctor's going to tell a 21-year-old kid you are going to be dead in five years if you do not quit smoking? that does not even make sense. but even if that happened, that is part of addiction which, respectfully, dennis could not remember when it happened. first he thought maybe it happened later, then earlier, then he could not remember, then it was in the '70s, but at the end of the day, even if that conversation happened, what does that tell you? it tells you that maybe he was an addict. maybe he was in doubt. maybe he was confused. maybe he thought filters were safer. who knows. but he certainly did not know more than they knew. he did not know more 4565 than james bowling knew. he did not know more than mr. horrigan, the ceo of r.j. reynolds knew. he had an eighth grade education and he was just trying to do the best he could. he was trying -- you know, life is not easy. and everybody tries to do the best they could and to be taken advantage and lied to is not a good thing. this is them on tv. (a video clip was played and transcribed as follows:) we want to be the detective just as much as the surgeon general and the ama, and we will cooperate in every way. well, obviously, a filter takes out certain tar and nicotine. i do not think the industry admits there are any bad elements. if there are bad elements, through our laboratories, through the surgeon general, through the ama, through acts of god and luck, we hope we may find them. and if we do find them, they will be removed. we do talk to the question of whether or not cigarettes are hazardous. we do not believe that cigarettes are hazardous. we 4566 do not accept that. because when, as, and if any ingredient in cigarette smoke is identified as being injurious to human health, we are confident that we can eliminate that ingredient. do you believe that cigarettes are safe? have they been proven to be safe, mr. cullman? i believe they have not been proved to be unsafe. (the video clip concluded.) mr. paige: you have to think to yourself, that was 1971, '71, you have to think to yourself, that is a grown man on tv, knowing that he is being watched, knowing that people are addicted, knowing that he is assuring them that he is going to remove the dangerous ingredients. and why would he do that? why would somebody do that? is it really all just about money and that makes it okay? that makes it okay, so he can make money? and their companies can make money? and then they told people that the filters, the filters were safer, right? they even said that, that first piece that they knew 4567 internally they are talking about the filters, a promotion, it is a -- it is purely a merchandising sales promotion. this is what they are saying internally. you know, we -- we -- we tell people it is our triple, quadruple, quintuple filter, capable of removing whatever constitutes of smokes are currently suspect while delivering full flavor and, incidentally, a nice jolt of nicotine. and then they go on and talk about other documents. in most cases, the smoker -- and, see, this is the thing, they -- they did cite you a report from the world health organization that said, hey, filters are safe. filters are safer or lights are safer, or whatever that report said. and if you put the filter and the light on one of those ftc smoking machines, they do filter versus a nonfilter, the filter will remove something. but what they are not telling the public, what they are not sharing with the public health community, what they are not sharing with doug duignan and his family, is that when you smoke filters, because the 4568 nicotine addict needs a certain amount of nicotine. if you think about it, somebody smokes a pack a day, and somebody smokes ten cigarettes a day, they are getting different amounts of nicotine to their brain every day, right? so there is a certain dosage of nicotine that is going to your blood, to your brain, if you smoke that much. if you do not get that much, and you are a nicotine addict, and you are addicted to nicotine, you do not feel good. you feel nervous, you feel -- you do not feel right and then a lot of times when people smoke, they say "i need a cigarette," "oh, that relaxes me, that makes me feel better." but if you look at the withdrawal symptoms, and it is really the withdrawal symptoms are anxiety and restlessness. so for somebody to get the nicotine they need, they smoke more. they -- and that is what they say internally, the smoker of a filter cigarette was getting as much or more tar and nicotine she would have gotten from a regular cigarette because they are inhaling deeper. they are smoking more -- more puffs. they are smoking 4569 more cigarettes. and when you do that, when you smoke more, you are getting more carcinogens. and it is making it more -- it is not any safer. it is not any safer. they talk about, internally, an illusion of filtration. that is a philip morris document. and then the last one there, we know that a smoker who too often -- all too often a smoker who switches to a high-filtration cigarette winds up smoking more in order to provide himself with the same delivery which he had before. but doug duignan did not know this. they did not share this with him, they did not share it with anyone. they did not share it with the government, they did not share it with the -- with the tobacco working group, they did not share that with the tobacco working group, the national cancer institute. they did not share it with the surgeon general, and they kept it a secret because they wanted to make more money. and, ultimately, years later we find out, this is in 2000- -- 2001, this is ten years after doug duignan died. and, you know, 4570 dr. burns, he worked with the monograph 13. and he worked with the surgeon general. and he told you they did not believed the cigarette company. they relied upon the forth- -- the truthfulness of the cigarette companies. they thought that it was safer. so when we talk about relying on material information that was concealed, one of the questions for the fraud is: did doug duignan rely on important information that was concealed from him? did the national cancer institute and the surgeon general thought that filters and lights were safer, would not it make sense that doug duignan would also think that and that is what he told his family? and they are not safe. a half a million people dying every year does not sound very safe. 99 percent of the people are smoking filters and lights, and they are all dying. they are all dying. nobody's -- it was not safe for doug duignan, it was not safe for the other 499,900 people that year as well. but in monograph 13, from the tobacco institute, they talk about how the advertisements reassured people to smoke 4571 filters, but internal documents which they then had, because we did not have them, we did not get those until the late 1990s, 2000 we started getting more documents. and now we look at what they knew. why -- we look at what they concealed, what they lied, how they conspired, how it all worked and how they got away with it. and the internal documents show that they knew all along that these filters and lights were not safer. and then in 2010, the surgeon general also wrote a similar thing in the 2010 surgeon general's report, where they talk about public health officials had little basis to anticipate the degree to which the manufacturers could design cigarettes to allow smokers, like doug duignan, to draw more smoke and nicotine from cigarettes and it was represented by machine-measured yield tar and nicotine, that is what i was telling you when you measure on a machine, they do not compensate, they do not -- they do not draw harder and it is different. but they knew, by looking at the tobacco documents, they learned that there was no decrease in disease. more people died. 4572 everybody was dying. there was no safety from this at all. so when you talk about what did doug duignan know, what did he rely upon, what did he believe was it reasonable for him to think that filters and lights were going to provide him some measure of safety, that is what everybody thought back then. so the doubt and confusion, it continues in the '70s. we have more documents. for 20 years the industry has employed a single strategy to defend itself on three major fronts, litigation, politics and public opinion. this is 20 years after the frank statement. so think about it, what they are saying externally 20 years ago, we are going to help you, but internally they are talking about how this was a brilliantly conceived and executed plan that helped them win important battles. it is been a holding strategy consisting of creating doubt about health charge without denying it. that is what they talk about internally, that they are creating doubt and there is a holding strategy so they can get away 4573 with it, so they can lie to people and get away with it. and we are here today and as we sit here and we believe -- people believe -- it will be comical to see what will happen; that it is all free choice, it is a legal product, and it was all on the up and up. but it was not on the up and up, it was not by any stretch of the imagination. the ctr acted as a front and then they talk about tobacco money, they are talking about researchers who are now getting money from them because they are having a hard time getting funding elsewhere. and inside they are talking about tobacco money ain't so dirty anymore. the ctr is the cheapest insurance money the industry can buy, and without it, we would be dead. and then we showed you -- i read into evidence all the money they spent. they spent a billion dollars. you know, they talked about -- they talked about spending a billion dollars to make a nicotine-free cigarette. well, does that make sense? that they -- that they would attract youth to become addicted to nicotine, and then, once they are addicted to 4574 nicotine, they are going to sell them a cigarette without nicotine. they could sell a nicotine-free cigarette, but not to somebody who was addicted. and we know that 80, ninety percent of people are addicted. so it is nice to come to court and tell you, hey, we tried. look, we tried, we did our best. we did our best but meanwhile if they really want to sell nicotine-free cigarettes, because they are really concerned with addiction, and they are really concerned with the people they are helping, they have many options. they can go back to the old cigarette that was not inhalable so you do not get the nicotine to the brain, or they can have an inhalable cigarette where you inhale it and there is no nicotine, or when you have an inhalable cigarette and they regulate the amount of nicotine and make sure it maintains and sustains addiction, and they target youth. obviously, a nicotine-free cigarette is not going to be able to compete with that market. they are spending $240 billion promoting the nicotine in the cigarettes. and they spent a billion dollars on research and we 4575 know that the ctr and the tirc, they are part of the conspiracy, the judge read you the findings, they were involved with the whole agreement. and so they could say -- it is easy to come up here and tell you that they did all this good research, but dr. proctor explained to you that most of that research had nothing to do with smoking and health. it was distraction research. and then we look at their power. and you have to think about this. the tobacco industry, it is not -- you know, they are not to be taken lightly. they are a very, very powerful industry. and their own documents talk about how they got to where they are today. and they -- they, inside their documents, they talk about the cigarette controversy, the public, those who are present and potential supporters. they talk about congressmen must perceive and understand and believe the evidence to sustain the opinion that smoking might not be the causal factor. remember we showed you all those letters that they were sending that phony research to the members of congress. 4576 then dr. gori, who was the head of the national cancer institute, who was working on the tobacco working group, with the tobacco company, you heard they are talking about how dr. gori wanted to get this position. and he went to the tobacco industry and he said, hey, can you help me with your friends in congress. and then, finally, their other documents, they are talking about all the congressmen who know that. so when you talk about their power, their resources, their ability to get what they want, and you compare it to the youth, the uneducated, the less educated, the people who are addicted, it was not a fair fight for doug duignan. he never had a chance. he did not stand a chance. they also talked about how they would try to get rid of smoking clinics. and you think about it, you are going to -- you are going to blame doug duignan for not trying harder. right? he could not try harder. he was 30 -- 42 years old when he died. even their expert agreed that most smokers do not begin to really try to quit, some people try when they are 4577 younger, they should, i mean, you know, and if you have smoked and you quit, thank god. and -- and that is the right thing to do. i do not think anybody would argue with that. but a lot of smokers do not begin to quit until they are in their 30s, their 40s, and they need help. and back in the '70s and '80s, when doug duignan was trying to quit, when he was using the egg timer, when he was using the little filter that he bought at the store; internally, the tobacco companies were talking about the opposite, they were talking about eliminating smoking cessation clinics. they did not want smoking clinics to be covered by health insurance. they did not want to help people. they did not want to help people. and now they get up here and blame doug duignan because all he did was cold turkey and all he used was an egg timer. that is all he had. and now -- mr. ware: objection, your honor. i think we do need to see the court on this one. the court: okay. approach, please. mr. ware: counsel has just said, 4578 referring to the tobacco company, now they come to us at the table and get up here and, in effect, he is accusing the defense of doing something inappropriate because we are here. that is precisely what the court proscribed pretrial. the court: well, he is been pointing right behind defense table is -- is the screen where he is been putting up all the documents and saying "they." let me look at this. he says, and i quote, "internally, the tobacco companies were talking about the opposite, they were talking about eliminating smoking clinics. they did not want smoking clinics. they did not want to help people. they did not want to help people. and now they get up here and blame doug duignan." mr. ware: that is -- the last -- the last sentence is -- they are pointing to us. the court: yeah, yeah. this refers to counsel where the companies, through counsel. what do you want to say? mr. sales: it is lawsuit 101 to compare and contrast the positions taken in court by a party and the statements they make outside of 4579 court before they come to court. and it is completely fair, based on this record, to contrast the positions that "they," meaning the defense in the litigation, are going to take and we expect to hear. we know we are going to hear it. to say that they are going to contend that it is one hundred percent his fault. but look at all the things they were doing to interfere with mr. duignan's ability to quit. that is the theme of this argument. it is totally fair. the court: i think the prescription is on -- there is even an instruction on this, a jury instruction about you have got a right to litigate, you have got a right to defend yourself. i think there is a distinction between criticizing somebody for defending themselves and criticizing the arguments they use in their defense. they have to -- they have to criticize the arguments made in their defense, right? i do not know how you can -- so the point is, if you are condemned for getting up and defending yourself, that is one thing. if you are condemned or rebutted for what comes out of 4580 your mouth and you stand to defend yourself, that is something else. it is a little too close for comfort, though. i'll ask him not to get that close again as far as indicating counsel table. you know, you refer to the screen or the tobacco companies, you make sure that is the subject of your sentence. mr. paige: okay. mr. ware: your honor, our motion -- has the court sustained the objection, in effect? the court: no. no. i'm overruling the objection in effect. mr. ware: okay. the court: with a -- with a warning. (sidebar concluded.) mr. paige: what is next? okay. so i want to play this video. this is into the '70s and the '80s, and it is additional videos, short little clips that you all have seen. (a video clip was played and transcribed as follows:) mr. dwyer: but insofar as the correlation between lung cancer and cigarette smoking are 4581 concerned, no one knows. it may, it may not. a british physician has said the cause of cancer of the lung is not known. we have all these statistical inferences and forecasts. until the cause is discovered, no one who values scientific evidence should assume that cigarettes cause cancer of the lung. narrator: take the controversy about cigarettes. in the 91st congress, a house committee heard testimony from leading experts on smoking and health. the record shows that many of the country's most respected doctors openly challenge anti-cigarette claims. anne browder: i'd have to disagree with you in that we do not know what causes the ailments that have been attributed to cigarette smoking. narrator: cigarette smoking does not cause cancer, yes or no? mr. horrigan: it is not known whether cigarettes cause cancer. it has not been causally established. narrator: cigarette smoking. no causal relationship between cigarette smoking and emphysema? 4582 horrigan: despite all of the research to date, there has been no causal link established. anne browder: i think the case is still open. the jury has not come in. narrator: it may not be harmful. you are not convinced. anne browder: it may be or it may not be. we do not know. narrator: do cigarettes cause cancer? mr. merryman: i do not know if they do or not. mr. banks: i'm not in a position to give you a yes or no answer. mr. campbell: we do not know what causes cancer in general right now, so i think that we may find out what causes cancer and we may find out some relationship which is yet to be proven. (the video clip concluded.) mr. paige: and we have taken depositions of some of their corporate representatives, and we know that they knew that people like doug would be relying upon their lies, and we also know from what they said they know that -- we all 4583 know that it is wrong to do that, but they acknowledge that it is wrong to do that. can you play this? this is mr. heimann, the former ceo of american tobacco in 1986. (a video clip was played and transcribed as follows:) q. throughout your tenure with american, it was not only american's position, but your position, that cigarettes were not injurious to health; is that accurate? a. true, i take it? q. yes. a. yes, that is so. q. that is something american tobacco wanted the public to believe; is that correct? a. yes. q. it is a statement that american tobacco placed great reliance on. a. we issued that statement, yes. certainly we wanted them to believe it. q. as far as you are concerned, a person is justified in relying on that statement? a. yes. (the video clip concluded.) mr. paige: and mr. figlar -- dr. figlar, www.phippsreporting.com (888)811-3408 4584 we took his deposition and we asked him -- we had shown him some of those videos that you all just saw before by mr. heimann and we asked him if the last videos, the last one was from the '90s and he said '88 or '90 is fine. and then i asked him: "as of -- as late as '88 or '89 or '90, the tobacco institute was saying they still did not know whether smoking causes cancer. that is what they were telling the public, correct?" and he said: "they did not know. they could not make that determination is what they said in the video. "and they wanted people to believe that? "i would say they would." and then i asked him: "if they were lying about it, while people were smoking and dying, that would be the wrong thing to do?" and he said, "it would." and that is why we are here, because it is obvious. you do not need dr. figlar to tell you it is the wrong thing to do. you have to think for yourself, how did we get here. how did we get here when there used to be 140 people in the whole world who had lung cancer in 1900, 4585 not so long ago, and now we have 30 million americans who die from smoking-related illnesses in the last 50 or -- 50 years or 60 years. 30 million is the number that you all heard of, and how did we get here. we know how we got here now because they are liars and they targeted children and they manipulated the system and they put profits over human lives. and it is not right. and that is why they should be punished for what they did. and they -- and it is not okay when they stand, you know -- it is not easy, you know, jimmy said this, when i'm having to cross examine, you know, expert pathologists from harvard university, you know, but when they take an oath and they swear to tell the truth in congress, or their expert swears to tell you the truth, they swear to tell you the truth, they need to do that. and when they stood before congress and they lied, that is not okay. (a video clip was played and transcribed as follows:) mr. wyden: let me begin my questioning on the matter of whether or not nicotine is addictive. let me ask you first, and i'd like 4586 to just go down the row, whether each of you believes that nicotine is not addictive. i heard virtually all of you touch on it, and just yes or no. do you believe nicotine is not addictive? mr. campbell: i believe nicotine is not addictive, yes. mr. wyden: mr. johnston? mr. johnston: congressman, cigarettes and nicotine clearly do not meet the classic definitions of addiction. there is no intoxication. mr. wyden: we will take that as a no. again, time is short. if you can just -- i think each of you believe nicotine is not addictive. we would just like to have this for the record. mr. taddeo: i do not believe that nicotine or our products are addictive. mr. horrigan: i believe nicotine is not addictive. mr. tisch: i believe that nicotine is not addictive. mr. sandefur: i believe that nicotine is not addictive. 4587 donald johnston: and i, too, believe that nicotine is not addictive. (the video clip concluded.) mr. paige: and so we know that is a lie. we know they were lying. so when you talk about material information that is concealed from doug duignan, important information that he was entitled, that he was entitled to know about, he was entitled to know that there was never a controversy back in 1953. they did not have to start this. there was not a controversy. he needed to know. they should have told him there were 70 different carcinogens. every time he inhaled cigarettes into his lungs, he should have known that. in the '60s, the '70s, the '80s they should have informed him and advised him of that. he should have known that fifty percent of all regular smokers are going to grow up and die, millions more are going to be sick, 500,000 americans every year. they concealed that from him. they did not tell him that they were studying and targeting kids and vulnerable members of society. that the nicotine was 4588 highly addictive. and they were manipulating the levels of nicotine, the ph levels to make it more inhalable and more addictive and that the filters and lights did not work. that was important information that he was entitled to know about. he was their customer. they owed him more respect than they showed him, more than they showed the government, more than they showed the surgeon general of the united states and congress. they had to tell people that and they did not and it is not right. and to let them, you know -- you know, dr. rosman -- you know, they may come up and say, what does this have to do with doug duignan. and i submit to you this has everything to do with doug duignan. he was a human being. he was -- he was entitled to be treated fairly and honestly and compassionately them. and when dr. rosman, he testifies -- not only doug duignan, he testifies nobody's a member of the class. he said everybody's not a member of the class. so i submit to you you are going to get these questions on the verdict form. was the 4589 concealment by philip morris of material information concerning the health effects of the addictive nature a legal cause of doug duignan? i submit to you -- of his cancer and death -- i submit to you the answer is yes. you will be asked the same question about r.j. reynolds and information that they concealed about their cigarettes, their doral lights, their tareytons, their camels, their winston, their viceroys, all the cigarettes that they were selling, they had an obligation to tell the truth, to tell the truth, to reveal, not to conceal. to help people, not hurt people. the next one. was the agreement between philip morris and r.j. reynolds and other tobacco companies and entities to conceal or omit material information regarding the health or addictive nature a legal cause of his lung cancer and death? and i submit to you overwhelmingly the answer is yes. and these questions are all important on the verdict form. every one of them have legal significance and that is what they did and they 4590 hurt people and they hurt doug duignan. so the next issue -- and i'm moving along, trying to speed it up. the next issue is punitive damages. and so we talked about it earlier whether you are were going to hold them accountable, hold them accountable for their conduct because compensatory damages go to compensate the family for the loss. there is no greater loss, there is no more significant loss than can occur than taking somebody's loved one from them. but in addition to compensatory damages, compensating for them, the family for what they did is also an issue of punishment, accountability, holding them accountable so that they know that this is the worst of the worse, that you cannot get away with this. so you have to ask -- the question is: was there clear and convincing evidence that punitive damages are warranted against philip morris and r.j. reynolds? and so this is the instruction board and it goes through when punitive damages are warranted. and i'm not going to go through all the evidence with you again, but whether their 4591 conduct was so gross and flagrant as to show a reckless disregard of human life, and i submit to you there would be no other conduct that would be worse, that would show more of a reckless disregard for human life than what these men did for 50 years in their boardrooms and their private meetings and their laboratories. whether their conduct showed an entire lack of care, that they must have been consciously indifferent to the consequences, they did not care. they did not care that people were dying. they did not care that they knew that kids, they talked about being replacement smokers, knowing the addiction rates and knowing what would happen to them, were they compassionate about it or were they indifferent about it? whether their conduct wantonly and recklessly disregarded the safety and welfare of the public and whether they showed a reckless indifference to the rights of others. to be equivalent of intentional violation of those rights, and i submit to you you only have to find one of them, i submit to you all 4592 four of them are applicable to both of these defendants. and all we ask for you all to do is follow the law. and if you follow the law in this case, if you take the facts that you all have learned about, that you all know about, and you follow the law and you ask yourself, is there other conduct that would warrant damages over and above the conduct that they did, i submit to you you cannot find any other conduct worse, that i can think of, that would warrant punitive damages in our civil society that we live in today. this is doug duignan and those are the executives around him. you know how the industry lied. these are grown men. we are going to talk about the replacement smokers. they know ninety percent start before they are age 18. they know half of them will die a horrible death, like doug duignan. and the surgeon general's report in 1989 talked about how significant this is. and they talk about -- this is -- we went over this with dr. figlar. the adult rate of smoking were to continue at the present level, 4593 impact of smoking -- this is in 1989 -- on the future health and welfare of today's children would be enormous. research has shown that one-fourth or more -- it is actually one-half -- we know from the evidence -- one-fourth or more of all regular cigarette smokers die of smoking-related diseases. if 20 million of the 70 million children now living in the united states, that is from 1989, so people who were kids in 1989, they are already foreseeing this, and this is shared with the tobacco companies. they know about this report. 70 million children now living in the united states smoke cigarettes as adults, then at least 5 million of them will die of smoking-related diseases. this figure should alarm anyone, anyone who is concerned with the future health of today's children. right? you should, right? those are big numbers. those are a lot of people. those are a lot of kids. and these are 1989 and it took them another 11 years before they were forced to admit that their smoking was harmful, causes cancer, and nicotine was addictive. 4594 so their internal document, i'm just going to walk through some of them. we deliberately played down the role of nicotine. hence, the nonsmoker, talking about kids here -- sorry. because i'm reading from here and there is a screen here. hence, the nonsmoker has little or no knowledge of the satisfactions it may offer him. and no desires to try it. okay. so they are not going to have a market. they will not have a market if they do the right thing. at least with kids. and then if they do not have kids, then they really do not have a market. there are 40 million smokers, 40 million, ninety percent of them start as kids. think about it. if ten percent of them started as adults, they could have a market of 5 million. they could have 5 million adult smokers who started as adults if they wanted to. that is a lot of customers for somebody to have. but that is not enough for them. more is never enough. they always need more. they want 5 million, they want 40 million, 50 million. and so they have to 4595 convince these kids, with wholly irrational reasons, that they should start smoking in the hope -- in the hope -- see, really, a rational person says, we need to convince him with rational reasons why he should not smoke -- in the hope that he never smokes. in the hope that he does not smoke. that is what we teach our children. right? that is what we teach kids. what they are saying, internally their secret documents by their executives and their scientists, we have to convince them with irrational reasons why he should smoke. in the hope that he will find for himself the real satisfaction, nicotine addiction. and that is their market. and they started with it in the 1920s. school days are here, let us go after high school and college kids. in the '50s, we know r.j. reynolds continued with that. they were studying high school students, when doug duignan was 9 years old. i'll show you some of their documents. in the '60s, this is a philip morris document talking about kids as crops, crops of 4596 prospects. these are kids, these are human beings, they are crops, they are going to fertilize them with nicotine so they can become an addict. it will produce a healthy increase in the number of new smokers who they know will die. that is their -- that is their frank statement when they talk about public health paramount to every other aspect of our business and they are talking about kids and our society that we are supposed to protect as a crop. so they could be healthy new smokers. they know they are going to be unhealthy. they know they are going to die. it is horrible. it is not right. and in the '70s, philip morris and r.j. reynolds, they are talking about marlboros and young people, age 14 to 17, 14 to 24-year-old age group. you know, that is doug duignan. in 1974, he is 24 years old. he is still within their market. they are still going after him. in the 1980s, they take a retrospective look back and they call them replacement smokers. they are looking at 12-year-old, 13-year-olds. doug was 12 years 4597 old. and they talk about how younger adults -- and this is what i'm talking about -- 50 million smokers. ninety percent start as kids. they know, they are talking about younger adults and we know that means kids, turn away from smoking. the industry must decline, just as a population which does not give birth will eventually dwindle. it is kind of poetic what they are saying, but it is the right thing that they should have been doing. they could have done that. there are other ways to make a living without hurting people. there are other things we can do in our lives that are good. and they would not do it. they do not care. they do not care. these are the documents you all saw about when they are talking about less-educated people. less educated, today's trend, tomorrow's market. these are documents where they talk about keeping nicotine levels up. they are talking about nicotine level was not obtained by accident. we can regulate fairly precisely the nicotine any -- any level we desire. 4598 marlboro and kool. kool is made by r.j. reynolds. marlboro and kool contain more free nicotine than any other comparable brands, hence, would be expected to show more instantaneous nicotine kick than any other brand. well, why, and then the secret of marlboro. marlboro is increasing. everybody is smoking marlboro. you get more kicks of nicotine with marlboro. and, again, when you talk about the harm and the reprehensibility. this is in the '67 ftc report, cigarette smoking is without question the greatest single public health problem this nation has ever faced. the cost to society of smoking cigarettes in human terms is staggering. is staggering. that is real. that is real. that is not us saying it. that is not dr. proctor saying it. that is not dr. burns saying it. and they -- and they had that report. dr. figlar said they were made aware of these reports. they would follow these reports. they are in an industry where they know the harm they are doing. they know they are 4599 not doing it honestly. they know they are cheating. they know they are hurting people on purpose. and they do it for money. money. that is it. we all know. there is no other reason to do it. they are not doing it because smokers like the taste. they are not doing it to give people something to help relax themselves. they are doing it for more money. our basic position, the cigarette controversy is subject to the charge and may be subject to the finding. and that is the engle findings, right? they were found to have done this. they were making false and misleading statements to promote the sale of cigarettes. this was in 1968. '68. it was almost 30-something years, 32 years before they finally admitted it, before they admitted it. and they knew. who ain't for more money? the loss of human -- human lives is staggering. are killing millions of people but who ain't for more money. who ain't for more money. so, in addition to compensatory damages, you should consider whether punitive damages warrant against each defendant as punishment and as a deterrent to others. 4600 the court: keep going. you got about 15 minutes or so. mr. paige: that is fine. you want to take a break now? the court: no, no. i was trying to very discreetly signal you, you wanted to know when you get close. you have about 15 minutes to go before you get to the point that we are going to break. mr. paige: okay. what time is it? the court: about five past 12:00. mr. paige: thank you. okay. so, you know, punitive damages, you know, why is this important? you know, you think about people dying and lives and, you know, martha lost her husband, she was 39 years old, a widow. she is one person. you know, one person. and, you know, they were kids. you know, they were in their 20s, 19, 20 years old they lost their father. they had a lot of time left with their father. and talk about compensatory damages, you know, what is fair for them for what they went through. but these are real people. real lives. real families. real -- real individuals. and 4601 this does have a lot to do with doug duignan and they should be punished. they need to know that this is not okay. there is an instruction on reprehensibility. you should consider the harms to persons not a party to the lawsuit to determine whether the conduct that harmed the duignans also poses substantial risks of harm to the general public and is, accordingly, particularly reprehensible. and i ask you to think to yourself what could be worse than what they did. so you have to find this is different than the class membership question. and class membership, it is the greater weight of the evidence. this has to be by clear and convincing evidence, that punitive damages are warranted. and i submit to you -- you know, it is going to be interesting, and i ask you and mr. ware and mr. williams, respectfully, i have a lot of respect for both of those gentlemen, and they have a, you know, client to represent, i do not begrudge them for that, when they get up here to speak, i'm going to ask you to listen carefully to what they talk about why -- 4602 why their client did this, why their client put profits over human lives. and i submit to you this was not just some misunderstanding. this was not a few wrong-headed statements. these were top executives, top scientists, they know what they were doing. it was intentional. it was on purpose, for money and for profits over human lives. and i submit that is why punitive damages would be warranted against both of the defendants. your honor, i'm at the point now if you want to take a break, if you want, i have maybe 15 more minutes left or -- the court: well, if you -- i rather you get that out before we break for lunch. mr. paige: okay. okay. the court: yeah. mr. paige: okay. the court: in a few minutes, right? mr. paige: yeah. so one of the questions i'm going back to, in the verdict form, we are going to ask you for -- to award compensatory damages. to compensate, to compensate the family for their 4603 loss that they incurred. and, you know, when we are talking about what they incurred and the loss that they had, i submit to you that there is no more significant loss that somebody can have than the loss of a loved one, especially so young. you know, we are not talking about, you know, an older person and it would not be right a lot of smokers in their 60s and 70s, you know, it it is not right either, but somebody who was 42 years old and has his whole life in front of him. his wife met him in the first grade. he -- he -- you know, she -- martha, you know, after they cross examined her and said, you know, happy birthday, and then they cross examined her and said, hey, you had a kid when you were 15 or 16 years old, and doug went to jail. i submit to you that these are people who both overcame, you know, difficulties in their life. the best thing she ever did probably was have kevin when she was 15 or 16 years old. he is with her, he takes care of her, and they live together and doug, as soon as they got married, you remember that picture, he was 4604 married at a police officer's house by a judge and they wrote letters to the prison. they were good people. and i'm not -- from -- you heard them testify. you saw the family. you saw the pictures. he made a mistake. he worked hard. he loved his family. he treated them well. they loved him. and there was no more significant loss. and you have one life and he deserved better from these executives from that company. and they could have done better. and they should have done better. this is their wedding. they were in love with each other, there is no more significant loss than martha could have had. she loved him. he loved her. you know, she was a widow at age 39 years old. 39. that is young. never -- went on a couple of dates, she said, but was not for her. she and this guy, they grew up in a small town. a small town, played baseball together, ran around together. you know, she wrote to him when he was in jail and they came out and they got married and that is who she loved. that was -- you know, people go through life and you think, hey, that is the 4605 love of my life, but to martha, that was the love of her life. that was it. you know, she had one love in her life and she loved him. and he was a good father to kevin. you know, that is kevin, he adopted kevin, and kevin was his own son. you know, kevin duignan, he has his name. that is his father. and he was a good man. and he loved his kids and he loved his wife. you know, you can see in his eyes he was smoking a cigarette there, but that is not the important thing. you just look at the way he looks at his wife there. he loved her. she loved him. she now lived 34 years they were supposed -- 34 years is a long time. that is how much time they were supposed to have together. he should -- not only from 1992 they should have been living together, they should still be together for another ten years, they should still be together. they took that from them. they took that. this was -- this was his life. they ruined it. you know, they ruined martha's life. that was her husband. and he was a good father. he had a great relationship -- a great relationship 4606 with his kids. you know, a father and a son. a father and a son, that is a great bond. the son never forgets and a father never forgets. and a father and daughter, you know, that is very special. and both of those kids, you know, they loved their father obviously, and they still miss him. so i wish, you know, this is the part where i ask you for what is fair and reasonable for what they did. granted, i said in opening, i misspoke, i said he never met his grandkid. he did very briefly, then he died. he never saw his grandkid grow up. so i thought long and hard, i really have, about what is fair for what they have done to this man and to martha and christina and kevin, and i wish that i could ask you -- they each have separate claims, and i want to be clear about that. they each have separate claims, they are each entitled under the law to a separate claim, and that is the law that you all will follow. and i wish for each of them, for what they did, i wish i could say give martha $100 million, give christina $100 million, give 4607 kevin $100 million, but under the law that would be too much. the law will not support a compensatory award like that. and i submit to you for martha, for 34 years, for being a widow at 39, for suffering and missing her husband, still to this day, i submit to you that a fair amount would be $12 million. and you can award more if you want or you can award less if you want, that is just my suggestion. again, i submit to you, you know, that is the amount that we think is fair and just under the circumstances of this case. and for each of the kids, i would ask you to award each of them $4 million. and, again, we submit to you that is fair and just. you can award more or less, but that is what we would submit, respectfully, that you do not go over those amounts. and that is it. that is all i have to say. mr. ware and then mr. williams will each have an opportunity to talk to you, and when we get done, i have another opportunity to get up, i'll make it short, it will not be another two hours, maybe 15 minutes, and -- but i do -- you 4608 know, we have been together for three weeks and we do not really get to talk, so i wish i knew you all better, but i do know that you all take this seriously and really consider it and consider the harm that they did and what they did. and on behalf of myself and robert and jimmy and bob and david and the family, i really thank each and every one of you. thank you very much. closing rebuttal mr. paige: tired? want me to sit down? i know -- i only have a certain amount of time. and i can respond to everything they said. in fact, the notes i have here are just some notes that i made up here. i have so many other notes at my desk that jimmy is handing me and david is handing me, nor do i have the time, nor do you all have the patience to listen to me to respond to every single thing they said. so i will try to respond to some of it, things that i think might be interesting, you probably 4767 will not agree that everything i said is interesting, but i'll do my best. mr. williams ended and he said, you know, i have thick skin and a lot of what was said, and jimmy objected two times and said, you know, mr. paige said this out of context, or he did not tell you that, or he only told you this and he did not tell you everything. and i've done my best to tell you everything, i really have. and if there is something that i did not tell you that you all think was important, i submit to you that it is in the evidence. the evidence is in the -- you will have it in the jury room. you will have the whole documents. you know, according to mr. williams, if you listen to him, there is no conspiracy, that never happened. there is no youth marketing -- mr. williams: your honor, objection. that misstates what i said. the court: i'll -- i'll sustain the objection but they heard -- they heard what was said, they are right here. just go ahead, mr. paige. mr. paige: he minimized the youth 4768 marketing, i'll go through some of that. he certainly minimized the manipulation of nicotine as if that never happened. he minimized the filters as if that was safe. it is 500,000 americans are dying every year. mr. williams: objection, once again. that is contorting prejudicially what i said. the court: overrule. it is -- it is argument. i'll allow it. mr. paige: and so now, we could -- lawyers can say what they want. i can say anything. he could say anything, but you have the documents. you have the videos. you have the information to make an intelligent decision. you know now of all -- regardless of what mr. williams stood up here and said and mr. ware said, you have seen all their dirty little secrets from their little rooms, from their little meeting rooms of what they said and how they talked about people, how they talked about human beings, you know, they made a premier cigarette, you know, give them a round of applause, that was in 1989 when they were telling people smoking did not cause cancer and nicotine was not addictive. 4769 he wants to take credit for that. like they did something good. that that was something good. they come up with zonnic now, they have zonnic. you know, they spent 50, 60 years, decades, attracting kids, charging them money, making money off of them, and then they say, hey, if you are sick enough and you want to quit, and you do not want to smoke anymore, we will charge you on the way out. we will charge you on the way in and we will charge you on the way out. and that is what they wanted. that is what mr. williams wants a round of applause for. mr. williams: objection, your honor, it is going beyond argument. the court: mr. paige. the court: i think you have got tit for tat now. i think no more -- no more personal, or i'm going have to call you down. mr. paige: okay. let me say this. a couple of things they did say, that i do -- the court: you can talk about things that are said. mr. paige: okay. 4770 the court: do not talk about what mr. williams did. mr. paige: i mean, things that they said in their closings that i get to address. the court: yes. i'll throw you up there, but it is about things said, not about who said them or their intentions of saying it. (sidebar concluded.) mr. paige: can you put the slide up? so here is a slide that was shown to you by mr. williams, and it is true; and, again, all we ask and i know that all that you will do, is follow the law, okay? and the law talks about fair compensation and whether punitive damages are warranted. and there is nothing -- you know, they talk about, oh, he said this to inflame you, and let me tell you, there is nothing in the jury instructions that say that you should not award punitive damages because this is where the money is not going. think about it. they -- they talked about the damages we asked for. and mr. ware made a comparison to the loss of a loved one to a years' salary. remember he talked about that? $20 million is 4771 a lot of money. $50,000. people make $50,000 in a year. she lost her husband, they lost their father mr. ware: your honor, i object to that. he knows i did not say that. the court: it is argument. overruled. mr. paige: and think about it. they spend $10 million a day advertising their products, marketing their products, ninety percent start as teenagers. we have been here how many days? fifteen days? and they want to equate their family's loss, 34 years, 34 years of losing a 42-year-old father who they loved to $50,000 salary? you know, it is not right. and the fact is, if you give the plaintiffs $20 million, and if you were to award punitive damages to punish them, to punish them, to deter other tobacco companies and other companies from doing what they did, so it does not happen again, and if you punish them, what is the worse thing that happens? mrs. duignan, mrs. duignan's going to have money and mrs. duignan, she is that bad that she is going to have money so that they cannot 4772 have it? they are going to do better with it? are they going to give it to the american cancer society? [#deleted objection dialogue#] mr. paige: so another thing -- not that one. so another thing that was discussed was that you have not seen the whole picture. and i submit to you, you have been here for three weeks. the engle jury, the engle jury trial was much longer and there was a lot more evidence, and we try to give you, i guess, it is a reader's digest version of what happen. but when we talk to you about the flintstones, and, again, it was told to you that it -- it did not have anything to do with mr. duignan. first of all, it was a kid's -- it was played at night, it was played right after casper the friendly ghost, 7:30, and then 8:30 was the flintstones. it is not a secret or not a surprise that young kids would be 4780 watching it. and they know, they know because they -- the deposition of dennis duignan was taken, and dennis said that they watched that show, that they watch the flintstones. they watched the i love lucy, they watched the beverly hillbillies -- mr. williams: objection, your honor. facts not in evidence. mr. paige: it is right there. the court: i think -- overruled. mr. paige: and so this is part of the dennis duignan deposition that was read to you all. so, you know, can we prove to you that doug duignan saw an advertisement and ran out and that is why he started smoking? we could not prove that to you, that would be impossible that is why you are allowed to infer from the evidence that he lived in a community, he lived in a society where we know that the advertising was very prevalent and it was on the shows he would have to be living in a small town, he would have to be living under a rock to miss all the advertisements. and then the youth marketing, you know, 4781 youth documents are, you know -- i showed you a couple of them in my first part of my closing. i can show you many, many more. they are all back in evidence. but r.j. reynolds, who mr. williams represents, there is no secret in the documents that they changed their terminology, that they wanted to use term "young adult smokers" because they did not want to get in trouble. it is right in this memo, it is in evidence. and there are documents after documents that talk about inducing pre-smokers, nonsmokers become smokers. if our company is to survive or prosper, we must get our share of the youth market. these are r.j. reynolds documents. so that is not a surprise to anybody. r.j. reynolds cannot pretend they did not do that. they did that. that is not a beyond the greater weight of the evidence, it is a fact. it is a fact of reality. and to try to ignore that is just -- is just not living in a real -- in the real world. more documents. these are all r.j. reynolds? 4782 philipson: all three, yeah. mr. paige: r.j. reynolds, all talking about it. they are studying philip morris, they want to know why philip morris has all these young smokers. they are looking at philip morris again, how come philip morris is getting all the teenagers? so that is r.j. reynolds. so when mr. williams stands up here and says that i did not read to you the whole document, i did not, i never read to you a whole document. we would be here for -- we would be here for three months. so we read to you the parts that we thought were important. i think the evidence is undisputed, they did what they did. it is not right. he acknowledges it is not right, because they did it. it would be wrong, but they did it. medical records. mr. ware went through the records with you. and, you know, he told you -- he wrote down and he said things that -- you know, the records that were shown you by jimmy, mr. gustafson. on his part of the closing, he said that they were not true. that 4783 we cherrypicked records and that we were disingenuous. okay. that is what mr. ware said, that we were disingenuous for showing you the medical records. and i submit to you, if anybody was disingenuous, that would be wrong, right. if somebody did not show you all the records, whether it was us or them, and they were disingenuous with you, that would not be the right thing to do. and so the medical records, you saw the records, you heard from the witnesses. i could go through every record with you again, but i want to show you a couple of things. this is what mr. ware showed you. if you can go back just a slide that talked about dr. shah, dr. iyer and dr. rao. but if you look at the records -- turn the page. you know, he talked about, and i do not know why we keep talking about the bronchoscopy, the tissue, that he did not get tissue, and it is almost like it was not a lung cancer. i guess that is their argument that he did not have lung cancer. 4784 but if not getting tissue on a bronchoscopy meant somebody did not have lung cancer, then all dr. chirieac would be able to say is he did not have lung cancer because it was not on the bronchoscopy. but we know that is not so. that happens. that happens. but in the report, in the x-ray report, it said 6 -- 6 or 5-centimeter mass, should be considered malignant until proven otherwise. and i asked their expert, and he tried to say it was pneumonia. i said, is that what pneumonia -- is that -- the chest x-ray report does not say pneumonia. and he said, when a doctor writes 6-centimeter in diameter, the mass should be considered malignant, what that really means is that it could be pneumonia. so you have to think, who is really being disingenuous with you? who is really not being upfront with you when they are talking about the lung cancer this man obviously had? and a bronchoscopy. i asked dr. chirieac, you have had cases where the treating doctors thought it was a lung cancer, a bronchoscopy was performed, it was negative, they had to get 4785 a pathology from lymph nodes somewhere else in the body. you have seen that. and then he goes on to say that he was concerned -- if he was concerned with lung cancer, he would have done the same thing as these doctors. so why are we still talking about the fact that the bronchoscopy was negative when their own expert admits, and we all -- i mean, it should not even be a disputed fact, just like youth marketing should not a disputed fact, or manipulating nicotine. dr. iyer, the surgeon, he talked to the pathologist and said lung primary. again, dr. iyer wrote, "consistent with lung primary." dr. rao, he said dr. rao -- mr. ware told you after a certain date that dr. rao never said lung primary. well, it is see what he really said. let us see all the records and see what dr. rao wrote. but here on the 22nd -- it is hard to read. probably just read things going up. it says diagnosis -- that is a dx -- is, and then it says probably lung cancer. but if you do not know -- if you do not know what he means there, we go to his next record. and 4786 this is on 9/22, they are giving the gentleman information from the american lung association. the next record is on 9/26. it is signed by dr. rao. brain and bone mets from adenocarcinoma of the lung. that is dr. rao. mr. ware did not show that when he did his closing. the next one, he talks about what did dr. brant and dr. roberts say? and he said dr. roberts, he made a mistake when he wrote the death certificate. let us see what dr. brant -- we know these are all quotes from his deposition that were read to you all. the next thing, what dr. brant said. and here is dr. brant. terminal -- i mean dr. roberts. this is on october -- mr. philipson: 8th, it looks like. mr. paige: october 8th. terminal lung cancer with mets to the bone. terminal lung cancer with mets to the bone. that is his primary care doctor who is following him. the next one. and this is the one that dr. chirieac said that it says "terminally," "terminally cancer." he said that does not say 4787 "terminal lung cancer," it says "terminally cancer." but if you look at the prior -- we will go back again. if you look at lung, there, you look at the next one, lung, obviously, he is saying "terminal lung cancer." and in the next one, they check him out of the hospital. they say it is lung cancer. and finally they sign the death certificate. it is lung cancer. so can we prove with one hundred percent certainty that this gentleman died of lung cancer? can i prove it to you beyond any reasonable doubt whatsoever? that is not my standard. it would be impossible. in 1992, they did not have the staining that they have today. but these were doctors who were trying to save his life, who were doing the best they could with this family. you heard from dr. ruckdeschel from moffitt cancer center. and even their own doctor, he really, his only explanation for this glandular adenocarcinoma, he said it is not prostate cancer, it is not pancreatic cancer, it is not stomach cancer, it is not breast cancer, it is not ovarian cancer, obviously. 4788 the only thing left that it could possibly be in the whole world, because earlier when these doctors were considering, i mean, really, if you think about it, what is missing here is they thought initially that they were not certain it was lung cancer because they thought it could be lymphoma or it could be germ cell. and those were ruled out one hundred percent. one hundred percent. and there is no indication whatsoever that this man, who was 42, with no family history of colon cancer, with no metastasis to the liver, and no diagnosis of symptoms in the liver, with no bleeding, except for the -- he came in with no bleeding and the bleeding stopped when the medication stopped. there is no explanation, other than to exclude him from being in the class, there is no reason to deny that this man died of lung cancer. the surgeon general report. they said they cooperated with the surgeon general. here is what their documents say. if you look in their internal documents, in 1961 they are talking about carcinogens are found in every class of smoke, filtration. 4789 present technology does not permit selective filtration. but when they write to the surgeon general, they are telling the surgeon general -- only two years later, this is philip morris -- none of the chemical substances have been found to be harmful to health, and it is possible, of course, to modify the chemical compound by the use of filters. they were lying to the surgeon general. they were not cooperating with the surgeon general, and they said that they were. and they misled the government for a long time. you know, they said you could stand on a rooftop and shout "smoking is dangerous" at the top of your lungs, and you would not be telling anybody anything they did not already know, right? but what about their people, their scientists, their people, the people who worked for their companies, where were they when all the shooting on the rooftop was going on? how come they could not hear it? how come they could not help anyone? why were they hiding from all the shouting? 4790 then the surgeon general's report in 1987 -- or 1990, they talk about in 1987, 30 to forty percent of smokers either did not believe that smoking increased their risk of cessation or reduced the risk. this corresponded to 15 to 20 million smokers. so there was a lack of information. the tobacco companies were not helping. they were not helping people. and go to the next one. they talked about dennis duignan. they showed you this slide, mr. ware showed you this slide. "do you recall him smoking a marlboro when you were a teenager? "no, i do not recall that. i do not recall that." well, you guys do not have a photographic memory, but there were other parts of the deposition. "do you remember what brand your brother doug smoked when he was a teenager? "he smoked marlboro, to the best of my knowledge." that is what dennis said. that is what dennis talked about. 4791 "i believe i heard you mention tareyton. "yes. "do you remember him smoking that? "distinctly." he smoked chesterfield, marlboros and tareyton. that is what dennis testified to. okay. so we know that he smoked the r.j. reynolds brands. you know, just because mr. williams does not talk much in this trial, he does not have to, he has no duty to say anything -- mr. williams: your honor, contrary to the ruling. the court: i'm going to -- it was benign. it related back to something equally benign that you said about being heard from less. so i do not think it is pejorative. mr. williams: may i approach? the court: you may. the court: go ahead. mr. williams: i did not say anything about being heard less. i never said that. mr. paige: i was just going to say -- the court: okay. i thought you did. i 4792 thought you said, you have not heard as much from me because i have not asked as many questions because i followed mr. ware. that is what i thought you said. mr. williams: no. mr. paige: i do not know if he said it or not. david said he said it. but my whole thing was, and i wanted to be done with it, i was going to just say that does not mean he did not smoke the brands. mr. williams: which i never said. the court: let us just -- let us just -- i'll just make a bright line. no name of opposing counsel. no reference to anything -- you can refer to anything they have said, but it is been argued that there is been talk about so and so, but nothing -- nothing with a pronoun. mr. paige: okay. the court: he told you -- mr. sales: can he use counsel's name? the court: yes. mr. sales: in his closing, how many times did he say "mr. gustafson" or "mr. paige" -- i understand the court's ruling. 4793 williams: you are saying something and you are not saying it. mr. sales: he did say -- the court: look, mr. sales, he just said he is got very little more to do. and i'm just going to make it real simple for him by giving him a bright line so we do not come up here 17 more times. (sidebar concluded.) the court: go ahead, mr. paige. mr. paige: okay. and so i guess the point i'm just trying to make is there has been testimony from kevin about what his father smoked in the '80s, and martha that he smoked winston and camels, and he did smoke their brands. and regardless, regardless if he smoked their brands or not, that does not exonerate them from the conspiracy claim, because in the conspiracy, when you are in a conspiracy, when you -- when a person, you know, they -- the jury instruction is that they get to be treated like a person. when you want to be treated like a person, you have to act like a human being, right? 4794 in the movie, the -- there is a movie a few good men, everybody has probably seen it. there is a part -- not the part you think i'm going to say -- there is a part where dawson downey, they are getting in trouble in the end, and the little guy says, it is a -- i forget who says it -- but how come i'm in trouble? why -- we did not do anything. i did not do anything. we did not do anything. and the other guy says, no, but we did not help. we did not help anybody. we did not speak up and we should have spoken up. we could have been better people. we could have spoken up and helped this man. and that is here with r.j. reynolds. they cannot sit here and say, we did not do anything. american tobacco, brown & williamson, r.j. reynolds, lorillard, they are responsible for all their executives. and none of them, none of them ever came forward to help anybody. and that is why they are responsible, regardless of what he smoked, they are responsible for the conspiracy, every bit as responsible as philip morris is, one hundred percent. whatever the next thing is. 4795 now, here is more of dennis' testimony. you know, you told your brother he would be dead in five years. that is what i recall. when did this conversation occur? i do not know. probably in the last 30 years. and then he said it was probably in the '70s. so that is what dennis duignan said. that is the testimony and that is what it is. go on. this is also what dennis said. how many lawyers came to your house from the tobacco industry? two. and when you met them, did you tell them that your brother started smoking as a teenager? yes. did you tell them that everybody was smoking back then? yes. did you tell them back then. people did not really understand how dangerous it is like we know now, and that is why, when they say this case is about doug duignan, it is only about doug duignan, that is the only thing, it is not -- doug duignan is not the only party here. 4796 that is when they are -- this case is about doug duignan and it is about a powerful industry, an entire industry of very -- you know, just a powerful industry. r.j. reynolds, american tobacco, brown & williamson, philip morris, and doug duignan. that is what the case is about. it is not about just picking on doug duignan. dr. rosman, you know, he found that doug duignan did not meet one criteria. you know, you will have to judge whether you think that is -- he was being forthright or disingenuous with you all. this is another thing where they talked about 1971, 1975. this is from the defense closing where they said all these surgeon general reports were coming to the conclusion that there was fewer lung cancer that would be produced by low-tar and filtered cigarettes. and dr. burns said, yes, that was the consensus through the '90s. you do not disagree that the public health community played a role? he said, yes, we did play a role. but the truth is, they were being misled, 4797 because this is the tobacco working group. that was the group from the national cancer institute that was looking into filters, trying to make a safer cigarette. and the tobacco companies had their scientific directors in the tobacco working group giving them information and cooperating with them, so to say, but when you look in their internal documents -- go back -- the internal documents from the industry said, we should take -- this is talking about the tobacco working group. we should take steps to give the industry as much protection as possible, and at the same time remain the tobacco working group. dr. gori should be informed that the scientific director does not accept the premise that smoking is harmful. so that was their cooperation with the tobacco working group. they were not there to help. they were not there to help. they were there for protection. and then the surgeon general's report comes out, and i'm not going to read that whole thing, but they come out in 2010 and they say 4798 they were misled, they had been misled by the tobacco companies all this time. mr. philipson: that is it. mr. paige: okay. that is it. that is everything else. so we all -- i appreciate your time and your patience. i know it is been a long day, and thank you very much. the court: well, it has indeed been a long day, and i'm not going to keep you too much longer. however, there is some business i want to complete before i excuse you. in fact, really when i excuse you is up to you. it is my intention to give you the very brief remaining instructions, and i'm obliged to go over the verdict form with you even though you have seen that. and i'm going to excuse you to meet at least to the extent of settling in and choosing a foreperson. if then you -- if it should be that all of you want to continue at that point, as sometimes happens, if everybody wants to do it, i'll let you continue. i'm getting the vibration that that is probably not going to happen, in which case you will pick up with your deliberations in the morning.