closing statement mr. ware: good afternoon, members of the jury. i will copy my colleagues in thanking you for being here for as long as you have been here, as attentive as you have been and continue to be. i know it does take a chunk out of your life but as others have said, probably more eloquently than i, it is an important system 4631 that we live in, and you are very much a part of that system. and we are grateful for your participation in it. so let me begin with something i said at the -- during the course of the opening, and that is that while we can listen to decades of history about secret documents and about how bad the tobacco companies were and what they failed to do, in the end, the case is about doug duignan. it is about his conduct. it is about what he could or could not do. it is about his smoking and it is about the era in which he lived because that era was an era of overwhelming information and it informs the extent to which he knew certain things and could have made other decisions in his life. and i began by showing you or talking about control and responsibility. and i just want to remind you of the questions which are central in this case on a host of different fronts. and so whether we are talking about addiction or we are talking about his conduct, all of these issues bear on the decisions you are going to make. now, who was in control 4632 of mr. duignan's decision to smoke? who was in control whether he should at least make attempts to quit smoking at various times, multiple times? was he himself truly motivated to quit during the history of his smoking? or was that really, at the end of the day, a function of the fact that mrs. duignan was pushing him to quit because she knew he had the ability to do it, and he wanted to keep peace in the family so he would go along for a couple of days and then go back to smoking? was doug duignan addicted and was that addiction such a substantial factor that but for his addiction he would not have gotten cancer? was it the addiction as opposed to just smoking that drove him and ultimately caused him to have cancer? and finally, at the end of the day, did doug duignan actually rely on anything philip morris or reynolds said or did? we heard a lot about conspiracies. we heard a lot about concealment. we saw endless documents, many of them ugly, many of them wrong in the sense that the statements in them should not have been 4633 made. i'm not here to apologize for any of that or rather to defend any of that because i do not think that is central to the job we are all trying to do in the courtroom and have been trying to do for the last three weeks. they are not good statements. some of that conduct should be apologized for. but the fact is, we are here to talk about doug duignan and his life and his responsibility and whether he had primary lung cancer; not what happened in 1971 or 1972. so let us talk about -- i'm not going to go back to the 1600s and a bunch of slides about christopher columbus and so on. let us dwell on, for about ten minutes, the era in which mr. duignan grew up, beginning in 1950 when he was born. what was known and what was happening? what is the atmosphere in which he grew up? what kinds of things was he hearing in the neighborhood, not only from his mother telling him not to smoke, but presumably from neighbors, from friends, from television? we heard that he had a television set. but what were the messages? what is the aura of 4634 1950s that informs what he knew, when he knew it, and what decisions he might have made. and dr. proctor gave us a lot of information in that respect. we know that there were major scientific accomplishments, major scientific studies. and dr. proctor said initially that 1950 itself was a year of real importance. and he went on -- let us just keep these rolling a little bit brian. he went on and said that among other things, he identified these two major sets of studies; one in england, the hill and doll studies that you will remember a little bit about, and the other wynder and graham. and wynder and graham go on and do mouse painting and a host of things. the more important point is not that there are scientific studies out there, but that these were publicized and became well-known by everybody because in those days, however difficult for some of you to remember, magazines were relevant. and the only information people had were from sources like this, namely -- let us go back to six -- or four 4635 and five. the only information people had were from sources like this. life magazine was a big magazine, everybody got it. and the point here is that these scientific studies, while scientific, and we do not expect that doug duignan or perhaps even his mother were reading scientific studies, the information was being given to the public in another format in popular magazines of the day. here life magazine on wynder and graham and the time magazine article that we saw earlier in which it is observed that there is a definite relationship, a causal relationship between lung cancer and smoking. and that that association, as you see in the bottom there, is, quote, real. so the science was developing in the early 1950s. at this point, mr. duignan was two years old. dr. proctor called these articles critically important to the decade and to the development about the knowledge and risks of lung cancer. and then he described the massive publicity that kind of surrounded these things. 4636 he identified for us an article called cancer by the carton. and he characterized that by saying it would be hard -- in effect, it would be hard to imagine a more impactful argument, meaning it is results were dramatic, it was widely disseminated, people knew about it. and he made the point that it had a direct impact on cigarette sales at that time. so we are talking about 1952 when mr. duignan was two years old. 20 billion cigarettes i presume translates into a billion packs of cigarettes by which the industry sales dropped just in the first two years of that decade. dr. proctor also described those two years as the first modern wave of mass quitting. so one of the things that happened, really for the first time in public health history in the early 50s, was that lots of people were giving up their cigarettes. historically, as plaintiffs have pointed out, typically the sales were escalating of cigarettes, but in this era things began to change. in 1954 a lot was said about the frank statement. and the frank statement to the 4637 plaintiffs is the centerpiece of this conspiracy. they talk about the december 1953 meeting at the plaza hotel in new york, and we have heard vivid explanations or speculations about what happened inside that hotel when these executives met. but the upshot was, they published something that was intended to be a frank statement to smokers. and for our purposes, really the only thing that is important is the affect it had was to discourage smokers and to cause more people to quit because the very fact that the tobacco companies were publishing something about the potential harms of cigarettes, even though they were denying it, caused people some concern. wait a minute, if philip morris and these other companies think this is an issue worth worrying about, then maybe we ought to worry about it. and accordingly, that article, among others, caused yet more concern, more people to quit, and that wave that dr. proctor talked about continued to wash across the united states and the public at that time. by 1957, according to dr. burns, there was a consensus within the medical community that 4638 cigarette smoking caused lung cancer. that is important because consensus means it is not a couple of studies, it is not a couple of well-known talented guys in england doing a study, it is not a couple of other well-known scientists or epidemiologists in the united states doing a study, now there is consensus. doug duignan was seven years old, a long way from his first cigarette butt, and yet there is consensus in the medical community about lung cancer and smoking at that time. in 1959, the surgeon general makes a public statement regarding the connection between lung cancer and smoking and describes lung cancer as a principal or the principal cause -- smoking as the principal cause of lung cancer by 1959. obviously, doug duignan at that point is nine years old. so again, at the risk of repeating myself, this wave continues to build. in 1962 in england, again there is another major study which results in connecting the dots again that smoking causes lung cancer, at that time widely reported in the united states when doug was at 4639 age of 12. now, the next signature event, we are told, in the history of public health in the united states, in fact, it was characterized by dr. proctor and i think by dr. burns essentially as the most significant event in the public health history of the united states ever, or certainly up to today, and that was the surgeon general's report of 1964, which came out in january, at which time doug duignan was 13 years old. and it was important because again it made these major connections, and again, it caused widespread publicity. i showed you the tampa and st. petersburg headlines, but the testimony was, as you recall, those were all over the united states. you could pick a city, and when this report was issued, it was published as a major headline that the surgeon general had made these connections. so again, these things continue to build. and that went on through the 1960s. in 1966, when doug duignan was 15 years old, the pack warnings went on. in 1967, of course, mr. duignan ran into some legal problems, as a 4640 result of which he was not in the public eye. he was incarcerated for a three-year period, during which we know that he did not smoke conventional cigarettes. he smoked only bugler roll-your-own cigarettes. and i do not know if you caught it in the jury instruction, but the court has instructed you and will again that the defendants in this case have no responsibility whatsoever for the bugler cigarettes. they were not affiliated with the companies, they did not make them, they have no legal responsibility for whatever he smoked during that period of time. and that has some significance for reasons i'll talk to you about in a moment. in 1968, the american cancer society made some comments. dr. horn, who was the president at the time, made some comments about, well, how much do people really know? i've been talking about magazines coming out. i've been talking about scientific studies. the american cancer society, by this time in 1968, when mr. duignan was 18 years old, is saying, look, people have really gotten the message. you can stand on the rooftop and 4641 shout "smoking is dangerous" at the top of your lungs, and you would not be telling people anything they did not know. now, maybe if this was from a tobacco company, we would not be paying attention to it, but it is not. it is the american cancer society making an observation about how effective the public message -- public awareness has gotten through media and other sources at that time. importantly, we know that doug duignan, according to dr. burns, became addicted to bugler cigarettes, became addicted to smoking when he was in prison. and mr. gustafson said that occurred before 1967 when he went to prison, but there is zero evidence of that, that he was addicted prior to the point at which he went to prison. however, dr. burns pinpoints the time at which he was addicted as sometime during the 1967 to '70 period when he was smoking buglers and only buglers. and that again is important because these defendants had nothing to do with that addiction. i think the evidence with respect to 4642 marlboros may be that he had tried marlboros prior to 1967, but there is no evidence that he was a regular smoker of marlboros prior to that time, and in fact there is evidence to the contrary, as i'll show you in a moment. just to wrap up some of the history, dr. burns himself gave a couple of speeches, he gave one in 1975 to the american lung association, and during those speeches he again made the point that you really do not have to announce any further, you do not have to shout from the rooftops, you do not have to make these major public announcements because everybody in america at this point, by 1975, when doug duignan is 25 years old, knew of the link between smoking and lung cancer. he says a similar thing to this in the speech he gives in 1981 where really he uses very high numbers. i think, as he may have told us, generally speaking, one would not expect a response even higher than ninety percent because there is always a percentage of people who are not paying attention to anything no matter what it is. so his observation that 95 percent of 4643 people are thoroughly aware of the health risks of smoking and ninety percent of those realize that it could impact their own health is very significant. so let me talk a little bit about quitting and addiction and douglas duignan. first of all, in this case, to be a legal cause of death, plaintiffs must prove that mr. duignan was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine and that that addiction was sufficiently powerful, that but for the addiction, he would have quit and not gotten cancer. that is what plaintiffs need to prove, that if it had not been for the addiction -- mr. paige: i'm sorry. excuse me. objection. may i approach, your honor? [#deleted objection dialogue#] mr. ware: thank you, sir, very much. i do not remember if i -- actually if i mentioned this or not, but you know in this case, based on mr. paige's comments, that the plaintiff has admitted that mr. duignan was a legal cause of his addiction and death to some extent, along with other factors. now, in this case, you will not be given an instruction on what addiction is. there is been a lot of testimony about it. dr. burns used a particular template for it. dr. rosman used the dsm-iv. but there is no specific like legal criteria that is part of a judge's charge with respect to addiction. and so as i said at beginning, what this comes down to as a practical matter is this question of control and responsibility. what control did mr. duignan have and what responsibility did he have for exercising that control. we know from the evidence that -- and there is really no dispute about this -- 4657 mr. duignan's started smoking, according to his brother, when he was 14 or 15. it is hard to forget the cigarette butt testimonies. we know that is how he started. we do not have a lot of information about how frequently he smoked early on, but we do know that neither reynolds nor philip morris had anything to do with the products that he smoked at that time. and we do know that regardless of allegations of concealment or conspiracy or statements that were made or statements that were omitted to be made, none of that could have had any influence on doug duignan because he started smoking for other reasons. he certainly did not rely to his detriment on anything that philip morris or reynolds was saying in the 1950 -- or '60 time frame when he began smoking, 1964 when he was 14. he was not relying on tobacco company statements, was not a function of some conspiracy. it was a function of, as mrs. duignan said, all the kids did it, including her, and they did it not because of statements of any tobacco company and not because of any conspiracies. 4658 the testimony of doug duignan [sic] is that early on they did not really smoke very much, mostly because they could not afford it. and so they were not out buying packs of cigarettes. he was pilfering what he could from the chesterfield pack of mr. lange, and occasionally they probably came up with other cigarettes. but in any event, the early smoking was pretty modest. and dennis duignan told us outright that he does not recall his brother smoking marlboros, even though he lived with him at that time, does not recall his brother smoking marlboros at all while he was a teenager. there may be some evidence that he tried one, but the point is he was not a marlboro smoker as a teenager. that came later. there is no doubt from the evidence that after 1970 at some point, marlboro became his favorite brand. it is a little fuzzy in terms of the evidence how much of which brands he smoked, but let us assume since marlboro was his favorite, that he smoked more marlboros than other brands. the evidence is that at roughly the age 22 4659 to 24 because it was before dennis went to california, dennis or denny had the conversation with his brother in which doug duignan repeated to him that there was a time when a doctor told him if he did not quit he was going to die within five years. and his brother says, yes, he remembers that conversation, and then he places it in time. it would have been sometime before he moved to california and we know from other evidence not quoted here, that that was 1975 or earlier. so after his incarceration but before 1975 in his early 20s. that conversation obviously is important because it was a very vivid warning. it was a warning by a doctor. and plaintiffs seem to be trying to raise the question whether the conversation ever happened, because mrs. duignan said she does not remember him going to doctors. it is possible that this was a physician at the prison. it is possible that he went to a doctor sometime after 1970 and before 1975 for just a basic illness. but in any event, his brother testifies very vividly about the conversation. 4660 he is later asked by mr. paige, and this is part of the trial testimony, you know, could this have been, as plaintiffs struggle to push this conversation out to a point at which mr. duignan was sick, and therefore not constitute a warning to him earlier on in his life, denny duignan is asked flat out, is it possible that doug was in his 40s at the time of the conversation and he says no. now, you might recall that i got off to a stormy relationship with dr. burns in cross examination and it was over this issue because i asked him, is not it a fact that sometime in the age bracket of 22 to 24 he had a conversation with his brother, which denny duignan repeated, about having seen a doctor and the doctor having warned him. and dr. burns said, well, no, there were two versions of it. it could have been in his 40s. it could have been in his 20s. tried to muddy the waters here and make this ambiguous. it is not ambiguous. he had it in his 20s. we know that because his brother moved away. in addition, i asked burns, well, i mean you are here giving an opinion about addiction, 4661 you know, what use did you make of this conversation? and he basically said, i ignored it. it was not important to me. whatever conversation occurred between the two boys was not important to you in forming your opinion, and he says that is right. it is not important to me. i mean, if you think about his role here as an addiction expert, to just brush aside a conversation that was this direct, this stark, with a young man, doug duignan, in his 20s, is surprising. i mean, his job was to tell us why he believes doug duignan was addicted. and yet this piece of evidence coming directly from his brother who lived with him, who knew him best, about whom there was testimony from kevin that they were very close growing up, and dr. burns brushes this aside as irrelevant because it is an inconvenient truth to his addiction narrative, his addiction opinion. so the question arises by his mid-20s, did doug duignan get the picture? did he understand that smoking could cause lung cancer, that smoking was dangerous. and the answer is absolutely, how could he not. 4662 particularly having had that conversation. dr. burns agreed that he hated -- he, doug, hated everything about prison life. he did not like buglers. and we heard snippets that all through his life he was troubled by confined spaces, whether movies or crowds or whatever. and some suggestion was made that that was fallout from his having been confined for those three years. so we know he got the message. we know that he knew about the risks of smoking at that time. dr. burns also told us that given the fact that he hated buglers given the fact that he hated prison, that was an opportunity for him to quit smoking and he did not do that and dr. burns was asked if he had quit, in say 1970, at which point he had been confined, he was not able to smoke at will, he had to live by a set of rules, he was smoking something he did not like, if he had quit instead of starting to smoke conventional cigarettes, would that have had health impacts for him. and dr. burns said, yes. if he had stopped and not begun again, that is absolutely correct. 4663 we heard a lot of testimony from martha with respect to different quit attempts, at least in the 1980s. i think each of the kids testified to a couple of attempts. ultimately, you are asked to believe that doug duignan, an independent construction worker all of his life, who if you think about it, did a remarkable thing. he was given a seven year prison sentence, according to martha duignan, but he was paroled in three years. and so here is a man who had sufficient control over himself and his decisions and what he did in an institution that limited his movement, his activities, his smoking, his day, and we are being told this man who could accomplish all that and do it so well that he persuaded people to parole him in less than half of his sentence, but this man was so addicted, he could not do one other thing, and that was quit smoking for more than 48 hours. i think you are entitled to question whether that is even possible given that his family has described him as decisive, as a man's man, as a guy who was pretty tough, as a person who tended to do what he wanted. given 4664 that he could cope with prison life with the restrictions that are inherent in that, are we really to believe that he could not even quit on a single occasion over the next 20 years for more than 48 hours? that is why dr. rosman questioned this testimony, and questioned whether this man was addicted to such an extent that he could not quit. i know there was one quit attempt that was described in some detail but only one, and that the infamous shower incident in which he apparently went into the bathroom, opened the window over the tub, blew the smoke out the window, but left a cigarette butt on the window sill and was later discovered by martha. other than that, we do not have any real detail about any of these quit attempts. what we do know is that martha continually over time -- if we accept her testimony, let us just take it all and say yep, that is all true, he made these multiple attempts in the 1980s. what does that tell you? it tells you that her judgment was he was not so addicted that he could not quit, because if he is so addicted that he cannot quit, what is 4665 point? why badger the guy and why put him through multiple attempts to quit? it was in fact her judgment that he could quit that caused her to try to get him to stop multiple times in the 1980s. he just did not want to do it. the man had few enough pleasures in his life. he worked hard. he made the decision to smoke. he told his brother that he liked smoking. and that was why he was not going to quit. he simply did not want to do it. he had the conversation with his brother in which he told him -- again, this is dennis: so your brother doug told you he likes smoking? answer: yes. that is why he was not going to quit." so we have it from a horse's mouth in a sense. we are not sure when this conversation occurred, there was testimony that as of the time of his deposition in 2015, he had not seen his brother for 30 years, but that means 1985, mr. duignan died in 1992. so for seven years they had not seen each other, and i think perhaps kevin testified that in fact on one 4666 occasion they were together and kevin met his uncle, but anyway. the upshot is that if martha duignan truly believed that her husband was so addicted that he could not quit, she would not have kept trying. and we know from her own testimony that she did not throw ashtrays away. and she really did not believe that he was going to succeed in trying to quit. it was not a function of his addiction, it was a function of his motivation. there was also testimony about the conversations between dennis and doug in which the subject of his addiction came up. and denny was asked, did your brother ever tell you he thought he was addicted to smoking. and the answer was no. so the only thing you remember him saying is, no, he is not going to quit. that is all i remember. i mean, again, that is significant. these boys grew up together. they had the same father. they were close as children. and yet at no time in his life, despite the conversation about having had a conversation with a doctor did doug duignan ever say, well, 4667 you know, i'm addicted. i cannot quit. no, he did not say that. he said, i do not want to quit because i like smoking. you are well aware at this point of the evidence of many millions of people who have quit, and i will not go into any detail on it, but i do want to show you the testimony of dr. burns briefly because he does not dispute that most of the 55 or 60 million people who have quit would have been addicted by his definition. now, maybe he has a little weird definition, i do not know. but we heard from other reporters that at least half of those people by almost any measure are addicted or were addicted, and yet they have quit. what makes doug duignan different than those 30 million, that fifty percent of the 55 or 60 million people? more than half of everyone in the united states who has ever smoked and is still alive has quit smoking, and that is significant as well. dr. burns is not a specialist in addiction medicine. the only treating -- as he says 4668 here, the only treating physician, the only person who sees patients every day, both in the prison population and private patients, is dr. rosman. and dr. rosman had his own reasons why he does not feel that mr. duignan was addicted. he is not saying that some of these criteria are not established some of the time, but he is saying that he does not fulfill the criteria of the dsm-iv, which is the tool that this treating physician uses in his own practice of treating patients who are addicted. let me talk briefly about low-tar and low-nicotine cigarettes. basically -- i will get back to this in a little bit in connection with the verdict form, which i want to go over with you, but essentially, the evidence in this case is that at some point in the '80s, doug duignan started smoking light cigarettes. we do not know exactly why. we do know that there is no evidence in the case about that having occurred because of a conspiracy or because of things that philip morris or reynolds did or did not do. we know that martha started smoking them 4669 as well. there is no evidence that that is all they smoked. so there is no evidence that the reason that they began smoking light cigarettes was so that they could quit. all they were really doing was substituting light cigarettes for regular cigarettes. it was not a question of trying to quit by using light cigarettes. and there is no testimony that that was their intention. nor is there any testimony regarding their having depended on information from the tobacco companies that induced them to smoke light cigarettes or filtered cigarettes. there is a lot of evidence about the positions being taken by the public health community throughout the 1970s. and dr. burns was asked whether or not he disagreed with the proposition that the public health community's own advocacy of low-tar and light cigarettes was not responsible for the fact that many people switched to lights or a low-tar cigarettes. and he said, "i believe it played a role." and after that he talked about a number of surgeon general's reports. and i asked him 4670 sort of a global question about the surgeon general's report of 1971 which said that lights result in fewer lung cancers, and about 19 -- the 1975 surgeon general's report, the 1975 and the 1981. and dr. burns told us that indeed, despite whatever criticisms there might have been of light cigarettes and despite some evidence that people can compensate using those cigarettes, that is, they might smoke more of them, they might draw more fully, they might take longer inhalations, all of which would be bad things, but despite knowing that, the public health community continued to advocate that if you are not going to quit, yes, use a low-tar filtered cigarette. and that is what dr. burns is saying here, that right up until the 1990s, essentially to the point at which mr. duignan died, that the public health community itself was advertising or recommending not that people smoke, i mean, in every year, of course, they were saying that. the best thing you can do it is quit, but if you are not going to quit, then yes, switch to low-tar and filtered cigarettes. 4671 that is important because it means that this was not a result of some conspiracy or concealment by the tobacco companies; rather, this was a recommendation of the public health community itself to use these cigarettes, knowing that there are some risks to that because people might smoke more of them. let me turn to the medical case because i know that that is at the heart of what we are doing here. it is the first question on the verdict form. did doug duignan have primary lung cancer? now, that is really a central, maybe the central issue in the case, and so i want to talk about it at some length. i think everyone agrees that if doug duignan did not have primary lung cancer -- and just to refresh, that means he did have lung cancer of some -- he did have cancer in his lung, but not only that, it started in his lung. that is what primary lung cancer is, remember. it is not enough for plaintiffs to prove that he had cancer if his lung. they must prove that it was primary lung cancer, that 4672 that was the point of origin, and they must prove that by the greater weight of the evidence. dr. chirieac's opinions are pretty straightforward, and they really come down to two opinions. first, that the medical evidence does not show that lung primary was established. it does not prove that it was not established, but it does not prove that it was established. in other words, the evidence is at a state that one cannot tell whether this was lung primary or unknown primary. and his second opinion really is that it is just as likely or probable that the diagnosis here is cancer unknown primary. a word about the witnesses you saw. you know from what you have heard that dr. proctor and dr. burns are professional witnesses. this is what they do for a living. dr. proctor told us that he had a $50,000 week last week. he testified in two trials, he spent some time in hotel rooms over the weekend, and he charges $6,000 a day. and that is what he does when he is not doing other things. 4673 but a lot of his life, 60, 70 trials have been devoted to tobacco company litigation on behalf of plaintiffs. dr. burns similarly. dr. burns told us he is now retired and that half of his time is spent as a professional witness in cases like this. they have each made between three and four million dollars doing this. contrast that with dr. chirieac. you have got an unpolished man who is a pure scientist and physician. a great pure scientist and physician. a person who did not have a $50,000 week. a person who did not spend the last year going around to cases in florida. he spent the last year working on a signature development of an antibody to detect the genetic mutation in women, and then to assist in the development of a drug that permitted those women not just to identify the disease, but instead of having chemotherapy or having radiation, to take a pill twice a day and not have their hair fall out and not have the other side effects. that is what his life is about. and you saw that. he is unvarnished. his 4674 english is not perfect. he fights a little too much on cross examination. it is not his living. he came here as a physician, as a pathologist, not as a polished witness all packaged up and ready to go on to the next case. but you got the truth and you got it directly from dr. chirieac. and i want to show you -- a lot of the questioning has been along the lines of what you saw today from mr. gustafson. you saw a ballot with on the left-hand column a handful of doctors, six or seven doctors listed, and they are all checked off. they all said primary lung cancer or probable primary lung cancer. well, that is just not true. you know, what is happening here is plaintiffs have cherrypicked the data. they have cherrypicked the records. and so if a doctor made three different entries, one of which before the biopsy information, before the pathology was available, possible lung primary, question mark, he got a checkmark. and so i want to show you why that is 4675 disingenuous and why that is not what the medical records say when read objectively. dr. chirieac said that he does not disagree with any of these physicians, quote, treatment decisions. what does he mean by that? everybody except the pathologists are treating physicians, that is, they are participants in the decision of how to treat mr. duignan. the pathologists are specialized in pathology, looking at a cellular level to find out what the primary site of this disease is. dr. chirieac does not disagree with the judgments made by any of the treaters because all of them are trying to find something to do to help this poor man. and so he is saying, yeah, i agree that they made their best judgments at the time. what he disagrees with is the conclusions jumped to here that this is lung primary because that is not what the records say. so let me show you the first of three slides. and what this is is a -- all this does is take each physician -- and this is contained in an exhibit, 44111, that will be available to 4676 you in the jury room. it just takes each physician by name, and then within that physician's entries, it identifies the multiple entries they made where they said something about whether this was lung primary or not. and if you look at this closely, it is very informative. and so let me start at top with dr. shah. dr. shah is the pulmonologist. and you will remember that september 17th is the date that mr. duignan is admitted to the hospital. and so what are the entries? there is no biopsy at this point, that biopsy has not happened, right. and so this is before any biopsy. it is before any scientific data. the only thing that happened on the 17th of significance to whether this is lung primary or uncertain unknown primary is the x-ray. and the x-ray does show something in his chest which is vary loosely described as a mass or whatever. so what does dr. shah say? on the 17th, he says three different things. and depending on which of his notes you look at, he first 4677 says "possible lung cancer." that would be potentially he is saying it is possible this is lung primary. he then says "primary lung mass," you know, with two question marks. is this a primary lung mass? is this primary lung cancer? so he is gone from possible, maybe when he just saw the x-ray, we do not really know, to i'm not so sure. so he says "primary lung mass," two question marks, "cancer." and so his -- the state of where he is on the 17th is, i'm not sure it is primary lung cancer. he does not get a checkmark at this point. and he specifically says "biopsy tomorrow." now, why would he say that? he would say it because he knows it is going to happen, and he wants to know what it says, because he is dependent on that biopsy to get this right. and he is making the statement in this record, i do not know if this is primary lung cancer at this point. then if we go to the 22nd, let us stick with dr. shah at the top, 9/22, what is significant about that date? it is that the 4678 biopsy reports, all three of them, what you heard described as the lung biopsy itself, the bronchial wash and the bronchial brush, those results came back the day before on september 21. and you will see this in the records. the sequence is he is admitted on the 17th. on the 17th he gets an x-ray. on the 18th there is a biopsy. it takes two days for that biopsy report to be officially issued by the pathologist. that happens on the 21st of september. and so here is dr. shah after the biopsies. and at this point he is in even more doubt. i do not know what it is, and so i'm going to write an accurate record. and so i'm going to say it is adenocarcinoma, because that is been confirmed, metastatic to the brain and the lymph node, because that is all i know. he no longer says anything about lung mass, he no longer says possible lung cancer, he just does not know. because now he is seen the biopsy reports and he is up in the air. they are inconclusive. he knows it is not cancer of the -- so far as the lung is 4679 concerned. he knows it is adenocarcinoma because at this point the lymph node has been biopsied. so that is dr. shah. no checkmark. dr. iyer is the surgeon who, on the 18th, excised the inguinal lymph node. so remember they were on the 17th, they were trying to figure out what -- what was going on with this man. and one of the things they did was the biopsy of the inguinal lymph node. they removed it and they biopsied it. and so dr. iyer, all on the 18th, again, three different entries. he starts out by saying possible lung primary from frozen section. i do not know if you remember, but the testimony was that frozen sections, if you will, are quick and dirty biopsy adjacent to the operating room at the time of the surgery itself. it is not conclusive. you always want to wait for the final biopsy report, which does not happen until the 21st, but it is some indication and it might have helped in terms of diagnosis and treatment. and for whatever conclusions he makes he says, well, based on this frozen section, it is possible this is a lung primary. possible 4680 surely does not mean, i've concluded that is the case. he is saying it is possible. it means exactly what you think it means. then he has another prime -- frozen section, he says lung primary. well, that is pretty umbi- -- am- -- unambiguous. he thinks it is lung primary. but then, in his third note, he changes his mind again. and he says, i do not know, you know, it is consistent with lung primary. again, not saying at the end of the day on the 18th, he is back to "i'm not so sure." it is consistent with lung primary, but i'm not really sure. so i'm taking back my label of lung primary. let us go on to dr. rao, who is the oncologist. dr. rao starts out on the 19th, so this is the day after the biopsy, but before the results are available on the 19th. the biopsy is on the 18th, but no results until the 21st. he starts out, right from the beginning, saying, could be lung cancer or it could be metastatic to the lung. so he is up in the air. it could be unknown primary, it could be lung 4681 cancer. that is where he starts on september 19th. and after the biopsy, he is really in the same position. he says, possible lung primary. again, i cannot conclude it is, i'm not saying it is lung primary, it is possible. and then on the 22nd there is the record, which you will see, it is -- which is -- i mean, the plaintiffs characterize it as saying probably lung cancer. when you look at it, i'm going to assure you, you cannot tell whether it says "possibly" or "probably." the handwriting, the physician's handwriting, is very difficult to discern. but it -- it does not really matter because by the 23rd he now has the biopsy results and the final word from dr. rao, as he turns this patient over to dr. brant, as the radiation oncologist, is -- it is adenocarcinoma, they know that from the inguinal node biopsy, but i do not know if it is primary or unknown. he is saying, i am -- i am still uncertain. i've gone through from the 20 -- from the 18th to the 23rd, we have had a biopsy, we have had an x-ray, done the inguinal lymph 4682 node, and he is not sure. he says it could be either one. and he is the oncologist. he is the burns of this treatment team. so the state of his opinion on september 23rd is that he cannot tell whether it is lung primary or it is unknown primary, and that is what he says. so it is important to look at these notes in sequence, not just to cherrypick one here and there. let us keep going and see what the other physicians say. dr. hughes and dr. herbert are both pathologists. the top one, dr. hughes, is the pathologist. again, these are the official reports on september 21, and there are two -- there -- at the top section where dr. hughes remembers three reports. one report is with respect to the lung biopsy itself. and the next two are the bronchial brush and the wash. and just to refresh, the bronchial brush is sort of stick a brush into the bronchus, you know, down the windpipe, branch off to the right and left, this one goes right, they scrape it, if you will, the inside of the bronchus, that creates epithelial cells on the 4683 brush, you pull the brush out, you examine those microscopically. and, as dr. chirieac explained, the reason you do that is that often, if it is really primary lung cancer, it will start eating through the bronchus itself; and so that is what you are looking for. you are looking to see are any of those cells in the bronchus on the side of the tube, if you will, are those cancerous. and the answer here from the pathologist is no. now, we know, although i'll show you in a few minutes, dr. burns fights this. we know that lung tissue was captured in this biopsy. when dr. burns showed you an illustration of a bronchoscope, it was a distant kind of shot of a bronchoscope. it did not show the needle and it did not show the ability of the needle, which aspirates, you know, sucks in the tissue from the biopsy, which can make a u-turn. you saw the film from dr. chirieac showing an actual lung biopsy and you could see that the needle actually makes a u-turn to get into the mass. that is its capability. that you were not shown in the direct case. you were shown just a tube that goes down into the lung 4684 and it was ambiguous what it can do from there. that was never illustrated to you. in any event, dr. hughes has the two other reports, all three reports are negative for cancer. so you have got lung tissue actually biopsied. we know it was captured because the pathologist says so. it says, alveolar lung tissue. hard to mistake what that means. and it is negative for cancer. so is the wash and the brush. no cancer -- no tum- -- no malignant cells seen, no cancer. then we go to dr. herbert, also on 9/21. dr. herbert is the pathologist who did the lymph node biopsy. so two different pathologists here. she did the lymph node biopsy and she does conclude that it is adenocarcinoma, but she does not describe it as even potentially lung cancer. she says, metastatic large cell undifferentiated malignancy. so despite the biopsy, she is unable to determine whether this is unknown primary or lung primary. and so she describes -- describes it truthfully and objectively. i can tell you that it is metastatic large cell. i 4685 can tell you that it is undifferentiated, what dr. chirieac said is an ugly-looking tumor. but i cannot tell you anymore. i can also tell you it is adenocarcinoma. that is the type of cancer it is. let us then move on to dr. schoenfeld, who does the ct scans. this is on 9/22, so this is post-biopsies. and dr. schoenfeld, despite the fact that he has got the biopsies in hand, despite the fact that he is now -- he is already got an x-ray, now he does a ct scan of the chest, as well as the mesenteric area of the body, and he, too, does not say lung cancer or lung primary or even possible. he says, suspicious mass, right upper lobe. so he just does not know what it is. and he is objective about that and that is what he says. i do not know, in effect, suspicious mass. then let us look at the last few. dr. brant is the radiation oncologist. so dr. rao turns the patient over to the radiation oncologist, because he is very ill. it is evident that he -- that there is no curative here, and so the question is, can some 4686 radiation help the man. and so it is important here what he is -- several things are important with dr. brant. first of all, when dr. brant gets the patient, i'm going to show you the letter in a minute, it is described to him as widely metastatic adenocarcinoma. so dr. rao does not say to him, this is a patient with lung cancer, rather he says, widely metastatic adenocarcinoma. now, if dr. rao, who is referring the patient, had thought he had lung cancer, he would have said so. he does not say so. and so -- in any event, in september brant says, probable lung primary. now, there is a reason for that that i'm going to show you. this turns out to be an error on his part, because he misses the critical piece of information, which i'll show you in a minute. but then, importantly, in december, brant is writing his last official record in the case. it is not just a letter, it is a treatment summary. he is obligated to write it, as a radiation oncologist, he has legal 4687 consequences, and he writes it to dr. rao. and what does he say? on the last entry, after he is got the file in front of him, he has all the biopsies, he has every piece of information anybody has from these medical records, and he says, uncertain primary, on december 2nd. uncertain primary. exactly what dr. chirieac said. and that is dr. brant. dr. roberts -- i'm going to come back to dr. brant because i want you to look at the letter for certain reasons -- but let me finish up this. dr. roberts makes two different entries. on the discharge summary, 9/25/1992, he does not say, lung cancer. he does not -- he does not label it one way or the other. he just says, cancer patient. you will see it in the middle of the page in his handwriting. now, that is his discharge summary. when he writes out the death certificate, he does say, lung cancer. and we do not have any information about why that is the case. maybe he believed it, maybe he was doing it because it is a public record and he had to put something down, it is all speculation. we just 4688 do not know. what we do know is nobody else had come to that conclusion. even dr. brant, who, two days prior, had described this as unknown or uncertain primary. and then, finally, we have dr. heindel, who, likewise, initially before he had any pathology on september 18th, he is equally objective. and he says, mass right upper lobe. does not pretend to know what the primary site is, remember the biopsy is not available, biopsies are not available to him or anybody else until the 21st, so he does not have anything like that. he is the anesthesiologist who was treating the patient. he was part of the treatment team, as dr. chirieac said, because he was the man who anesthetized him for purposes of the inguinal lymph node excision. so he knew the patient. and if you think about what the anesthesiologist's role is, of course it is to anesthetize the patient, but we all know that there are a lot of critical factors in doing that. a lot of things can go wrong. 4689 so it is important that he understand the course of treatment, the medications the man's on, what allergies he might have, and a host of information so he is certain that when he anesthetizes him, he will not do something that will cause him a problem or possibly even cause his death. so the anesthesiologist is not an irrelevant little peon that is over here on the side and does not know anything, he is a board-certified specialist and he is trained to be careful about what he gives to any patient because he can cause death. and so he has a background on this patient. he has a lengthy record later, on september 25th, in which he, along with dr. brant, later concludes unknown primary. it is in the third line of this handwritten note that is really quite long. and one of the important things about that record is it is obvious that he knows this man, that he has a real history on him. he describes it and he says, i've been asked to consult, to see whether, if i give him a steroid -- an epidural steroid injection, 4690 whether i can help his pain. and he basically says, so i met with him, i actually palpated him, i touched him in order to see where he was expressing pain. he had a leg pain that went down to his foot. and so he is very, very detailed about his observations of mr. duignan at this juncture. and his ultimate conclusion is in the beginning of this report, cancer unknown primary. now, why would he say that? he has gotten it from somewhere. maybe dr. rao, maybe roberts, maybe whoever referred him to him. or he knows because he is looked at the pathology. so my basic point, i know i've been windy, i've taken a lot of time on this, but my basic caution to you is, it is not a ballot, you know, it is not a vote, if one of you were sick or one of your family members and you are in a hospital room and you had -- mr. gustafson: objection, your honor, golden rule argument. mr. ware: fair enough. the court: sustained. mr. gustafson: move to strike. mr. ware: fine. 4691 in any event -- the court: well, you want an instruction? mr. gustafson: move to strike the comment, the golden rule comment. the court: okay. granted. mr. gustafson: thank you. mr. ware: thank you for the reminder. let me put it this way. this notion of putting up a ballot, if you will, and checking off boxes, is not the way cancer diagnosis is done. you do not want it to be a vote. because only certain specialists know certain things. even dr. burns told us that the role of the pathologist is critical. because he is the only one, or she, are the only ones who actually look at the cancer at a cellular level and are the only ones who can truly diagnose. so it is important that you not have a vote, that it not be a ballot. and so to wrap up this portion, my only caution to you is when you are in the jury room, is to look at the record, but do it by date. do it by physician and by date, and you will see that it is not the case that most of these sufficient -- these physicians vote for lung primary. that is not 4692 case. they are mostly up in the air, they do not know for sure, and several of them say unknown primary. and that is exactly what dr. chirieac said. he basically said, you cannot tell. and so an honest, dispassionate diagnosis from his point of view is it could be lung cancer, it could be unknown primary. the greater weight of the evidence does not tell you which one. and the burden is on the plaintiffs to prove to you that it is lung primary. that is where dr. chirieac was. now, let me talk a little bit more about dr. brant because i told you he made an error. first of all -- well, this is the final -- this is dr. brant's final letter from december 2, and i've already told you that his last word on this patient was uncertain or unknown primary. you know that. but i want to go to his earlier september letter and show you a couple of things that i think are important. so perhaps -- well, let us talk about dr. chirieac's view of what these terms "probable" and "impression" and so on mean in cancer diagnosis. i think it is slide 43. and 4693 so let me just say a word about that. dr. chirieac was asked, when you guys use these terms, what do they mean to a trained physician? and he says, well, it is not like the legal system where 51 percent is probable. these are degrees of uncertainty. you know. and saying it is probable, saying you have an impression, saying anything that is tentative, other than identifying the primary site is a way of making a guess. i think he means an educated guess, it is not pulled out of thin air. and sometimes that is right. but the point is, the language of these physicians is not the same as the language of lawyers. we know from dr. burns -- we could go to 44, or, excuse me, dr. ruckdeschel, that when he looked at dr. brant's opinion he described it as weak. and he is talking about the september 23rd, 1992 letter in which dr. brant says probable lung primary. he later changes his mind in his letter in december to say unknown primary, but initially in september, for some reason, he says probable lung primary. and i want to show you why he 4694 did that. we know for sure a couple of things. first of all, let us go to slide 46. dr. brant did not receive the lung biopsy pathology report, or at least had not received it by the time he wrote his letter. it is copied only to dr. roberts and dr. shah. dr. brant describes in his letter what he has on hand. and he does not say that he has the biopsy report. brian, can we go to dr. brant's letter at 42? all right. this is -- this is a picture of dr. brant's september 23rd, 1992 letter. and it is notable for a couple of things. first of all, at the very beginning -- now, this is coming from dr. rao, because he is referring the patient to dr. brant for radiation. and in the testimony that was read to you from dr. brant, dr. brant says, i never went to the hospital. i saw this man in my office. and he is ambiguous about -- he does not remember mr. duignan. he says he is only going from the medical records. he is unclear whether 4695 he saw them -- saw him more than three hours, one hour on three different days in that eight days he treated him. he just does not know. he has no recollection whatsoever of the man. he testifies that probably he would not recognize him. but his letter to dr. rao -- dr. rao refers the patient to dr. brant. dr. brant examines him. he writes back to dr. rao and he says, not "i'm referring you a patient with lung primary," he says "i'm referring you a patient with, quote, widely metastatic adenocarcinoma with brain metastases." so, again, if we went back to dr. rao's last entry on the medical records i was showing you, this is what dr. rao had said. he had backed off any notion of lung primary because he did not know. and so when he sends the patient to dr. brant, he is still ambiguous and that is why he does not say, i'm sending you somebody who has lung primary. that is not what he says. now, dr. brant, in his letter, describes the bronch- -- the bronchoscopy but he describes only the pathology report from the 4696 bronchus itself. he misses and never refers to the bronchoscopy report of the lung tissue, which, if you think about it, is the most critical medical record in the file. and for whatever reason he either does not have it or he missed it. there are three biopsy reports. he talks about no bronchiole lesions. but he never talks about the biopsy of the lung tissue itself. and so he misses the fact that they have biopsied the lung tissue and they found no cancer. and so at the end of his letter, when he concedes or when he says "lung primary," he is making that statement without ever having seen the pathology report that actually biopsied the lung. now, by december, presumably that information catches up with him, and on december 2nd he changes his view and he says it is cancer, uncertain primary. now, plaintiffs says, well, wait a minute here, he was -- his deposition was taken, we read it in. and he said some other things and he backed off his december 2nd unknown primary 4697 opinion. so why would he do that? [#deleted recess#] mr. ware: i want to talk to you briefly about some of dr. ruckdeschel's testimony, and then i want to go over the verdict form with 4704 you. let us go to 48, if we can. dr. ruckdeschel testified, as you can see here, that adenocarcinoma, which we know is what his cancer was from the inguinal lymph node, could have arisen and does arise from glandular cells, basically from anyplace in the body. and dr. chirieac testified -- 49, please -- that lung cancer -- he described it as the final stop for many kinds of cancers, that they are -- cancers that are metastatic often land ultimately at that last stop, like a subway stop or a train stop, they lodge in the lung, and that that is a possible process that is going on here. he also testified, dr. chirieac, that colorectal cancer or colon cancer can spread to the lung. he is not saying this was definitively colon cancer, nor he is saying it is not. again, his opinion is this could be lung primary or it could be unknown primary, but the evidence is not sufficient to tell you which. there was testimony from dr. ruckdeschel, 4705 plaintiff's expert, with respect to the importance of trying to learn the primary site. and he says, as you can see here, that determining the primary site is a, quote, critical function of diagnosis, and that therefore, it is important, if possible, to understand the site of origin. and as he says in the last line, yes, it is important, and it is important because it can influence the prognosis, it can influence treatment or anything else. and that is why the hunt for the primary site was so aggressive and so meaningful to all of the physicians, and it is why you see this schizophrenic kind of record in which at one point they say, well, it is possible, and then in another point in the absence of evidence, they say uncertain primary. dr. ruckdeschel also testified that in fact as a medical oncologist, he does not typically diagnose. you do not do pathological exams? i review the pathology, quote, i do not actually officially make the diagnosis. this is a point that dr. chirieac was 4706 making throughout, that everybody has a specialty, everybody's on the team, but ultimately the diagnoses of cancers are done by the pathologist for all the reasons you know. and dr. ruckdeschel says quite plainly that he is highly dependent on the pathologist, as is everybody else worth his salt who is an oncologist in an institution of real renown. he also told us that unknown primary, it is not an outlier, he said 5 to ten percent of cancers in the united states are cancers of unknown primary. it is not common, but it is not so rare as to make you question, well, could this possibly be unknown primary? and he says -- i'm on 55, brian -- it is not common. i think he put the number at 5 to ten percent, and he says, yes. and he said particularly earlier in the '90s when this was happening, there were more cancers of unknown primary because there was less ability to chase down the primary site at that time, just given the science and the technology and the fact that this was a smaller hospital. and then dr. ruckdeschel tells us that on 4707 an annual basis, somewhere between 50- and 80,000 cancer cases a year are diagnosed unknown primary. so again, it is not rare, maybe it is uncommon, but that is a lot of people. and it may well be that mr. duignan was one of them. in the course of giving his opinions, dr. ruckdeschel did not look at the lung biopsy report. and i want to show you -- this is 59, please. now, he was called here to give an opinion with respect to what the primary -- whether this was primary lung cancer or not, and yet he seemed confused about that, and he told us -- i said to him in cross examination: "you have given a very, very specific opinion. are you now saying you are not quite sure where the bronchoscope actually captured tissue?" "what i'm saying is, i do not know whether he actually punctured through the lung through the bronchus into the lung tissue or he just took a sample of the bronchus." that is an astonishing comment from a man who is paid to come here and tell us how to interpret the pathology. he is hired as an 4708 expert, and yet he is not quite sure what the result of the biopsy was when you can see for yourself, have seen and no doubt will see again, if you look at dr. hughes' report, it is unambiguous in saying alveolar lung tissue. there is no doubt about it. as well as bronchial tissue. and that is because the bronchoscope needle has to puncture -- it is in the bronchus. to get into the lung, it is got to go through the wall of the -- i'm on the wrong side here. it is got to go through the wall of the bronchus and into the lung. so of course it is going to pick up some bronchial tissue on the way through, as it is getting lung tissue. but the important point is, for whatever reasons, dr. ruckdeschel arrived at his opinions without even knowing whether we had a biopsy of lung tissue. and then you will recall some colloquy about this drawing from years and years ago, the importance he attached to that, whether it is round or it is eccentric or whatever it is. with that let me turn to the verdict form, 4709 if i may, and then i will wrap up. as you know from plaintiff's counsel, the first question on the verdict form is: did douglas duignan have primary lung cancer? putting that another way, the question is, have plaintiffs carried their burden of proof to show by the greater weight of the evidence that it is lung primary as opposed to uncertain primary? because unless they have carried that burden of proof, then the defendants must prevail in this case, because everybody agrees that if it has not been proved to have been lung primary, that is, that the cancer started in the lung, then the defendants have to prevail in this case. again it is not good enough that you find cancer in the lung. what you must find is that the cancer started in the lung. and the answer to question 1 is no. on the basis of the medical records and the physicians who gave their opinions from september 17th through december, it remains uncertain whether or not this was lung primary, or on the other hand, uncertain primary, 4710 unknown primary. second question: was douglas duignan addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine? again, the answer should be no. what more did douglas duignan have to know than he knew in 1973 or '4 about lung cancer and the potential dangers of lung cancer? he grew up in an era of unprecedented disclosure about these harms. and you can say all you want about conspiracies behind the scenes and documents that were secret and not shown until later, but the question is whether doug duignan in some way was misled by any of that. would any of this have been important to him and would have actually changed his conduct? and there is simply no evidence of that. this man smoked because as a child other people smoked and he started smoking. he knew the risks. he has gone all through the bugler years. he began smoking a host of brands. and the very fact that he is smoking seven or eight brands shows you that he wanted to smoke. he was going to find something to smoke no matter what it was. 4711 his wife continued to try and get him to quit. that means she knew he was not addicted. otherwise why try? why get him unhappy? why have a problem in the house? the fact is she knew he was not addicted, and therefore, encouraged him repeatedly, according to the plaintiff's testimony, about -- asked him repeatedly to try to quit smoking, and yet he refused to do it and did not do it. so the answer to question 2 should likewise be no. he was not addicted, or putting it differently, addiction was not a legal cause of his lung cancer and death. addiction was not so strong that but for the addiction, he would not have gotten lung cancer. rather, he smoked because he wanted to and he knew the risks. the sole legal cause was -- well, let me go to the next question. was an addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine a legal cause of his cancer and death? and the answer again is no. the sole legal cause was his choice to smoke in this case. we know that he knew the risks. it was 4712 unambiguous to him. he said so. he talked to his brother about it. and as i said earlier, here is a man who managed to govern his life under the most difficult circumstances and to do it so well for three years of confinement that he persuaded the prison system to let him go early. the idea that he could not have quit for more than 48 hours is unrealistic and unproven here. the fourth question with respect to percentage of responsibility. in a case like this in which the decedent had the ability to quit, knew the risks of smoking, the responsibility belongs to mr. duignan. mr. duignan would not have, for example, had he had too much to drink one night, have gotten up the next morning and looked in the mirror and said, i'm twenty percent or ten percent responsible for the fact that i had too much to drink. the liquor manufacturer is ninety percent responsible. i mean, that just is not a view of responsibility. mr. duignan made his choices, and however unfortunate they turned out to be, and they 4713 were unfortunate over time, he had at a very young age a very tragic end, whether that is genetics or it is whatever it is, but that does not change the fact that he had control over his life repeatedly, he made those decisions, and is he responsible for the outcome those decisions. questions 5 and 7 on the verdict form deal with the question whether there was concealment or conspiracy, whether there were things said or that should have been said, statements made or that should have been made which could have changed the outcome here which mr. duignan would have listened to had they been made, or to the extent were any statements made by philip morris that caused him to smoke and not to quit smoking. there is no evidence in this case of anything like that, and the answer to questions 5 and 7 should be no. whether or not there was a conspiracy, that conspiracy never touched douglas duignan. there is no material information as to -- mr. gustafson: objection, your honor. can we approach? 4714 the court: yes. the court: state your objection. mr. gustafson: he just misstated the record and he just went against the engle findings. he said whether or not there was ever a conspiracy. a conspiracy is a finding, it is a fact, and they cannot find that fact. mr. ware: i did not question the fact. mr. gustafson: that is exactly what he said. it is on the transcript. whether or not there was ever a conspiracy. so it needs to be corrected because counsel misstated what the law is and what the findings are, and they cannot do that. and so we would ask that the jury be corrected or his statement be stricken or he gets up and fixes his own statement so he is not in a lie. mr. ware: i'll fix it. what i meant was even if. i did not mean -- mr. gustafson: it is not if. it is. irrespective. the court: even though there is a conspiracy. 4715 gustafson: right. the court: okay. i'll let you correct it and rephrase. even though there is a conspiracy. okay. mr. ware: all right. or irrespective of -- all right. i'll go with "even though." the court: i think "even though" is -- has a corrective quality. (sidebar concluded.) mr. ware: if you make certain preliminary findings in this case, the engle findings do apply. even though, assuming those findings apply, that there was a conspiracy, that there was concealment, none of that impacted douglas duignan because douglas duignan understood the risks of smoking, had the information, and there is no material information which he could have been given which would have changed his decisions. he smoked for the reasons we know, not because of the conspiracy or the agreement. i want to say just a couple of words about damages. essentially, plaintiff's counsel has asked for $20 million in the aggregate for the duignan family. in the testimony given by 4716 dr. proctor, we had some discussion about the fact that the average family in florida makes something on the order of $50,000 per year. you can do the math. it would take hundreds of years to earn $20 million. that is an astonishing amount of money. it is well beyond anything that would change the lives of this family, well beyond. and i simply urge you, if you ever get to this point, which i think you should not, that you bring some proportion to that analysis. this is not a lottery, it is a courtroom, and it is a trial. and so i ask you in doing so to, as i said, be proportionate in whatever response you bring to that question. finally let me talk for a minute about punitive damages. as counsel said, the standard by which you judge whether or not there are punitive damages is a higher standard. it is not the greater weight of the evidence, it is clear and convincing. philip morris did not do anything in this case as regards mr. duignan that warrants additional punishment. you have heard the testimony from dr. proctor that among the 4717 things they were doing even in mr. duignan's lifetime was developing new products including denicotinized cigarettes, cigarettes they could bring to the public even at the cost of competing with themselves. this was a company intending on improving itself and making decisions vastly different from some of the decisions that it had made in the past. there is no clear and convincing evidence that there is a need for punishing the company at this point in the company's history. with that, members of the jury, i want to thank you for your courtesy to me and philip morris. and i would like to have been shorter, but could not be. thank you. closing statement mr. williams: ladies and gentlemen of the jury, good afternoon, i'm jack williams, as you know, and i want to tell you we are getting there, because i'm the second-to-last person that is going to talk to you this afternoon, and i'm not going to be as long as the first two. but i want to add my voice to the course of lawyers that is thanked you for your service here. pinellas county called you, you answered that call, and you have generously given us your time and attention and the sacrifice that you 4719 made, and for that we all thank you. i, as you know, mr. mayfield and i represent r.j. reynolds tobacco company, but certainly you have noticed that throughout the trial mr. ware and the philip morris team has spearheaded the defense. when i ask questions i try not to repeat the questions the witnesses so i would not tax your time the questions that mr. ware asked and here i'm not going to do that either. i'm not going to repeat some of the things that he told you. but i do need to address some of the distractions that were paraded in front of you during this trial and that you heard this morning when mr. paige was talking to you. and by distractions, i mean information that has nothing to do with dennis duignan. i mean information that is not going to help you answer the questions that you have to answer on the verdict form because each one of those questions has to do with -- i'm sorry, douglas duignan, i apologize, i meant douglas duignan. each one of the questions on the verdict form in this whole case has to do with douglas duignan and when you -- what i meant by 4720 distractions is information that is unrelated to him. a lot of what you heard this morning was meant to inflame you. it was information to make you mad, and i suggest to you that it was to cushion the request for millions of dollars being awarded in this case. mr. gustafson: objection, your honor, can we approach? the court: you may. the court: state your objection. mr. gustafson: this violates the order in limine about attacking parties for either prosecuting the case or defending the case. and that is what he just did. and we are not allowed to do that to them and they are not allowed to do that to us. and the statements that he just made did exactly that. mr. williams: that was not an attack, it was my responding to the request for damages -- mr. sales: distraction to -- to trick them into giving money; that is the argument. the court: no, sir, just one talking head. 4721 i think you crossed the line as being a comment on the advocacy of the other side. i mean, you can accomplish the same thing, we have to depersonalize it away from -- mr. williams: i'll do that. the court: -- talk about the content of the argument and stay away from anything that sounds like they are trying to get you to do this and this is what they are doing. mr. williams: i'll do that. (sidebar concluded.) mr. williams: may i proceed? what i meant, ladies and gentlemen, by trying to inflame you, i meant by talking about things that had nothing to do with douglas duignan like youth targeting and youth marketing. we know that dennis -- i keep saying dennis, and i apologize for that, i mean douglas. we know that douglas duignan did not start smoking because he was targeted by some tobacco company advertisement or he saw movie stars smoking or he saw athletes smoking. but this morning how much did you hear about douglas 4722 duignan starting smoking because of youth targeting? that was meant to inflame you. that was meant to distract you away from the real issues involving douglas duignan. you heard about lies the tobacco companies said. they lied about this, and that is not right. they lied about that, and that is not right. but once again, those lies were not tied to douglas duignan, and he is the only smoker, the only smoker, who is important in this case and who this case is about. now, being a juror is a difficult task, especially in a case like this where you have information raining down on you like the worst thunderstorm you have been in. it is almost like you have to separate the wheat from the chaff, the wheat being what is important, what is about douglas duignan, and the shaft being the stuff that has nothing to do with douglas duignan, like i talked about youth targeting for a moment ago, because we know he did not start smoking because of youth targeting. and so i'm going to go about the evidence that you have heard separating that wheat from the chaff and talking about that. 4723 now, i'm going to talk about some chaff the plaintiffs have put before you. you have seen hours of videos that had nothing to do with douglas duignan. live witness have come in here and testified about things that had nothing to do with douglas duignan. in fact, one of the plaintiffs main witnesses was dr. proctor, you will remember. he was on that stand for four whole days at $6,000 a day plus weekends and he did not even know his name. and he did not know anything about him. you saw irrelevancies this morning, like marketing documents from r.j. reynolds from 1927 to 1928. that was long before he was born. it had nothing to do with douglas duignan. you also saw marketing documents when -- long after he was a minor. he was born in 1950. so he would have been under 18 in 1968. and you have seen documents from the '70s and '80s and '90 when he was a full-grown man. again, those are irrelevancies, those are distractions, and they are meant to distract you from the real evidence, which involves douglas duignan 4724 now, two weeks ago -- more than two weeks ago when i was standing right here giving you my opening statement, i told you what i expected the evidence in this case to show. for example, i told you that douglas duignan started smoking because of his stepfather, and it had nothing to do with r.j. reynolds. and as you are about to go deliberate and decide this case, that is still true after hearing all the of the evidence. it is still true that he continued to smoke although his doctor told him that he would be dead in five years if he did not quit, in the mid 1970s; and that is still true and let me just say something. the plaintiffs tried to diss dennis duignan, and that is why i probably kept saying his name at the first time of my closing argument. i wanted to address that. dennis duignan was douglas duignan's brother and they were very close, and you heard that statement that he made about what the doctor told him. there is -- and you are the judges of the facts and you judge credibility, 4725 douglas -- dennis duignan had no reason to make up that story. there is no motivation for him to make up that statement. there is plenty of motivation for plaintiffs to want to refute that statement. when you become a juror, you do not leave your common sense out there. you do not walk in this courtroom without all your experiences. just use your common sense. mrs. duignan got on the stand and told you that she went to the doctor with him all the time, and that she knew everything about him. but we found out that there were a lot of things that she did not know about her husband, and one of the things was this statement that he told his brother dennis duignan about him being told by his doctor to quit, you are going to be dead in five years if you do not, and he responded by saying, he was going to continue smoking. so that is one of the things that i told you during my opening statement and that is still true. it is still true that dennis -- douglas duignan was not fooled or mislead by any concealment of smoking's dangers or 4726 addictiveness by r.j.r. and it is still true that he smoked filtered cigarettes, not because of some tobacco company advertisement, but because he did not like getting tobacco if his mouth. i told you that standing right here two and a half weeks ago, and that is still true, based on the evidence that you have heard. it is also still true that he did not rely on r.j. reynolds or cigarette company advertising or statements or ads in making his smoking choices. his wife, who you heard testify, told us that he chose his cigarettes based on price, availability and flavor. those things. all those things are still true no matter what other evidence you had -- you heard coming from that stand, the things that i outlined for you in my opening statement are still true. and with that in mind, there are a couple of specific questions on the verdict form that i want to go over with you. mr. ware talked with you about questions 1, 2 and 3, the class membership questions, and i'm not going to repeat that. if you answer "no" to any one of those 4727 questions, the lawsuit is over. but if you disagree and answer "yes" and move on to question 4 regarding proportioning responsibility for the legal cause of douglas duignan's lung cancer and death, i want to talk about why, for r.j. reynolds, the evidence should lead you to determine that it has zero percent responsibility for douglas duignan's addiction and death. now, mr. paige suggested that you impose thirty percent on r.j. reynolds, but as long as it adds up to 100, the form -- and can we put that up -- you can proportion responsibility wherever the evidence leads you. and the plaintiff has admitted some fault, so some fault has to go to them. and here is the verdict form. but as you recall, back on august 21st, the last day of jury selection, one of the questions that i asked to the whole group was: would anyone have a problem with finding a tobacco company not at fault if that is what the evidence indicated, regarding a smoker's death? none of you raised your hands, and that is one of the reasons why you were selected to be fair 4728 and impartial jurors in this case. i'm going to review the evidence and if you reach question four, i'm going to ask you to find r.j. reynolds zero percent responsible for douglas duignan's lung cancer and death. now it is important that you know that responsibility can only be assigned to actions that were a legal cause of douglas duignan's addiction and death. and you will see in your instructions that the judge read to you this morning, that in order to be a legal cause of douglas duignan's addiction and death, the action must directly and in natural and continuous sequence produce or contributed substantially to producing such lung cancer so that it can be said that but for -- and that is an important but for -- the addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine, the lung cancer would not have occurred. now, that is a mouthful. here is a way to think about it a little more simply. if he had never smoked an r.j. reynolds cigarette would the result be the same? and if the answer to that question is yes, if the result would be the same, if he still would 4729 have become addicted, if he still would have developed lung cancer, if he still would have died of lung cancer caused by smoking, everything -- if everything would be the same, if he would never touched an r.j.r. cigarette, then r.j.r. cigarettes were not a legal cause of his addiction and death. and answer to that question is yes. and here is why. and i'm going to talk about addiction first. smoking r.j.r. cigarettes were a minimal factor, if at all, in douglas duignan becoming addicted, and that is based on the plaintiff's expert witness, dr. burns. dr. burns testified that douglas duignan became addicted in 1970 when he was released from the federal reformatory. and here is what dr. burns said. he was asked these questions and i think mr. ware showed these, but this is an important point. he was asked: "question: is it your view that by 1970, based on what you know, douglas duignan was in fact addicted or that his smoking was consistent with addiction?" he said: 4730 "answer: yes. i believe that is a yes. "question: all right. and so by that time, he came out of federal prison, in 1970, it is your view and opinion that he was likely addicted at that time?" and, again, he said: "answer: i believe that is correct." so we are talking about a period of time from approximately 1964, when douglas duignan started smoking, to 1970. and we know we can cut off the period from 1967 to 1970 because he was smoking the bugler roll-your-own, and the judge has instructed you that neither r.j. reynolds nor philip morris is responsible for that. so, essentially, we are talking about three years, from 1964, when he started smoking, approximately, to 1967 what was he smoking? we know he started with chesterfield cigarette butts then chesterfield full cigarettes, and r.j. reynolds is not responsible for that, not legally responsible for that. we know during that time he might have smoked some other brands, but those were not 4731 identified. so r.j. reynolds is not responsible for that. remember we are in a courtroom and it takes evidence. he might have smoked some marlboro during that time, but, again, r.j. reynolds is not responsible for that. now, mr. paige brought up tareyton. tareyton is a brand made by r.j. reynolds, but here is what dennis told us about how much tareyton they smoked. he was asked, and this is when they were young: "question: i believe i heard you mention a tary- -- mention a tareyton cigarette that you remembered that brand when you were growing up." he said: "answer: yes. "question: do you remember when that was, about what year?" he says: "answer: no, he does not have any idea." but this is the important piece right here: "question: and was this brand that you 4732 smoked freq- -- was this a brand that you smoked frequently?" and he said: "answer: probably not. and the importance of that comes from dr. burns' testimony. again, the plaintiff's nicotine addiction expert. dr. burns said even for people who become addicted quickly, it takes at least a year or two of smoking. it does not happen overnight, it does not happen by just smoking a couple of packs of cigarettes. here is what dr. burns said. he was asked: "question: and in this case -- well, i do not know whether you can give us an average, but, in general, would you agree with me that it takes four or five years of smoking, perhaps regular smoking, for the average person to become addicted?" and dr. burns' answer: "answer: i do not believe that is a statement that is scientifically validated." but then he says: "answer: some individuals become addicted 4733 relatively rapidly, within a year or two. a year or two. smoking a few packs of tareyton is not going to get you addicted." and that is the only evidence there is about his smoking, between 1964 and 1970, r.j.r. cigarettes. so r.j.r. cannot be a legal cause of his addiction. there is no evidence to support that. now, let me address why r.j.r. is not legally responsible for his lung cancer and death. in a nutshell, we are talking from 1971 until he died in 1992. r.j.r. made several brands that douglas duignan liked. and he smoked those on occasion when he could not get his main brand. there were several that are named, the camel, the raleigh, the viceroy, the doral. he smoked those. but it is important for you to remember that r.j.r. nearly making cigarettes cannot be a legal cause of his lung cancer and death, the judge told you that. r.j.r. merely advertising cigarettes cannot be a legal cause of his lung cancer and death. and r.j.r. selling cigarettes cannot be a legal cause of his lung cancer and death. 4734 remember that his wife martha, when she was on the stand, admitted that when he could not get his main brand, when he smoked the other brands, he smoked for price, availability and flavor. because he smoked and liked r.j.r. cigarettes because of their price, does not make it legally responsible for his lung cancer and death. because he smoked and liked and r.j.r. cigarettes were available does not make it legally responsible for his lung cancer and death. and because he liked the flavor of some r.j.r. cigarettes, he chose them, he liked them, does not make r.j.r. legally responsible for his lung cancer and death. so based on that, ladies and gentlemen, in a nutshell, r.j.r. is not legally responsible for his addiction, for his lung cancer or his death. and if you get to question 4, i would ask that you impose zero responsibility on r.j. reynolds. i want to talk about the concealment question on the verdict form. it is question 6 4735 and 7. and here they are. i'm not going to read them to you again. the first one is the concealment question as to r.j. reynolds and the second one is the agreement to conceal, the conspiracy question. and, essentially, as to both questions, plaintiffs have to prove that important information on the dangers or addictiveness of smoking that r.j. reynolds concealed was a legal cause of douglas duignan's death, and that if douglas duignan had known that important information he would not have died. that is what the plaintiffs have to prove. now, if you get to these questions and we hope that you do not, but if you do get to these questions, the evidence should dictate that you answer no. and the reason is, no matter how many lies that mr. paige says that r.j. reynolds told, douglas duignan was not affected by it. he was not harmed by them. he knew smoking was deadly. he was not mislead by r.j. reynolds. he was not fooled by r.j. reynolds. you know the evidence already about him being told very early by his doctor, his smoking career -- he would be dead if he 4736 did not quit, but it is not just that one doctor relation -- warning from the doctor that we are relying on here. he also -- there is other evidence that he knew smoking was deadly. he called his cigarettes "cancer sticks." he called them "coffin nails." and that is just not a saying. you do not call everything a coffin nail or a cancer stick. everything that you eat or drink or anything like that. those statements mean something. they show that you know something. that you know what you are doing. he was described as a person who could make decisions and was strong-willed. douglas duignan knew that smoking was deadly. he was not looking to r.j.r. for smoking information. he knew it, that it was deadly, he knew it was dangerous, but he decided to do it. and people do that on occasion. now, plaintiffs primarily rely on dr. proctor to support the concealment claims. dr. proctor was on the stand for four days. he did not know his name, but that is not the big thing. the big important thing is he did not know anything about douglas duignan. 4737 if he forgot his name or something like, that is forgivable. but what is not is he did not know what he believed, he did not know what he thought, he did not know what he said, and there is information, there is deposition testimony about douglas duignan. dr. proctor did not study any of it, and he could. so dr. proctor knew none of that so not much that he said on that witness stand for four days can really help you answer the questions that you have to answer on that verdict form. dr. proctor showed you a lot of irrelevant evidence, like marketing documents before douglas duignan was born. allegations of youth marketing or youth targeting long after douglas duignan was a grown man. and, in fact, a lot of the evidence that the plaintiff showed you this morning and during this case regarding their concealment claims were half truths, they were mischaracterizations, and they cherrypicked misleading language out of the documents so you will not get the whole picture. i'm going to go back and point out some of those because it is important that you get the 4738 whole picture before you start deliberating. you saw in part some of the evidence from plaintiffs, but you did not get the whole story and during the trial you did not get the whole story until sometimes we got up and got a chance to cross examine their witnesses. but i want you to have a complete coherent picture when you start deciding these important issues that you have to decide. now, one of the things that you just saw and got part of the story from the plaintiffs was the flintstones. they showed you their video with the flintstones video with dr. proctor and they showed you again today. they showed flinstones advertising winston cigarettes. and that was intended to shock and appall you. it was only on cross examination that you learned that the flintstones was introduced as an adult cartoon. on -- not on saturday afternoon like it became, but it was an evening adult cartoon introduced in 1960. you did not learn that until we got a chance to cross examine dr. proctor. it was based on the honeymooners, jackie gleason, art carney, audrey meadows, an adult comedy, and 4739 sponsors were, other than r.j. reynolds and winston, were miles lab, alka-seltzer, and one a day vitamins. it was not kid stuff, it was not intended to be, and it was not a kid show. it was on at 8:30 at night. and r.j.r.'s sponsorship only lasted for one year, 1960. for example, more people probably saw that video that you saw, the flintstones, during dr. proctor's 70 trials than saw it when it was actually on back in 1960. but the question for you is, what did that have to do with douglas duignan? that was one of the distractions i was talking about a few minutes ago. something to inflame you, make you mad, and shock you. because r.j.r. only sponsored it one year, in 1960. and in this case, remember, it is about douglas duignan, he was ten years old. that was years before he touched his first cigarette. r.j.r. ended its sponsorship in 1961 and that was it. so this has nothing to do with douglas duignan. they showed you a document from a marketing plan presentation from when douglas duignan was in his mid 20s. this is 1974. an 4740 r.j.r. document. and they focused on -- the plaintiffs focused on the 14 to 24 year olds. but what they did not tell you is that when it is talking about the 14 to 24 year olds, it is talking about tomorrow's cigarette business, not today's. and i emphasize it is tomorrow's cigarette business that is being talked about here, and douglas duignan is no longer a minor. he is 24 when this is being talked about. but when the document itself, which you did not see until we got a chance to cross examine their witnesses, when it starts talking about the marketing plans of r.j.r., it focuses on 18 to 24 year olds and 18 to 34 year olds, as you see there. to show you one piece of the document and not show you the rest of it can be misleading and give you the wrong impression. and that is what we do not want to do. now, we also showed you some of the ads that came out of this campaign, that came out of this meeting. and we wanted you to see the ads because they were focusing on the tobacco company as targeting youth. and we wanted you 4741 to see to get your own impressions. and we had a little fun with dr. proctor on this. the guy -- this is a winston ad that came out of this campaign. and do not forget that douglas duignan is already 24 years old. but look at these folks. these are not kids. this is not something that is meant or intended or reasonably appeals to youth. the guy in the left-hand corner looks like an undertaker. the guy in the far -- on the bottom has gray hair. these are not kids. but it took cross examination to show you this. we had to show you this. they just showed you the document focusing on youth saying youth targeting. we had to show you the actual ads so you could get the whole picture and get the whole story. we also showed the salem ads. and again, these are not kids here. this is not directed, intended for youth, and it would not appeal to youth. there was also an effort during this trial to suggest to you that drs. teague and rodgman -- you heard those names when it came to r.j.r. documents. those were scientists at 4742 r.j.r. in the 1950s and '60s. and plaintiffs tried to suggest to you that they were light years ahead of the scientific community and the public about things on nicotine and carcinogens, and r.j.r. concealed that information. that is what you were told by the plaintiff and that was implied by certain portions of the documents that they showed to you. for example, they showed you a document that dr. teague wrote in 1972 indicating that nicotine was a sine qua non -- they showed you this this morning too, not just with dr. proctor during the trial -- essential element of tobacco. this was written by dr. teague in 1972. but what they did not show you and what you did not see until cross examination, you found out that the same idea was expressed in reader's digest in 1950. nicotine is the essential ingredient in tobacco. so they are saying it is in a secret document at r.j. reynolds in 1972, but the same information is in the public domain years before that. 4743 another one. they showed you a document from 1959 when dr. rodgman notes that eight carcinogens in tobacco smoke had been identified. and mr. paige asked dr. proctor, did reynolds tell folks that? and his answer was no. but what they did not tell you, which we had to bring out on cross examination, and that is the point of this, is i want you to get the whole story, because if you just listen to what mr. paige said, it is inflammatory and you get the wrong impression. mr. gustafson: objection, your honor, he is doing it again. the court: mr. williams, let us focused on the evidence and not who says what. mr. williams: yes, your honor. the dr. rodgman article was in 1959. and he says that eight carcinogens were in tobacco smoke. but what you did not hear until we got a chance to talk to you is that the same information was reported and published in reader's digest the very same month. they both happen in november 1959. and again, just showing you the rodgman 4744 document was to make you mad, it was a distraction -- mr. gustafson: objection, your honor. the court: i think that goes to the motive. so let us stop talking about motives, let us start focusing on the evidence. mr. gustafson: i want a curative instruction, your honor. mr. williams: your honor, i just said it was distracting. mr. gustafson: that is the fourth time. the court: i'm going to decline that. mr. williams: ladies and gentlemen, again, none of this had anything to do with dennis duignan -- or i'm sorry, douglas duignan. you just saw part of the evidence, but it is important that you see the whole picture and what information was really available at that time. you were told just about what the tobacco companies did not disclose. but the second piece of that, when you see the same information years before in reader's digest, it means you are not being told that the same information is in the public domain -- 4745 gustafson: objection, your honor. he is doing the same thing. mr. williams: i have not said anything about them. the court: overruled. mr. williams: it is in the public domain and has been in the public domain for years before. now, i want to change subjects a little bit. mr. paige this morning said, mr. williams and mr. ware should tell you a little bit about their respective companies. i am going to tell you a little bit about r.j. reynolds and what it did. i want to respond to that. i want to talk about things that do matter that r.j.r. did. i want to put this picture together because it came out during this trial, but it came out during cross examination from witnesses who were here for the plaintiffs trying to help the plaintiffs win, so it came out in bits and pieces. and i want you to get the complete story about some of the things that r.j. reynolds did, and i want you to have a coherent whole picture when you go back to deliberate. 4746 i want to focus on things that were actually done, not things that were just written on pieces of paper, not words that were written on a piece of paper like thoughts and ideas that never came to fruition that nobody carried through on or anything like that. but i want you to know what r.j. reynolds actually did over the years because i think it is important that you see that some of the things that you see written in documents never happened. and dr. proctor even agreed with that. when he was asked, and it came out grudgingly: "well, a straight answer to my question would be just, no, you do not have any evidence that the ideas that claude teague expressed in that memo were ever presented to any executive at r.j.r, do you?" and he said, "narrowly, i guess that is literally true." it came out grudgingly, but it is true. a ton of stuff can be written down on paper, but what matters is what r.j. reynolds actually did. and i want to summarize and go through some of that with you right now. and i will be 4747 efficient with it. i'm going to start off at the period of time right when douglas duignan was born, about 1950, after world war ii had ended. dr. proctor told you that america came out of world war ii having a supercharged feeling of self-confidence. he talked about how it was a period of great technological optimism, how there was confidence in the power of technology. and in the cigarette context, dr. proctor told you that there was a naive optimism that whatever was wrong with cigarettes could be fixed. and so when the epidemiological studies and the mouse skin paintings and all that information came out saying that something may be wrong with cigarettes, even if the companies did not think there was a problem, r.j.r. did something about it. it hired personnel, it built plants, and it did extensive research on cigarettes and cigarette smoke. what did they do? claude teague, he was a chemist. they asked him to survey the scientific literature from all over the world and to find out what the relationship was 4748 between cigarettes and cancer. and in 1953, he produced this report complete with 78 citations about the scientific literature that existed at that point in time on cigarettes and cancer. what else did they do? a year later, in 1954, they hired alan rodgman, an analytical chemist, to find out what in cigarette smoke, what components might be causing the problem. what was harmful? and he explored ways to eliminate the harms -- to first find out what they are and then to eliminate them. and here is what dr. proctor said about that. he admitted that cigarette companies had spent enormous research, had made enormous research efforts in that era, meaning the 1950s and '60s, and he also said that they spent a lot of money invested in the raft of different kinds of research projects both internally and externally to find out about cigarettes and cigarette smoke. and that is from the plaintiff's witness. for example, one of the things they did -- there is a set of experiments that is told about in one of the documents that is in evidence, 4749 it is called "the optimum composition of tobacco smoke," and this involved a big experiment, 120 separate experiments, in fact, to find out about polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons -- i always have trouble saying that -- and it involved a half a million cigarettes to be used to find out about this carcinogen. and according to dr. proctor, this experiment was carried out, these experiments were carried out by alan rodgman, and according to dr. proctor, he was a good chemist, he used the best methods of the day to identify constituents of cigarette smoke, and he identified compounds that had not been identified before. these are things that reynolds is doing, not just written on paper, but things that it is actually doing. and you heard that dr. rodgman did not just do things, but he published his work. he gave speeches about his work and he furnished a list of carcinogens in cigarette smoke to the surgeon general's committee, and that list helped the surgeon general's committee develop the 1964 report. and reynolds was acknowledged 4750 for that in the report. now, according to dr. proctor, over time reynolds scientists kept going on to study cigarette tobacco smoke and discovered about half of the compounds that are identified now in tobacco smoke. so once again, these are not just words on paper, these are things that reynolds is actually doing. as we go forward in the 1950s into the 1960s, you saw a memo from a mr. galloway, the president of r.j.r., to dr. senkus, the head of the research and development department, urging cooperation with the federal government. and this is important because this morning mr. gustafson said what they said internally was always the truth. he said that when he was talking to you this morning. well, this is something that was said internally. this is something that tobacco companies -- this is one of those internal company documents. this is the president of reynolds telling the research and development director that: in cooperation with others, you should push the work concerning tobacco and health. you should prepare a plan to foster 4751 any relationship with the government personnel in the quest for a mutual understanding of the facts ultimately to gain their cooperation and proper research of the subject. if there is a safer cigarette, let us continue and increase our efforts in this program. please prepare a plan to carry it out. he told you that everything they said internally was the truth. this is something that they were saying internally. and r.j.r. did push for a safer cigarette. it participated in that tobacco working group that you heard about, that was the collaboration between the national cancer institute and the tobacco industry from 1968 to 1978, to try to develop a less hazardous cigarette. and again, this is something that r.j. reynolds was doing, these are not just words on paper, this is things that it did. i want to address briefly the issue of filters. you have heard a lot about filtered cigarettes. the plaintiffs have spent a long time making the claim that tobacco companies advertised filters as being safer, knew that they were not, and then in about 2000, the 4752 documents came out and we saw that filters were not safe. well, that is not the full story. that is not the whole picture. let us talk about what actually happened. and dr. proctor admitted some of this, but you did not learn it until cross examination. he admitted that in the 1950s, '60s, '70s and '80s, so 40 basic years, there was scientific research, 40 or 50 large scientific epidemiological studies performed by respected cancer researchers that had nothing to do the tobacco industry that concluded that smokers of filtered cigarettes have lower rates of lung cancer than unfiltered cigarette smokers. and that is 40 years of good science. that is just not one experiment or two experiments, that is 40 years of good science with that consistent result. now, based on that 40 years of good science, the public health community urged the cigarette makers to manufacture filtered cigarettes, and it told smokers to quit, but if you do not quit, smoke a filtered cigarette instead of an unfiltered cigarette because it 4753 may be a little less hazardous. that much is beyond dispute. then we are told by drs. burns and proctor that at the turn of the century, two things happened. the internal company documents were released, and some of them said the filters do not help. and then the 40 years of epidemiological research and scientific studies were reevaluated and reinterpreted, and dr. burns said they were wrong. and that story is supposed to convince you that filters were a fraud, that the companies always knew it, but that is not the complete story, ladies and gentlemen. you need to hear all of it. first of all, among those who played a role in the re-evaluation of the epidemiological studies was dr. burns. and dr. burns makes millions of dollars testifying on behalf of plaintiffs in cigarette cases, and so he is not an unbiased scientist or an unbiased medical researcher. but there is more. the government reevaluated those epidemiological studies in 2001. and here time is important of when what happened. 2001, the 4754 government reevaluates the epidemiological studies saying that filtered cigarettes are safer than unfiltered cigarettes. but the world health organization had access to all the tobacco company documents, the re-evaluation of the epidemiological studies, and it still said the filtered cigarettes reduced lung cancer risks over unfiltered cigarettes. here is what the world health organization said in 2003, two years after the government's re-evaluation: "a relative reduction in risk has also been observed among long-term smokers of filtered cigarettes compared to smokers of unfiltered cigarettes." and that is after all the tobacco company documents that they have talked about that have been released, all is open to the public. the world health organization said that two years after that, that the studies still show that filtered cigarettes were a little bit safer. and the world health organization reaffirmed that position in 2012. here is what it said in 2012: "it has been recognized that the actual quantitative impact of reduced tar 4755 and filter-tipped cigarettes is difficult to assess. nevertheless, it was concluded that changes in cigarette types since the 1950s have probably tended to reduce the risk for lung cancer associated with tobacco smoking." and once again, you did not hear that until we were able to cross examine the plaintiff's witnesses. dr. proctor admitted that. that is a fact that we brought out and we brought to you. meaning the defense. so the bottom line is that based on 40 years of epidemiological studies, the public health community encouraged the companies to manufacture filtered cigarettes and encouraged those who would not quit smoking to smoke them. and until this day, the world health organization says that that is a good thing. now, i want to say a word about nicotine manipulation. mr. paige discussed that with you this morning. and during dr. proctor's examination, he showed you memos from r.j.r. scientists, claude teague was one of them, experimenting with different levels of nicotine. and the allegation was that 4756 experiments were being done with different levels of nicotine to hook smokers. but it was only on cross examination that you learned that this was a public health community effort to develop a less hazardous cigarette, one with low tar and medium nicotine. you heard about dr. russell, the renowned british cancer researcher. he said, and i think dr. proctor repeated it, "people smoke for nicotine, but they die from tar." and the public health community advocated a low-tar medium-nicotine cigarette. a bunch of folks in the public health community and organizations did that, like dr. russell, who you saw information about, dr. richard doll, the noted epidemiologist, the tobacco working group, which i've talked about, dr. murray jarvik, the co-inventor of the nicotine patch. and in the 1981 surgeon general's report, it advocated low-tar medium-nicotine cigarettes because that might be safer, it might be less hazardous, because people would get the nicotine but not the tar which contains the carcinogens. 4757 you saw r.j.r. internal documents where they were following that conversation concerning low-tar, medium-nicotine cigarettes. this is one of the documents that we had to show to you. but r.j. reynolds was following that conversation. so the whole story is that both the public health community and r.j. reynolds and the cigarette industry were thinking about and discussing adjusting nicotine in cigarettes to make a less hazardous cigarette. and you can pejoratively use the term "manipulating," but this is the whole story, that the public health community was saying, let us see if a medium-nicotine cigarette and with low-tar might be safer. you can say "manipulation," but it was adjusting and it was an open debate. the cigarette industry and the public health community were talking about it. i want to talk about a few other things that reynolds did. you heard some evidence in this case about premier and eclipse. remember, that is a cigarette that heats tobacco and does not burn it, with the theory being it is the burning tobacco that creates the carcinogens. 4758 dr. proctor told you that r.j.r. spent a lot of money on developing premier, a cigarette that heats the tobacco, and it was tested, and the results showed that it did in fact lower carcinogens, a lot of them. ninety percent of the polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons were lowered. benzene was lowered. benzopyrene was lowered. acetylcholine was lowered. acrolein was lowered. those are all carcinogens. and tobacco-specific nitrosamines, they were all lowered in premier. and premier was test marketed, and it was marketed, advertised, and we told -- r.j. reynolds told smokers it is a cleaner smoke, and it explained by heating tobacco, premier changes the very composition of cigarette smoke, substantially reducing many of the controversial compounds found in the smoke of tobacco-burning cigarettes. but even after this investment, this technological breakthrough, premier did not do well in the market because it did not taste good, it did not smell good, so it failed. but r.j.r. did not stop there. it went back to the 4759 drawing board, went back to the lab, and created and developed eclipse, a better tasting, better smelling premier, and even dr. proctor grudgingly acknowledged that both premier and eclipse were less harmful than traditional cigarettes. here is what he said: "question: and everything else being equal, both premier and eclipse were less harmful than traditional cigarettes?" he said: "answer: yeah. everything else being equal." again that is something that reynolds is doing, it is just not words on paper. i want to say a word about tobacco curing. you heard about that. and curing is just drying the tobacco. dr. proctor spent some time talking about curing tobacco, and we learned that the tobacco farmers from whom reynolds buys its tobacco was curing it with propane gas and that propane gas was creating a carcinogen called nitro- -- tobacco-specific nitrosamines. and when reynolds discovered this, dr. proctor testified that it discovered it, it 4760 shared the information, told other tobacco companies, and published its findings, and it paid farmers to change their equipment in their barns to cure tobacco differently, so that tobacco-specific nitrosamines would not be created. reynolds also learned that certain fertilizers were being used that increase these nitrosamines, and, once again, it persuaded tobacco farmers to change fertilizer so these nitrosamines would not be created. again, things reynolds is doing, not just words on paper. finally, i want to talk about zonnic. you heard about zonnic during the trial. zonnic is a nicotine replacement product by reynolds. it is a nicotine replacement aid to help people to stop smoking. this morning mr. paige said, tobacco companies should do something to help people. this is something that reynolds is doing to help people. it is to help people to quit smoking. it is sold in the very same places that you find cigarettes being sold, in gas stations and convenience stores. so if a 4761 smoker wants to help him or herself, and use nicotine replacement products, they can get those products in the same place where they buy their cigarettes. now, i want to say a word about the last question on the verdict form. it is the punitive damages question. both mr. paige and mr. ware talked about it. but if you get that far on the verdict form, it means that you have fully compensated the duignan family already. you will already award it whatever money you think is fair to compensate them for their loss. punitive damages are simply more money to the plaintiff. they do not go to the american cancer society, they do not go stop smoking programs, they do not go to the state of florida, it is just more money to the plaintiffs. now, mr. paige said something -- punitive damages are for two reasons: to punish for past misconduct and to deter future misconduct. i believe mr. paige told you that. and when he was talking about tobacco companies this morning, he said nobody does that anymore. nobody does what the tobacco companies did in 4762 1950. so, in fact, mr. paige is telling you, partially, that there is no need for punitive damages in this case because there is no need to deter future misconduct. he said nobody does that, nobody would do that today. and if nobody would do that today, there is no need for punitive damages in this case. and when you look back on the things actually done by reynolds, i suggest to you that there is no need for punitive damages based on what it is done in the past. and just this past half an hour or so that i've been talking to you, i've summarized some of the things that reynolds actually did. and it is summarized on this demonstrative that i created. and i'm not going to go back over everything, but these are the things that i talked about. i started during the period of time that douglas duignan was born and carried through during has lifetime. and these all things that reynolds did during that period of time. but i'm not going to suggest to you that r.j. reynolds has been the perfect company over 4763 past 50 or 60 years because it has not. i'm not going to suggest to you that some of its representatives have not said stupid things in documents, because they have. and there is no question that r.j.r. should have come out and said cigarettes cause lung cancer sooner. but the fact that it was slow did not harm douglas duignan, and that is important. i'll say it again. the fact that reynolds was a little slow in admitting causation did not harm douglas duignan. and the reason is that he knew that smoking was dangerous, there is some smokers that may not have known, but douglas duignan is not one of those smokers. he knew and you know why he knew. i'm not going to repeat it about the doctor, about the cancer sticks, about the general information. douglas duignan knew that smoking was dangerous. and so did millions of others, frankly, because millions of people, as you have heard, found out smoking was dangerous and they quit. but they were motivated to quit and they, in fact, did quit. now, if you reach this question on 4764 punitive damages there are a couple of things that i want to say. first of all, the engle findings do not establish liability for punitive damages and cannot be used in -- and you cannot use the engle findings in making your determination as to whether punitive damages should be imposed or the plaintiffs are entitled to them. so to answer question 12, you cannot use the engle findings. the plaintiffs have to establish that by evidence, by the clear and convincing standard that you have heard about, which is higher than the just more likely than not. and also, you can only consider conduct by r.j. reynolds that actually caused harm to the duignan family. and as i've discuss suggested to you, no harm -- no misconduct by r.j. reynolds has caused harm to the duignan family. so based on the evidence in this case, and the facts that you know, the facts that you know about douglas duignan, i would suggest to you that if you get to that entitlement, the punitive damages question, that you do not 4765 impose punitive damages on r.j.r. and that you answer that question "no" based on the evidence in this case. i'm almost done, ladies and gentlemen. this is the last chance that i get to speak with you. plaintiffs get a rebuttal, they get the last word. mr. ware and i do not get a chance to respond. when they start telling you about all the bad things they believe tobacco companies did, there are two things i would like you to keep in mind. the first is what we talked about already, the things that r.j. reynolds actually did, not things you just see on paper, but things r.j. reynolds actually did, the things reynolds got right, that is one thing. but more importantly, i'd like you to keep in mind why we are here. why you spent the past almost three weeks with us, three weeks of your life in this courtroom, and the reason is douglas duignan. it is truly all about him. and he knew that smoking was deadly but he enjoyed it, so he did it, so he smoked anyway, and r.j. reynolds should not be responsible for 4766 that and you should not impose liability on reynolds because of the decisions that douglas duignan made, decisions that were not affected by anything that r.j. reynolds did wrong, and this case i want you to know means a lot to r.j. reynolds, too. and you have promised to be fair to it even though it is a big company, just like you would a person. and i would hope that you would do that. and, once again, i thank you for your service.