mr. furr: may it please the court, counsel, 16 mr. duke. good morning, ladies and gentlemen. ladies and gentlemen, i think the only possible place i 18 can start this morning is to begin by thanking you for your 19 jury service. we have the greatest justice system in the 20 world. and the jury system is right at the heart of our 21 justice system. serving as a juror is one of the highest 22 civic responsibilities we have in our society. it may be 23 secondary only to serving in our military. why is our system so great? our system is great 25 because our system is fair. it is fair to everyone. if 47 1 someone thinks they have been wronged they can bring a 2 lawsuit. they can come to court and ask a jury to award 3 them money. but it is fair to both sides because they have 4 to prove their case. they do not get money just because they 5 filed a lawsuit. they have to prove their case. 6 how do they have to prove their case? they have to 7 prove their case with facts, they have to prove their case 8 with evidence, they have to prove their case under the law 9 that the court is going to instruct you on, that i'm going 10 to discuss with you a bit this morning. they cannot prove their case with rhetoric, they cannot 12 prove their case with speculation or guesswork, they cannot 13 prove their case by trying to engender sympathy for one of 14 the parties. they have to prove their case with the 15 evidence, with the facts. ladies and gentlemen, with all 16 due respect, there has been a complete failure of proof in 17 this case. the plaintiffs have made multiple claims and they have 19 proven none of them. and i'm going to spend my time talking 20 about the way that they have failed to prove any of their 21 claims. it is very important at the outset to remember -- 22 you have heard it already -- it is their burden to prove their 23 claims. their claims are not proven unless they produce the 24 evidence and facts to do so. that is the burden they take 25 when they come in here and ask you for money. 48 1 so what is this case about? let us remind ourselves. 2 this case is about mrs. sarah duke. it is not about all 3 smokers, it is not about other smokers. the class action 4 portion of this case is over. it is now a case where 5 mr. duke gets to try to prove his claims. it is not about 6 the public health. i mean the only witnesses they brought 7 you were public health officials. and i'm going to talk to 8 you about their perspective on things and why it simply 9 does not add up to proof in a case about an individual. it is about sarah duke. and what else is this case 11 about? they did not get to it until the very end but the 12 case is about money. you have now heard that mr. duke is 13 here to ask you to make him a millionaire because his mother 14 smoked cigarettes for decades, despite being warned over and 15 over and over about the dangers without ever trying to quit 16 for decades. that is their claim as to why he should be made 17 a millionaire. now, they have made very specific legal claims in this 19 case. the case is not just a general issue of who is right 20 and who is wrong. he is filed legal claims. he has to prove 21 the specific issues that you are going to see on your verdict 22 form. and he has the burden to do that. but the trouble is 23 he cannot prove his claims because he does not have the 24 evidence. when evidence is missing, when it is not 25 available, that is the plaintiff's problem. not the 49 1 defendant's problem. because the plaintiffs have to prove 2 their claims. 3 you will see that they cannot prove their claims because 4 the evidence is either missing or the evidence is even -- or 5 the evidence is inconsistent with the claims that they have 6 made here. 7 let us look at the evidence that is missing. what is it 8 that we do not know about mrs. duke? because they cannot meet 9 their burden of proof without their evidence. that is what 10 they have got to produce to you. you know, we do not really 11 know when she started but more importantly, we do not know 12 what brand she started with. we do not know what mrs. duke 13 smoked until 1961 to 1963. that is the first time there is 14 any evidence that she was smoking winston cigarettes. she 15 would have been around 36 years old at that time. if the medical records are accurate with respect to 17 when she began smoking, she would have been smoking 18 somewhere in the range of 15 to 17 years when we do not know 19 whose brand she was smoking. there is no evidence that she 20 was smoking r.j. reynolds' brand during that time. and 21 that is the plaintiff's problem. because they have the 22 burden of proof. but they are asking you to blame r.j. reynolds for 24 everything. and you have to decide whether that is right, 25 whether they met their burden of proof. not only do we not 50 1 know a lot of the evidence, not only do the plaintiff not 2 have the evidence, like i said, a lot of the evidence is 3 inconsistent with their claims. 4 what do we know we know? we know that mrs. duke was 5 warned about the dangers of smoking the entire time she 6 smoked. she was warned by the public health community, she 7 was warned by the media, we know she was warned by her 8 family, she was warned by her doctors. and of course we 9 did not talk a lot about this, but from 1966 on she was 10 warned by every package of cigarettes that she picked up 11 that had a warning label on the side of packs. from 1971 12 on, every advertisement she saw had a warning label in the 13 advertisement. and she had very powerful personal warnings that we are 15 going to talk about. but you all know the evidence. you 16 know that her doctors and family gave her very powerful 17 personal warnings. what else do we know? we know that despite those 19 warnings that she did not make a single serious quit attempt 20 before 1996. that is a very important fact that relates to a 21 number of the issues that i'm going to discuss as we go 22 along. finally we know when she was diagnosed with lung cancer 24 and her surgeon refused to operate on her unless she quit, 25 what did she do? put them down, quit, cold turkey, no 51 1 withdrawal symptoms, and never picked them up again because 2 for the first time in her life she chose to stop smoking. 3 now we also know that the plaintiff has admitted that 4 her failure to try harder, that her failure to quit sooner 5 with a legal cause of her own death. you heard counsel make 6 that admission this morning during his closing argument. 7 ladies and gentlemen, this is just the wrong smoker for 8 this type of case. this is not a case about a smoker who 9 did not know that smoking was dangerous. it is not a case 10 about a smoker who tried over and over and over and made 11 some serious quit attempts and was simply unable to quit. this is a case about a woman who chose to smoke for 13 decades without trying to quit despite being warned and 14 begged by her family members to quit and despite watching 15 her husband die, what mr. duke described to us as a terrible 16 death caused by lung cancers related to smoking, and yet she 17 never even tried to quit. that is the type of plaintiff that 18 we have in this case. okay. i'm going to move to talking to you a little bit 20 more about some other issues in the case. and i'm going to 21 organize my closing around the verdict form. and i'm going 22 to start with an issue that plaintiff's counsel did not even 23 discuss with you for one second during his closing argument. 24 and there is a good reason that he did not discuss it with 25 you, because there is only one possible answer to the issue 52 1 that i'm about to discuss. 2 it is going to be the last question on your verdict 3 form. i believe it is question 10. it relates to something 4 called the statute of limitations. and here's the 5 instruction that you are going to get: in this case -- it 6 will be on page 21 of your instructions, by the way, 7 page 21. 8 in this case, plaintiff's suit would be barred, barred 9 if mrs. duke knew or by the exercise of reasonable care 10 should have known before may 5, 1990, that she had been 11 injured and that there was a reasonable possibility that the 12 injury was caused by cigarette smoking. defendant does not 13 need to prove that mrs. duke was actually diagnosed with a 14 smoking related injury before may 5, 1990, to prevail on 15 this defense. for purposes of this defense, the critical 16 event is not when a disease or medical condition was 17 actually diagnosed by a physician, but when the disease or 18 medical condition first manifested itself. mrs. duke knew or should have known that there was a 20 reasonable possibility an injury was caused by cigarette 21 smoking if the injury manifested itself to her in a way that 22 supplied some evidence of a causal relationship to cigarette 23 smoking. okay. what is this all about? it is a statute of 25 limitations defense. this is not some technicality. this 53 1 is a rule of law. the purpose of this rule of law is so 2 that claims have to be filed timely. why do we want claims 3 to be filed on time? because when claims are not filed on 4 time the evidence gets lost. and that is not fair to any of 5 the parties. and that is exactly what happened in this case. 6 the evidence has been lost. 7 so you see the instruction, a lot of words there, so 8 let me try to sort of unpack that instruction a little bit. 9 and you will get an opportunity and i encourage you to spend 10 time looking at page 21 on your instructions when you get to 11 them. but what you will see is that the question becomes 12 this when you sort of parse through it all: before may 5, 13 1990, did mrs. duke have some evidence that she had a 14 medical condition for which there a reasonable possibility 15 that it was caused by smoking? that is the question you have 16 to answer on verdict form question 10. and, ladies and 17 gentlemen, it was not discussed because there is only one 18 possible answer. and you know that already. this is the august 28, 1980 medical record from 20 dr. lloyd. mrs. duke is a 54year-old white female who comes 21 in to establish with a local physician. sarah has no 22 significant medical complaints until recently when she began 23 to have fullness in what she felt was congestion through her 24 chest region with mildly increased shortness of breath, 25 although this problem has been present for the past year or 54 1 so. she had no significant chest pain, per se, except for 2 the pressure and fullness in her chest region. she had no 3 other medical complaints. she has been followed in the past 4 by dr. andrews, and her only real problem has been that of 5 significant smoking where she smokes one to two packs of 6 cigarettes per day. 7 so what happens? she comes to her doctor complaining 8 of shortness of breath. as the medical record reflects, she 9 had been having problems with her breathing for about a year 10 or so and she would been seeing dr. andrews for that. then what happens? look at the diagnosis. probable 12 early chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and acute 13 bronchitis. and what does dr. lloyd prescribe to treat 14 that? number 2. begin stopping smoking. attempting to 15 come from two packs of cigarettes per day to none over a six 16 week period of time. so think about how that applies to the facts in this 18 case. did she have a medical condition? yes, she had 19 shortness of breath. the doctor did not have to tell her 20 that. it was something that she experienced and which led 21 her to come and see dr. lloyd. did she have some evidence that the shortness of breath 23 was related to smoking? dr. lloyd tells her, what you need 24 to do, sarah, to improve your health is to stop smoking. did she have that problem before may 5, 1990? this is 55 1 a medical record from august 28, 1980. she had it 10 years 2 before the time of may 5, 1990. 3 it is inconceivable that she did not know that she was 4 experiencing a medical condition that she believed was 5 related to smoking 10 years before the statute of 6 limitations. 7 but we have more evidence than that, because the 8 witnesses in this case all told you the same thing. this is 9 why this issue was ignored by plaintiffs. all the evidence 10 points in one direction. there is only one possible answer. 11 we talked about she subjectively recognized her symptoms, 12 her shortness of breath. that is why she came to the doctor. dr. lloyd, based on her symptoms and smoking history he 14 diagnosed her with early chronic copd and he told her to 15 quit to improve her breathing problems. that is what you 16 will recall he told you during his deposition. then -- this is probably why they did not address this 18 on closing statement -- their own witness, dr. cummings, 19 came here and told you that based on the 1980 medical record 20 mrs. duke continued smoking cigarettes despite knowledge 21 they were harming her. that is their witness. dr. tucker told you yesterday, and he did his dsm-iv 23 analysis, he was balanced, he was fair, he judged the 24 criteria early. we are going talk about that. but what he 25 told you on criteria number 7 in the dsm is that she 56 1 satisfied that because she smoked despite her knowledge of 2 smoking-related problems in 1980. 3 and even the fact witnesses told you this. everyone 4 knew it. laura duke came here and told you that she was 5 having a smoker's cough and breathing problems more than 6 five years before 1995. 7 so all of the evidence points in one direction. the 8 only possible -- i'm missing verdict question 10. here it 9 is. it is a little bit dangerous when i have control of the 10 clicker. sometimes i go a little fast. but you are going to see on verdict question 10, this 12 question: did mrs. duke know or should she have known in 13 the exercise of reasonable care on or before may 5, 1990, 14 that she had been injured and that there was a reasonable 15 possibility that her injury was caused by cigarette smoking? 16 answer: yes or no. there is only one possible answer. 17 there is no evidence to the contrary. it is an easy question 18 for you. i'm going to turn to discussing class membership. and 20 i'm going to continue discussing with you the questions on 21 the verdict form that you have to answer. it is important to 22 remember why class membership is so important, because 23 unless mrs. duke is a class member, the engle findings do not 24 even come into play. unless mrs. duke is a class member 25 this case is over. if you find -- and you will see the way 57 1 that your verdict form is structured -- that if she is not a 2 class member that you will be required to answer no to that 3 question, and then the case is over. 4 so i'm going to start with what she has to prove to be 5 a class member in this case. and the first thing i want to 6 remind you of is that this is a wrongful death case. it is 7 not a personal injury case. it is a wrongful death case. so 8 when you look to question 2 on your verdict form, this is 9 what you are going to see: do you find from a preponderance 10 of the evidence that mrs. duke's addiction to cigarettes 11 containing nicotine was a legal cause of her lung cancer and 12 death? that is the question you are going to you have to 13 answer. now there is actually two parts to that. one is whether 15 addiction to nicotine was a cause of her death; the second 16 is whether addiction to the nicotine was a legal cause of 17 her lung cancer. i'm going to address them both while i'm 18 talking to you this morning. i'll begin by talking with you 19 about this issue of whether addiction to nicotine caused her 20 death. you heard this morning from plaintiff's counsel that 22 they were quite clear that their theory is that her lung 23 cancer caused her death. i'm missing 9. the next one -- i 24 apologize. so here's the theory. here's the question 25 you are going to have: has plaintiff proved that mrs. duke's 58 1 death was caused by lung cancer? 2 and i've sort of drawn this little picture here. it is 3 supposed to sort of depict a hurdle. this is one of the 4 things that plaintiffs have to prove to you, that mrs. duke 5 died from her lung cancer. 6 in fact, during opening statement, the plaintiffs told 7 you that the dispute in this case is whether her lung cancer 8 caused her death. so that is the issue we are going to focus 9 on. what was the evidence? mrs. duke died. we know what 11 the evidence is. mrs. duke died from a stroke. it was 12 unrelated to her smoking. now, there was some -- this 13 morning you heard all the witnesses we brought to you 14 characterized disrespectfully as bought and paid for 15 mouthpieces. i hope you will take the time to think about 16 the credibility of the witnesses that we brought to you. there is an issue about stroke in this case. what did 18 we do? we brought to you a board certified neurologist, 19 dr. amos, who is treated thousands of stroke patients in his 20 life. you will have to decide whether or not he looked like 21 a bought and paid for mouthpiece. there is issue about cause of death. who do we bring to 23 you? dr. bennett. he is done thousands of autopsies. he is 24 an expert on cause of death. you heard how he spends his 25 time. you have to decide whether he is a bought and paid for 59 1 mouthpiece. 2 and we brought to you dr. tucker. he is spent decades 3 trying to help people with addiction-related problems, and 4 they claimed he is a bought and paid for mouthpiece from 5 california. 6 you know, there is a old parable, "people who live in 7 glass houses should not throw stones." they tried to prove 8 their whole case to you through dr. burns, who under their 9 standard -- i will not say this about him -- but under their 10 standard he would be the $2 million man who has been bought 11 and paid for from california. but that is not really the 12 issue in the case. what did they tell you? dr. amos told you that her 14 cause of death was complications due to stroke. aspiration 15 pneumonia. dr. bennett, the only doctor who really backed 16 up, did a forensic analysis of the case, a full analysis 17 looking in hindsight at everything -- remember, this is what 18 he does for a living. he is a cause of death expert. he is a 19 doctor that other doctors consult to help them figure this 20 out. what did he tell you? the death -- there is no 21 evidence that lung cancer was the cause of death. he also 22 agreed that the death was secondary to complications from 23 the stroke. and even dr. lloyd, he told you during his deposition 25 that although when he initially filled out that death 60 1 certificate he listed lung cancer, he told you that in 2 hindsight knowing now what he should have known then that he 3 would have changed that and he would have put 4 cerebrovascular accident stroke or pneumonia as the primary 5 causes of death. 6 how did the stroke cause -- we did not stop there. how 7 did the stroke cause the death? both dr. amos and bennett 8 explained to you that unfortunately for mrs. duke her stroke 9 caused paralysis in her face and her throat area. the 10 paralysis led to aspiration, which in turn led to her 11 getting food particles and other materials down in her 12 lungs, it caused pneumonia, and the pneumonia caused her 13 death. even dr. lloyd, the treating physician, told us 14 during his deposition that he could not rule out that 15 pneumonia was the primary cause of her death. well, what happened during this case? plaintiffs came 17 into this case telling you that the lung cancer caused the 18 death. the evidence is overwhelmingly clear that the death 19 was caused by stroke. so what did the plaintiffs do? they changed their 21 theory on us in the middle of case. and their theory became 22 that, well, actually, the lung cancer caused the stroke by 23 metastasizing to the lung. that became the new theory of 24 wrongful death. there is only one problem with that. there 25 is no evidence of that. and there is no evidence because 61 1 mrs. duke's treating physicians very carefully and 2 thoroughly worked her up throughout her treatment to make 3 sure that there was no metastatic disease in the brain, 4 because if there was, they wanted to treat it. you have seen 5 the evidence. 6 there was a ct-mra prior to surgery, they evaluated her 7 during surgery, they looked at pathology after surgery, they 8 did a whole series of ct -- mris and cts, and she never 9 received any radiation in the brain because there was no 10 evidence of metastatic disease in the brain. that is a 11 theory that was developed for this lawsuit. that is not how 12 she was treated. let us look at the medical records before surgery. this 14 is a 2-26-96 operative report in evidence. this is her 15 surgeon describing looking backward as to how she became his 16 surgical patient. she was evaluated with pulmonary function 17 testing, ct scans, mri scans, and there is no evidence for 18 metastatic disease. why is that important? if she had 19 metastatic disease they were not going to operate on her. 20 they would not have subjected her to this surgery for her 21 lung cancer if she had metastatic disease. during surgery, the evaluation never stopped. we get 23 to surgery, here's the pathology report from her actual 24 surgery. what happened as you heard is this: after she was 25 opened up they very carefully examined the lymph nodes 62 1 surrounding her lung to make sure there was no cancer in 2 those lymph nodes. because if there was, that would mean 3 that the cancer had metastasized, because you heard that the 4 lymph nodes is where the cancer goes first if it spreads to 5 the lung. and again, they would not subject her to this 6 surgery if it had already metastasized. 7 so here you have the 2-28-96 pathology consultation in 8 which the pathologist looked at materials taken from her 9 during surgery, looked lymph node after lymph node after 10 lymph node, and what'd you see? no tumors seen. no tumors 11 seen. no tumors seen. margins free of tumor. there was no 12 tumor outside the lung. but they did not stop there. she subsequently had her 14 strokes, which of course ultimately her cause of death, but 15 they kept evaluating her. they considered this theory the 16 plaintiffs have. could her strokes be caused by spread of 17 lung cancer? to her brain? her doctors wanted to make sure 18 that is not the case. look what dr. lloyd wrote. the mri was performed to 20 rule out, again, again, any potential underlying tumor. it 21 was felt that if tumor could be found she would receive 22 radiation in the area. none was found. thus, dr. mack did 23 not pursue any further radiation therapy on her head. she had good doctors. she was received good treatment. 25 they were careful. they were cautious. they worked this up 63 1 thoroughly. and no cancer was ever seen in her brain. 2 plaintiffs and witnesses want you to speculate and guess, 3 well, maybe it was there and they just missed it. but the 4 problem is when we cross-examined dr. burns -- remember the 5 plaintiffs have the burden of proof to prove their case by 6 preponderance of evidence -- here's what dr. burns admitted: 7 the preponderance of evidence is that mrs. duke's strokes 8 were caused by a bleed, not metastatic disease. completely 9 defeats this theory of metastatic lung cancer. second, dr. lloyd told me that she did not receive any 11 treatment in her brain because none of the tests showed 12 metastasis. dr. amos told you that -- and so did 13 dr. bennett, that there is simply no evidence that the lung 14 cancer metastasized to the brain. in fact, remember 15 dr. amos even showed you what lung cancer would look like if 16 it metastasized to the brain? he showed you those ct scans 17 where it would be peripheral, where it would be multiple 18 lesions, instead, mrs. duke had a single lesion deep to the 19 brain. and that is not the way lung cancer metastasizes to 20 the brain. again, all the evidence points in one direction. so, what happened next in this case? well, the next 22 theory that the plaintiffs adopted when the metastatic 23 disease theory fell flat because of dr. burns' admissions 24 and because of the medical record, next they said, well, 25 maybe the stroke was caused by smoking directly. first of 64 1 all, you are going see on your verdict form that is not the 2 question you are here to answer. the question you are here to 3 answer is whether the lung cancer caused the stroke. but 4 nonetheless, i'm going to go ahead and address that issue. 5 because it is very important and very revealing. 6 despite this new theory, not a single medical witness 7 testified that mrs. duke's strokes were caused by smoking. 8 you know, there is no dispute in this case that smoking can 9 cause strokes. dr. amos told you that. dr. burns told you 10 that. that is not the issue you are here to decide. you are 11 her to decides mrs. duke's case. and not a single medical 12 witness took the stand, raised their hand, and told you that 13 to a reasonable degree of medical probability that 14 mrs. duke's death -- excuse me, mrs. duke's stroke was 15 caused by smoking. there is no such evidence in the case. 16 yet in general it can, but nobody said it did cause hers. 17 instead what they talked about was her other risk factors. you just heard plaintiff's counsel admit this morning 19 could have been a cause for stroke. what is the leading risk 20 factor? her age. as we age, this is just one of things 21 that we become at risk for. her high cholesterol -- this 22 morning it sounded as though it was being challenged as to 23 whether she a hyperlipidemia. you might recall that during 24 dr. lloyd's deposition when he was shown the medical records 25 showing that she had a triglycerides level of 570, that he 65 1 whistled and said, wow, that is sure something that should be 2 treated. 3 dr. burns, dr. amos also agreed that alcohol abuse -- 4 that alcohol abuse increases someone's risk of developing a 5 stroke. by the way, we did not discuss alcohol to try to do 6 any type of character assassination or anything else on 7 mrs. duke. i hope you believe we have been totally 8 respectful of her. we have had nothing negative to say 9 about her, including the choices that she made about her 10 life. it is her life. she gets to decide how to live. but 11 we had talk to you about this alcohol abuse because the 12 alcohol abuse greatly increased her risk of stroke. finally her hypertension. so she had multiple, 14 multiple risk factors that could have explained her stroke. 15 although we do not have to explain to you what her stroke 16 was. it is not even on the verdict form. i'm simply 17 addressing this to round out your understanding of the 18 medical case here. so i would suggest to you there is simply no evidence 20 that the lung cancer caused her death. and when you get to 21 verdict question number 2, i know i'm skipping around a 22 little bit. i hope this order will be helpful to you as you 23 reason through the case. when you get to verdict question 24 2, do you find from a preponderance of the evidence that 25 mrs. duke's addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine was 66 1 a legal cause of her lung cancer and death, that the answer 2 will be no, because she does not die from lung cancer. 3 there is more. there is more they have to proof to 4 establish class membership. one of the next -- because the 5 next thing they have to prove is that mrs. duke was a 6 nicotine addict. you have heard that. they have to prove 7 that she was addicted to nicotine. again, i would depict it 8 this way because it is their burden to prove that she was 9 addicted. they cannot do it with assumptions or rhetoric. 10 they have to offer you evidence to prove she was addicted. now, the jury instructions that you are going to receive 12 do not contain a definition of addiction. you-all get to 13 decide what standard of addiction to use in this case. but 14 we would submit to you that before someone comes to federal 15 court and makes a claim for millions of dollars that they 16 should at least establish that under medical diagnostic 17 criteria that they are addicted. they should not come in 18 here with some watered-down definition that really amounts 19 to only that i smoked every day, and try to establish a 20 claim in federal court for millions of dollars. they should 21 come to you and prove to you that she was medically 22 addicted. so that is what i'm going to talk about. dr. tucker came to you and he told you that she was not 24 tormented -- the type of tormented smoker that he sees that 25 has nicotine addiction problems. and, you know, the facts 67 1 are really -- again, they are all aligned in one way. she 2 never complained about her smoking, she never told anyone 3 she was addicted. during her lifetime never -- no doctor 4 ever told her she was addicted. you are not going to see any 5 medical record saying that mrs. duke was addicted. when she 6 chose to quit she quit on her first try cold turkey. no 7 withdrawal symptoms. which is extremely important. every 8 set of criteria you-all saw, the doctors emphasized that 9 when somebody quits an addictive substance they withdrawal 10 from it. everyone knows that from common sense. she had no 11 withdrawal symptoms. by definition she was not addicted. 12 she simply chose to smoke. now, dr. tucker was the only, only addiction specialist 14 that came to this case to talk to you. he was the only 15 witness that came in here and walked you through their 16 analysis using medical diagnostic criteria to evaluate this 17 question of whether she was addicted. now, i'm not going to spend much time on this, but 19 let us be candid about the cross-examination of dr. tucker. 20 it was full of misdirection, gimmicks, tricks. do you 21 remember this whole bit about dr. tucker's testimony that 22 about fifty percent of smokers are addicted? and they kept 23 trying and trying to cross-examine him with the dsm-iv that 24 says that ninety percent of smokers are addicted? and he told 25 them that is 10 years old. that is 10 years old. there are 68 1 new data. subsequent studies show fifty percent. and then 2 this really illustrates the complete lack of merit of the 3 plaintiffs' claims in this case. they said oh, no, 4 dr. tucker this, is a 2011 edition of the book and it says 5 ninety percent. and he had to explain to us -- we should not 6 have wasted time on issues like this. this was a reprint of 7 the 2010 edition because they needed more copies of the 8 book. that type of gimmickry and trickery is not the way 9 this case should be viewed. mrs. duke's diagnosis as being a nicotine addict was 11 developed solely for purposes of this lawsuit. she never 12 said she thought she was addicted. she never said she felt 13 compelled to smoke. no one ever told her that she was 14 addicted during her life. remember mr. duke's testimony, i 15 would have never said that to my mother; that would be 16 disrespectful. nobody told her she was addicted. her 17 doctors never diagnosed her as addicted during the course of 18 her life. and now here we are -- i'm just going to be candid 20 about this -- here we are 16 years later. when they come 21 here asking you for millions of dollars they want to pin 22 this label of addiction on her and turn her into some weak 23 helpless addict who cannot control their own behavior, 16 24 years after she died in the interest of convincing you to 25 award them millions of dollars. that is what is going on 69 1 here. 2 as i said, plaintiffs did not bring you a medical doctor 3 that specializes in treating addiction. and importantly, 4 the witnesses they did bring, dr. cummings and dr. burns, 5 they are public health-oriented doctors. they have a very 6 strong anti-smoking agenda. they have every right to have 7 that agenda. i'm not criticizing them for being 8 anti-smoking. that is perfectly fine. but that is an agenda 9 that goes to the legislature, to congress. it is should not 10 be brought here in the courtroom and used to try to convince 11 you to award millions of dollars. you heard they have both 12 been testifying for decades against tobacco companies. since this issue of expert compensation is a big deal, 14 let me remind you dr. burns is the $2 million man. dr. 15 cummings has testified over 50 times. this was the seventh 16 time this year already. here we are in april. seems like 17 july maybe. but here we are in april and he is already 18 testified seven times against the tobacco companies. this 19 is what he does. now think about when they told you. if there is any 21 doubt that they were here pursuing a public health agenda as 22 opposed to helping you decide this case, dr. burns told you 23 that he thinks that even roll-your-own cigarettes are 24 defective and unreasonably dangerous. dr. cummings told you that his real agenda is he would 70 1 like to make it illegal to sell cigarettes or to smoke 2 cigarettes. he wants cigarettes banned. and you know what, 3 he has every right to have that view. i'm not criticizing 4 him. but that is not what we are here for. we are here to 5 decide a lawsuit for money. and you should decide based on 6 evidence related to the plaintiff and not some anti-smoking 7 agenda. 8 do you remember, with all due respect, what they did 9 was come in here and repeat over and over and over and over 10 she is addicted, hoping if they said it enough you would 11 believe it. but they did not offer you any analysis of 12 really why she was addicted. the closest they came was to 13 bring you that heaviness of smoking index that dr. cummings 14 testified about. but when i cross-examined him he admitted 15 that that test assumes that everybody is addicted, because 16 if you score zero on that test you are still lowly dependent 17 or addictive. that does not help you-all decide the issue in 18 this case. that is of no help to you whatsoever, if his test 19 indicates that everybody is addicted. you need something real, something substantive. you 21 need a real measuring stick to decide whether she was 22 addicted. and i would submit to you that the only measuring 23 stick you have is dr. tucker's testimony that she was not 24 addicted, using standard medical diagnostic criteria, which 25 is a test that should be demanded before you come in federal 71 1 court and ask for millions of dollars. 2 ladies and gentleman, when you get to -- this is your 3 first question. i know i'm going in a little different 4 order, like i said, but the very first question on your 5 verdict form will be: do you find from preponderance of the 6 evidence that mrs. duke was addicted to cigarettes 7 containing nicotine? the answer to that question is no. 8 that means she is not a class member and that means this is 9 case is over. i suggest to you that that should be the 10 answer to your first question. i'm going to move to the question number 2, which i 12 already answered in part. you remember we talked about how 13 lung cancer did not her death? well, in question 2 of your 14 verdict form they have to prove something else. they have 15 to prove that addition was a legal cause of her lung cancer. 16 so they have to prove to you that addiction was a legal 17 cause of her lung cancer. first it failed, because of course we already 19 discussed, she was not addicted. but second, even if she was 20 addicted, it was her choice to smoke without ever trying to 21 quit, that was the sole, only legal cause of her lung 22 cancer. the only legal cause of her lung cancer. let us think about it this way. well, i should make 24 sure you understand this i guess. on page 10 of your 25 instruction, you are going to get instruction about what 72 1 legal cause means. in order to prove that addiction to 2 smoking cigarettes containing nicotine was a legal cause of 3 decedent's death the plaintiff's must prove that such 4 addiction directly and in a natural and continuous sequence 5 -- in other words uninterrupted -- produced or contributed 6 substantially to producing such death. so it could be 7 reasonably said that but for the addiction, the death would 8 not have occurred. 9 we already know she was not addicted; we did not know -- 10 we already know that she did not die from lung cancer. but 11 the third way that the plaintiffs have failed to prove class 12 membership is that nicotine addiction was not a legal cause 13 of her lung cancer. i would suggest to you that you think 14 about this issue like this. i mean it is kind of an abstract 15 concept, legal cause of her lung cancer. but i think if you 16 think about it this way, it might be helpful to you as you 17 consider the evidence. did mrs. duke have the ability to quit but choose to 19 continue smoking? i submit to you that if she had the 20 ability to quit but chose to continue then nicotine 21 addiction cannot be a legal cause of her lung cancer. 22 because you cannot have it both ways. you cannot have the 23 ability to quit and say, well, yeah, i know i did not quit 24 when i should have and i knew to, but it was really the 25 addiction. it was really the addiction that caused me to 73 1 continue smoking until i got lung cancer. you just cannot 2 have it both ways. 3 on the other hand, if plaintiffs have proven to you 4 that nicotine addiction controlled sarah duke and left her 5 no choice, no matter how hard she tried, but to continue 6 smoking until her death, if they prove that to you, they 7 have proven their case to you. but you know that is not what 8 the evidence is about nicotine addiction in general or sarah 9 duke specific. because here's what you know. and there is no dispute 11 about any of these points, none. because we got these 12 points from plaintiffs' experts. one, nicotine addition 13 does not prevent smokers from understanding the risk of 14 smoking. that does not happen, so that does not relieve them 15 of their knowledge that they have gotten from the warnings. two, any brain changes caused by addiction in nicotine 17 does not prevent smokers from quitting. you know, a lot of 18 time was spent discussing these brain changes. how does 19 that help you? you heard that everything we do changes our 20 brain. this experience that you-all are having right now, 21 having to listen to me for an hour and a half is changing 22 your brain in some way or another. i do not want to 23 speculate about what i might be doing to it. but it is 24 changing you brain somehow. everything we do, everything we 25 encounter, every stimulus we encounter changes our brain in 74 1 some way or another. so that is not helpful because it 2 does not prevent people from quitting. because you heard 3 that 60 million ex-smokers live in the united states right 4 now. 5 according to dr. cummings, all of them would have had 6 these brain changes. did not prevent them from quitting. 7 and in fact, dr. cummings and dr. burns admitted two things. 8 they admitted that any smoker can quit. any smoker can 9 quit. and that -- that includes heavily addicted smokers. now, this issue again entirely defeats plaintiff's 11 theory of legal causation. now i had the drag it out of 12 dr. cummings because he understands the significance of this 13 admission for plaintiff's claims because he is an experienced 14 witness in these types of case, as you have heard. so 15 instead of just admitting to me the answer i was entitled to 16 have, when i asked him, is not it true, sir, that any smoker 17 can quit? he made me run back and forth and grab all his 18 prior testimony and show him over and over and over his 19 prior sworn testimony where he had admitted exactly what i 20 was asking him to tell you all, so that you would have that 21 information to decide this case with. but instead i had 22 drag it out of him by impeaching him with his prior 23 testimony. now, another issue that i can only describe as red 25 herring. dr. tucker told you that ninety percent of smokers who 75 1 have quit had quit cold turkey. and there was some 2 prolonged effort yesterday to try to impeach that statistic 3 with the dsm. but, in fact, dr. cummings told you the same 4 thing. so why they are throwing those -- releasing these red 5 herrings into the courtroom, i do not know. why would they 6 spend time on trying to disprove a fact from dr. tucker that 7 dr. cummings had already admitted to? but that is what they 8 did. 9 ladies and gentlemen, we would submit to you again, 10 before you come to the courtroom, federal court, and ask for 11 millions of dollars, claiming that you had been injured by 12 addiction, at a minimum the smoker should have tried and 13 tried and tried to quit. that should be a necessary 14 predicate to your finding here. but that is not the evidence 15 in this case. because you know what the evidence is in this 16 case. there is no evidence -- and again, you know, if there is 18 no evidence, that is plaintiff's problem, not our problem, 19 because they have the burden of proof. there is no evidence 20 that mrs. duke tried to quit in the '50s, '60s, '70s -- i 21 actually wrote it twice there -- or 80s. no evidence of her 22 attempting to quit during any of these decades. and then we 23 get to the 1990s and we heard all this discussion about 24 chewing gum, using filters, and this effort to inflate those 25 to a big deal that she was trying to quit, struggling. but 76 1 mr. duke during his cross-examination admitted to you 2 squarely that even he viewed those as half-hearted quit 3 attempts. 4 why is that important? that is important because dr. 5 burns testified that a real quit attempt requires sincere 6 motivation and that a half-hearted quit attempt is not 7 sincere. it is not sincere. 8 and then of course as we know she quit cold turkey. 9 and she quit the first time she actually tried. the first 10 time she tried, ladies and gentlemen, she could have quit 11 sooner if she decided to. now, let us talk about mrs. duke a little bit more 13 because it is a case about mrs. duke. did she fail to quit 14 earlier because she was a weak and indecisive, passive 15 person who did not have the ability to make decisions and 16 get things done? is that the type of smoker we are dealing 17 with? that might be a different case. but that is not who 18 mrs. duke is. you heard from all the fact witnesses, primarily 20 mr. duke and his wife, mrs. duke was a -- he put polite, a 21 very strong-willed woman, she was decisive, she was 22 intelligent and avid reader, she stayed up on current 23 events, and he told you that no one could push her into 24 doing something she did not want to do, and that she made 25 her own choices about how to live. 77 1 do you remember him talking to us about how he -- in 2 his own words he pestered, her badgered her and begged her 3 to quit, and she told him, you heard the testimony, she told 4 him, i'll quit when i'm ready to quit. it is my business 5 whether i smoke or not. i'll quit when i'm ready. not 6 because you are asking me to. that is the type of smoker we 7 have here in this case. 8 i just discussed those points. so, let us try to get to 9 bottom line on this. because here's the thing. when 10 plaintiffs come here and try to prove to you, like i said, 11 that nicotine addiction was a legal cause of her lung 12 cancer, they are essentially taking on the burden of proving 13 to you that she was an involuntary smoker. that is what 14 they are claiming, that she was an involuntary smoker that 15 had no choice but to continue to smoke until she developed a 16 smoking related disease. but you know that is not the case. here's what we know. she always had the ability to 18 quit. in fact, plaintiffs have admitted that she was at 19 fault, a legal cause of her own death for not quitting 20 sooner. she told us that smoking was her business, that she 21 would quit when she wanted to quit, not when others wanted 22 her to. she decided how she wanted to live her life. and, you 24 know, i want to be clear. i'm not criticizing mrs. duke in 25 any way. like i said before, she had every right to decide 78 1 how to live her life. that is what we all get to do in 2 america. but with the privilege of deciding how to live 3 your life comes the responsibility of being responsible for 4 the choices that you make in life about allow to live. 5 ladies and gentlemen, i suggest that when you go to 6 your verdict form, question 2, here's yet another reason why 7 the answer to question 2 should be no. the first reason was 8 that she did not die from lung cancer. the second reason was 9 that addiction to nicotine was not a legal cause of her lung 10 cancer. the only legal cause was her choice to continue 11 smoking without trying to quit even though she had the 12 ability to. you just cannot have it both ways on this 13 question. it is an either/or question. and the answer 14 should be no. okay. i want to move next to this issue that 16 plaintiff's counsel told you we had ignored -- in fact 17 you are going to see that we addressed the conduct issues in 18 this case two ways. number one, dr. gentry and dr. cook 19 testified to you for a combination of about four or five 20 hours by deposition, as painful as it might have been to 21 watch those depositions, that is what happened. and, second, 22 we addressed the conduct in this case through 23 cross-examination, and i'm going to show you how we did that 24 as we go forward. now, remember, in you find her to be class member then 79 1 the engle findings do come into play. but as court has told 2 you already, and we would instruct you again, the engle 3 findings do not establish that r.j. reynolds is responsible 4 or liable to mrs. duke. you see, the engle jury had a very 5 different job than you do -- did. the engle jury never 6 heard of sarah duke. they did not hear any evidence about 7 her, about her awareness of the dangers, about her smoking 8 behavior, about the choices she made. they did not make any 9 decisions about sarah duke. they made decisions about 10 general principals. your job in this case, if you get to this part of the 12 trial, which obviously we do not you will or should, but if 13 you get here your job is to evaluate whether or not mr. duke 14 has met his burden of proof to build a bridge between the 15 engle findings and mrs. duke's death. in fact, that is what 16 the plaintiff's counsel acknowledged in opening statement. 17 he said we have to build a bridge with evidence and facts 18 between the engle findings and mrs. duke's death. okay. so again, these are the four claims that they 20 have to try to build a bridge for. you are going to see that 21 there are four questions on your verdict form. i'm going to 22 address them altogether, because the evidence related to 23 these four theories of liability is all very overlapping, 24 very similar. i'm going to try to hit for you some of the 25 high points that were established on cross-examination. but 80 1 the point we need not lose sight of is that on this claim, 2 again, plaintiffs have to prove to you legal causation. 3 again you are going to see on page 12 in this instance in 4 your jury instructions they have to prove to you that but 5 for the wrongful conduct that death or damages would not 6 have occurred. they are going to prove -- try to prove to 7 you that but for r.j. reynolds' conduct, i guess that 8 mrs. duke according to what we heard this morning, would 9 still be alive today. here's the basic claim they made. relates to all the 11 theories. i'll talk more about it. the real claim is that 12 mrs. duke died because of dangers of smoking were not known 13 to her. that is sort of the central premise of all their 14 claims. but you know that is not true. you know that for a 15 variety of reasons. first, dr. burns and cummings told you that the media 17 had been publicizing the dangers of smoking for almost 100 18 years in this country, and that, in fact, it has been known 19 for centuries that smoking is dangerous and hard to quit. 20 in other words, it is been common knowledge. and i'm not 21 going to spend a lot of time going through this stuff with 22 you. you saw the cross of dr. cummings and burns. the 23 public warnings about the dangerous of smoking have been 24 like an iceberg. and all i can do right now is show you the 25 tip of iceberg. and i'll show you a few things we know 81 1 would have been relative to mrs. duke. 2 two years before she was born -- two years before she 3 was born reader's digest reported that smoking sometimes 4 causes lung cancer. no secret. no secret. 5 1952, reader's digest describing the dangers of smoking 6 by saying cancer by the carton. cancer by the carton. 7 again, no secret. you have heard all this about how the 8 message about the dangers of smoking was pervasive. it was 9 everywhere in our society. dr. cummings. and this may have been the critical 11 admission that he made in this whole case. and once again, 12 i had to go get those transcripts out and make him admit 13 this is what he said before, because he did not like to say 14 it because it defeats their claims. but he admitted that 15 everybody had heard and knew that smoking is dangerous in 16 1954. everybody had heard and knew in 1954. of course 17 you have heard, you know, i do not know why we even spend much 18 time in this case because during opening statement the 19 plaintiffs admitted that they would never deny that 20 mrs. duke knew what was out there, common knowledge was 21 being disseminated publicly. but then they are still trying 22 to convince you that she was injured because she does not 23 know that smoking was dangerous and because it was concealed 24 from her. well, it is a pretty simple common sense proposition you 82 1 cannot conceal something from somebody if they already know 2 it. dr. cummings admitted that. you cannot conceal 3 something from somebody if they already know it. 4 gainesville sun. she read it every day. the day after 5 the '64 surgeon general's report, front page, above the 6 fold, smoking is principal lung cancer cause. 7 the warning labels. we did not talk about them a whole 8 lot. but once again, how can someone come in here and say 9 that i was injured because i did not know the product was 10 dangerous because it was concealed from me, when the product 11 itself had a warning label on side of the pack every day 12 after 1966. there is no dispute about that. it changed in 1970, as you see, and every day after 14 1971 this warning was in the advertisements. in the 15 advertisements. and yet they are here asking you for 16 millions of dollars telling you she was injured by 17 concealment of a fact that she already knew. it just defies 18 common sense. once you know something you cannot be injured 19 by somebody hiding a fact. it is too late. you know it. there was much more about the dangers of smoking. i 21 do not have time to go through all this with you, but just a 22 couple of these things were really, really illustrative. 23 you heard about this congressional hearing in 1957 where the 24 surgeon general said we have done an excellent job of 25 warning the public through radio, tv, newspaper. 83 1 dr. horn, a very powerful -- dr. horn, the head of the 2 office of smoking and health in 1968, you can stand on a 3 rooftop and shout, "smoking is dangerous," at the top of 4 your lungs and you would no be telling anyone anything they 5 did not already know. 6 and dr. burns, 1975, more people know that smoking is 7 dangerous than know the name of the president of united 8 states. the information was everywhere. some people chose 9 to quit. as can you see, between 1955 and 1965, 17 million 10 american chose to quit. between '64 and '79, 30 million 11 more american chose to quit. we now have 60 million 12 quitters. the message has been out there. what people do 13 with it is up to them. some continue to smoke. some quit. of course mrs. duke did not have to rely on general 15 information. she had the most personalized powerful 16 warnings you could ever have. in 1975 her husband became 17 ill with cancer. she and her son watched him die over a 18 three year period from cancer that they believe was smoking 19 related. that they believe was smoking related. he quit 20 smoking. she never even makes an attempt to quit smoking, 21 despite watching what they described as a terrible death by 22 her husband. you could not have a more personal powerful warning than 24 that. mr. duke admitted to you that they believed that the 25 lung cancer was caused by smoking in 1975 -- the 1978 84 1 timeframe. and now they are in here trying to tell you that 2 she died from smoking from lung cancer because she did not 3 know that smoking was dangerous? defies common sense. 4 why is it so important? why is this warning so 5 important? dr. burns told you that had mrs. duke just quit 6 smoking by 1980 that she had would have prevented her 7 cancer. that is why her failure to quit is so important. 8 certainly in the '70s she knew, unequivocally she knew, and 9 she knew lung cancer from her husband's situation. she 10 never even tried to quit. but dr. burns, their expert from california, who knows 12 his statistics pretty well, he does know this, and he 13 admitted the reason he had been pushing people to quit for 14 decades and decades was because when you quit you improve 15 your likelihood of living longer. you decrease your risk. 16 and had she quit in 1980, he admitted she would not have 17 developed lung cancer. a lot of discussion about -- a lot of discussion about 19 statements made by the tobacco company. again the bottom 20 line is, a smoker cannot rely on something they did not see 21 her hear. there is zero evidence that mrs. duke ever heard 22 statements by the tobacco institute or the franks statement 23 or any statements about filtered cigarettes or non-filtered 24 cigarettes or any of that. why did not we bring witnesses to 25 address the company conduct? because the issue is whether 85 1 or not the company conduct affected mrs. duke. that is the 2 issue in the case. that is the plaintiff's burden. that is 3 the bridge they are trying to build. and they have zero 4 evidence that she ever saw or relied upon anything that the 5 tobacco companies did. 6 advertising. i do not know why we talked about 7 advertising so long. first, it is legal. it is legal to 8 advertise. second, it did not have any influence on 9 mrs. duke. again, there is zero evidence in this case that 10 she said she began smoking because of advertising or that 11 she smoked winston cigarettes because of advertising, or 12 that she smoked filtered cigarettes because of advertising, 13 or that the advertisement somehow convinced her that it was 14 safe to smoke or that filtered cigarettes are safer. 15 there is none of that. there is no evidence that the 16 advertising influenced her in any way. cigarette design. here's what the evidence really is, 18 and that is that tobacco is dangerous and addictive, 19 cigarettes cannot be made safe. cannot be made safe. but dr. cummings did admit that r.j. reynolds worked 21 hard to try to take the carcinogens out of tobacco smoke, 22 but it cannot be done as long as tobacco is burned. dr. 23 cummings also admitted that non-filtered, filtered, 24 full-flavor, light, additive free, cigarettes with 25 additives, they are all dangerous and addictive. those 86 1 design issues, it is another red herring. they are all 2 dangerous, they are all addictive, and they do not have any 3 influence on whether you can quit or not. no cigarette's 4 different than another. dr. tucker told you yesterday that 5 someone who treats people who -- for addiction problems -- 6 he does not ask what brand you smoke because these design 7 features have nothing to do with quitting smoking. 8 ladies and gentlemen, i'm going to go to the verdict 9 form now. you are going to see questions 3, 4, 5 and 6. if 10 you get to them, these are the questions at which you have 11 to answer the question of whether or not -- whether or not 12 the plaintiffs have met their burden of proof to build a 13 bridge between r.j. reynolds' conduct and mrs. duke's death. 14 submit to you, ladies and gentlemen, the answer should be no 15 to each and every one of these. there is just been a 16 complete failure of proof. the allocation of fault for mrs. duke's death. you 18 heard a lot this morning about the allocation of fault and 19 how, if you get to this point, you are going have an 20 opportunity to compare the fault of the parties and you get 21 to decide how to assign fault. there is a couple things i want to mention to you. 23 first, the most important thing to remember is that 24 plaintiff admitted that mrs. duke's conduct was a legal 25 cause of her own lung cancer and death. let us unpack that a 87 1 little bit. i mean, what can that mean? what underlies 2 that? what is absolutely logically necessary for this to be 3 the case? 4 first, that she -- what would you have to know before 5 you admit it that your plaintiff was a legal cause of her 6 own death? you would have to admit that they knew that 7 smoking was dangerous. how can you be a cause of your own 8 death if you did not know? second, you have to admit that 9 they had the ability to quit smoking. you know when they 10 stand up here and say she should have tried harder, she 11 should have quit sooner, that is an acknowledgement that she 12 could have quit. you would not say those things if you 13 did not admit that she could quit. finally, she had to have 14 the ability to quit smoking at a time that would have 15 prevented her lung cancer. all those things are absolutely 16 necessary before you could ever make the admission that she 17 was at fault. and again, why is it so important? dr. burns told you 19 that had she quit in 1980 or sooner, she would have 20 prevented her own lung cancer death. she would have 21 prevented her own lung cancer death. dr. burns and dr. cummings concede -- now if you get to 23 this comparative fault issue, it is very important to 24 remember what their witnesses conceded. they both conceded 25 that smokers are fully -- fully, not partially -- fully 89 1 consequence. that is fully in control of the smoker. the 2 smoker is one hundred percent responsible for that choice. 3 damages. you heard the plaintiffs are going to ask you 4 for -- they are asking for millions of dollars. i'm not 5 going to say much more about this except to say when you see 6 your instructions, you will see that any damages awarded 7 must be just and reasonable in light of the evidence. i 8 will also point out to you that the plaintiff is not asking 9 for damages related to pain and suffering of mrs. duke. you 10 will see that is not one of things you are being asked to 11 award damages for. you are being asked to award damages for 12 their out-of-pocket funeral expenses, which was $30,000, and 13 for mr. duke's injury that he suffered or he is claiming to 14 have suffered by virtue of his mother's death. that is what 15 you are asking for to mr. duke's injury, not his mother's 16 injury. that is not -- that is not the measure to damages in 17 this case, as your instructions will make clear to you. finally, the only potentially recoverable damages are 19 actual damages suffered by mr. duke as a result of his 20 mother's death. that is a standard that you will see in your 21 instructions. i'm going to say, ladies and gentlemen, just use your 23 common sense. use your common sense. use your common sense 24 when it comes to damages. but i will say this one more 25 time. nobody should be made a millionaire because their 90 1 mother chose to smoke for decades despite knowing the 2 dangers without being warned. nobody should be made a 3 millionaire for those choices. okay. 4 verdict question 10, the question that -- can you put 5 up question 10 -- verdict question 9. okay. do you find 6 from clear and convincing evidence that punitive damages 7 against the defendants are warranted under the circumstances 8 of this case? now this is the issue that mr. lantinberg 9 spent so much time on, because this is what they are really 10 interested in. because this is where they hope to get many 11 more millions of dollars. first thing i want to point out to you is that there is 13 a different standard under this case -- under this claim. 14 and that is clear and convincing evidence. and i'm going 15 talk to but what that means. second, we need to understand a little bit more about 17 punitive damages, because you have not heard much about 18 punitive damages. punitive damages are damages that are 19 designed to punish and to deter a defendant. but some other 20 things that you need to know are, first of all, punitive 21 damages are not awarded to punish generalized conduct for 22 which you disapprove. that is not your function. you are not 23 here to award punitive damages because you do not like in 24 general the way the companies did business, if you get to 25 this question. 91 1 instead, as this slide indicates, they can only be 2 awarded for conduct that was a legal cause of mrs. duke's 3 death. we talked over and over about the fact that there 4 was no conduct that was a legal cause of her death, but 5 that is a standard you have to meet. 6 second, punitive damages can only be awarded to 7 mr. duke. they cannot be awarded to any public health 8 organization or some hospital or smoking cessation program 9 or the american cancer institute or anything like that. if 10 you award punitive damage they go to mr. duke. and finally you need to understand that punitive 12 damages are in addition, in addition to damages compensating 13 the plaintiff. so that is what punitive damages are. what do plaintiff's have to show you to prove they are 15 entitled to punitive damages? you did not see this morning. 16 all you heard was the conduct was bad, the conduct was bad, 17 the conduct was bad, you ought to punish it. that is not the 18 test. here's the test that you will see in your 19 instructions. at pages 19 and 20, you will see that to be entitled to 21 punitive damages, the plaintiffs have to prove that the 22 defendants acted with reckless disregard of human life, or 23 that their conduct showed an entire lack of care, or that 24 their conduct recklessly disregarded the safety and welfare 25 of the public, or that there was equivalent to the 92 1 intentional violation of his rights. so that is the 2 standard. again, that is the yardstick you use to measure. 3 it is not this generalized test that was suggested to you 4 this morning. 5 i want to go back to the burden of proof because this a 6 really important. you know, think about this, ladies and 7 gentlemen. a request for punitive damages is an 8 extraordinary claim. because mr. duke is here saying i want 9 you to award me money unrelated over and above what i lost. 10 even if you fully compensate me, i want more money. i want 11 you to give me money to punish them. that is what he is here 12 asking you to do. that is an extraordinary claim. as a 13 result, there is a very, very high burden of proof that he 14 has to meet. you will see on page 20 of your instructions, that in 16 contrast, clear and convincing evidence -- which i just 17 showed you is their burden of proof -- is evidence that is 18 more compelling and persuasive. it is evidence that is 19 precise, explicit, lacking in confusion, and such weight 20 that produces a firm belief or conviction without hesitation 21 about the matter at issue. without hesitation. in other words, when you get back there you will be 23 deliberating. if you hesitate, if the evidence is 24 confusing, if you cannot decide whether or not punitive 25 damages are entitled, you by definition have decided that 93 1 punitive damages should not be awarded in this case. 2 the court: mr. furr, we need to take a brief 3 break. 4 5 6 7 8 mr. furr: thank you very much. the court: someone needs to go to the restroom. mr. furr: thank you. (recess) the deputy clerk: plaintiff's counsel, i have 9 marked on the exhibit list that -- the court: i just got a note that somebody needed 11 a bathroom break. mr. furr: everybody did. the court: well, yeah. it is just kind of hard to 14 figure out when to do it without interrupting somebody. mr. nealey: i had a closing argument in a trial 16 one time. and in the middle of the defendant's closing 17 argument, a juror was trying to read something. she stood 18 up and said "your honor, i have to go to the bathroom now." the court: well, at least we got a note. mr. nealey: it was commotion. (jury present -- 11:21 a.m.) the court: go ahead, mr. furr. mr. furr: thank you, your honor. okay. ladies and gentlemen, the home stretch. we are 25 going to finish closing before lunch, and then the case is 94 1 going to be yours. 2 the issue i'm now addressing is this extraordinary 3 claim that plaintiffs have made where they are asking you to 4 award them more money, even though they have already asked 5 you for millions of dollars already. we talked about how 6 they have a very high burden of proof of clear and 7 convincing evidence, and that they have to demonstrate those 8 very specific standards that i showed you on the jury 9 instructions i will not go back to now. but you saw them on 10 pages 19 and 20 of your jury instructions. well, let us talk about what the evidence is. this is a 12 little hard to piece together for you because most of the 13 evidence that i'm about to talk to you about came in through 14 three sources. number one was dr. cook's testimony. you 15 might recall dr. cook was the very first witness in this 16 case. the gentleman with the british accent, the scientist 17 at r.j. reynolds, that they played you the video deposition 18 of. this evidence also came in in part through dr. gentry's 19 testimony, who was the last witness that you saw whose 20 videotape they again played, and part of this evidence came 21 in through the cross-examination of dr. cummings. in the interest of time, i'm not going to sort through 23 exactly who said what. i represent to you that if you 24 consult your notes, you will see that this information came 25 in through their testimony. the first issue we are talking 95 1 about whether r.j. reynolds should be punished because they 2 have had a complete lack of care, a complete disregard for 3 public health. 4 well, here is the story that dr. cook told you. 5 dr. cook told you that r.j. reynolds, brand williamson, and 6 american, and other tobacco companies funded three 7 researchers at the university of virginia commonwealth named 8 larson haines tobacco,and that these three individuals put 9 together a publication that reviewed 6,000 articles from 10 12,000 journals, and that it was provided to the surgeon 11 general when they prepared the 1964 report. you keep 12 hearing -- you keep hearing that the tobacco companies did 13 not provide information to the surgeon general. in fact, dr. cook told you what the tobacco companies 15 did. they funded these researchers to put together the 16 whole world's literature about the dangers of smoking and 17 provide it to the surgeon general. and they continued doing 18 so as dr. cook told you, after the surgeon general's report 19 came out, tobacco companies did not say, well, that was 20 pretty bad idea. the surgeon general's report was very 21 adverse to us. instead, they continued funding this process so that 23 the information could be put together and public health 24 scientists and anybody else who wanted to read this could 25 find it. 96 1 again, you keep hearing that the tobacco companies did 2 not provide documents to the surgeon general. this is in 3 evidence. if you chose to look at this document in evidence 4 on page ix in the introduction of the surgeon general's 5 report, here is what the surgeon general said: "the 6 committee, however, does acknowledge with gratitude and deep 7 appreciation and with sincere apologies to any individual 8 inadvertently that the substantial cooperation and 9 assistance of the following: brown and williamson tobacco 10 corp., the p. lorillard company, philip morris inc., and the 11 r.j. reynolds tobacco company. so whenever you hear that these companies did not 13 cooperate, and would not provide information to the surgeon 14 general, right there is a surgeon general's reference 15 itself. and again, they are asking you to punish r.j. reynolds. 17 but the evidence is that, in fact, r.j. reynolds worked to 18 reduce carcinogens in cigarettes. you were told this 19 morning that we did not try to do anything to make cigarettes 20 safer? dr. cummings told you that we worked to reduce 21 cancers in cigarettes. those are the chemicals that cause 22 cancer. dr. cummings and dr. cook also told you that the 24 company implemented design features recommended by the 25 public health community. this design of cigarettes was not 97 1 going on in a vacuum. the public health community was 2 making recommendations about how you could would change 3 cigarettes to try to make them safer. and when they would 4 make those recommendations, r.j. reynolds and the other 5 companies would try them. in fact, the surgeon general -- 6 you heard this. the surgeon general found that many of the 7 design features implemented by the cigarette companies 8 actually reduced tumor density on average. they changed 9 design feature they put into cigarettes that the public was 10 receiving. and then, they would test those against other 11 cigarettes. the rate of cancer being developed in the 12 animal experiments was going down. and they are telling you 13 that we should be punished for complete absence of care? you know, there is a lot of focus on winston cigarettes. 15 ladies and gentlemen, you heard the evidence. there is -- 16 they want us punished over winston cigarettes? there is zero 17 evidence in this case that winston cigarettes are any more 18 dangerous or more addictive than any other cigarettes. 19 there is simply no such evidence in the case. consult your 20 notes thoroughly. please, i beg you to do that. you will 21 see there is no evidence that winston cigarettes are more 22 dangerous or addictive. they are basically asking you to punish us for selling a 24 legal product called cigarettes that has inherent dangers, 25 including cancer and addiction. that is what they are asking 98 1 you to do. they are asking you to punish us. they are asking 2 you to second-guess the legislature. they are asking you to 3 second-guess our society's decisions. what is society has 4 decided is this: cigarettes are dangerous. we are going to 5 put warnings labels on them, and adults in a america get to 6 choose. that is our societal choice, and they are asking you 7 to punish us because of the inherent dangers in cigarettes. 8 that is what you are being asked to do. 9 they made a big deal during their case about flavors. 10 but do you remember dr. cummings' testimony? r.j. reynolds 11 reduced the level of flavors between 1954, and in about 12 1990, reduced level of flavorants in the winston cigarettes 13 by about seventy percent. remember, it was kind of an a ha 14 moment for dr. cummings because he had just made that 15 admission the previous friday in a deposition in yet another 16 tobacco case, and he had forgotten about it over the 17 weekend. and i showed him the transcript and said remember 18 what you said a couple of days ago in your deposition? and 19 he admitted this. and they say entire absence of care and 20 safety? finally, you know there is this testimony about there 22 was a suggestion this morning that we should be punished for 23 some kind of issue related to lights or low tar cigarettes, 24 that we should have never made them. that they advertised 25 them wrong, and that somehow that harmed mrs. duke because 99 1 remember, reynolds could only be punished even in theory for 2 conduct that harmed mrs. duke, not for general conduct. 3 so the suggestion about lights and low tar, first of 4 all, has to be tied to mrs. duke. but you remember what the 5 evidence really is? mr. duke told you that he never 6 remembers his mother ever smoking winston lights. his wife 7 came in here and said oh, yeah, now that you shown me 8 pictures of the pack, i can tell by the color that that is 9 the cigarettes that my mother-in-law smoked for a while. 10 but then when mr. bassett cross-examined her, she admitted 11 that during her deposition, she had told us that she did not 12 remember the color of the pack. and this memory that she 13 now has appeared only after the plaintiff's lawyers sat with 14 her and showed her advertisements of cigarettes. one of the things you are entitled to do is jurors is 16 decide what you think about the credibility of witnesses. 17 i'm not going to say any more on this topic. that is for you 18 all to decide how credible you think that testimony is. finally, the final point i'm going make on punitive 20 damages is this. again, they want you to find without 21 hesitation that there was a complete absence of care by r.j. 22 reynolds, what could r.j. reynolds do? they cannot make the 23 product safer. there is no way to make it safe. it cannot be 24 done. we have tried and tried. so what do we do? r.j. reynolds' parent company goes 100 1 out and buys the company called niconovum. niconovum. you 2 remember the cross-examination of dr. cummings and 3 dr. gentry's explanation? niconovum is a company that 4 makes -- that makes smoking cessation products. that makes 5 nicotine replacement products, and you have heard that r.j. 6 reynolds is in the process of trying to get those products 7 introduced in the united states. what more can we do than 8 do the best we can to make them safer. put warnings on the 9 packs, and for people who decide to quit, go to sweden and 10 buy the best smoking cessation product we can find and try 11 to introduce it into the united states to help people who 12 want to quit quit. an entire absence of care and safety, 13 ladies and gentlemen, it is not even close. so when you get to this question, number 9, do you find 15 from clear and convincing evidence that punitive damages 16 again the defendant are warranted under the circumstances of 17 this case, no matter what else you have said in this case, the 18 answer to this question should be no. now, as you received 19 in instructions if you answer this question yes, we will come 20 back and have a second phase of this trial where we will 21 talk about punitive damages, but we should never get in a 22 second phase in this trial. we should never get there for 23 all the reasons i have been talking about. the case should 24 end with class membership. there is no bridge between the 25 plaintiffs evidence and defendant's conduct. there 101 1 certainly, certainly should not be a punitive damages award 2 in this case. so the answer to this question should be no. 3 i want to wrap up with you, and suggest to you somebody 4 asked me recently what is your defense in this case? i 5 thought i said, they said give it to me in two sentences, 6 three sentences. i said okay. everybody knew that smoking 7 was dangerous. anybody can quit the smoking -- can quit 8 smoking that wants to, and the plaintiffs have admitted that 9 mrs. duke was the legal cause of her own death. use your 10 common sense, ladies and gentlemen. take a step back, from 11 the plaintiff's rhetoric., and all these random documents 12 that are being thrown up here, these ancient documents that 13 have no relationship to mrs. duke, and think about the 14 fundamental nature of this lawsuit. make me a millionaire, 15 even though everybody knew anybody can quit, and i admit my 16 mother caused her own death. here is the fundamental nature of this lawsuit. not 18 only did they admit that everybody knew, they admit that 19 mrs. duke knew that smoking was dangerous. not only did 20 they admit that anybody can quit, the evidence is clear that 21 mrs. duke quit the first time she really tried. not only 22 did the plaintiffs' experts admit that all smokers are 23 responsible for their smoking choices, they admitted that 24 mrs. duke was responsible for her smoking choices. so here we are in 2012, and they are asking you to find 102 1 that somehow, despite these irrefutable facts, that this is 2 all new, and that you should award millions of dollars. 3 let us take a brief trip back through history about the way 4 these issues have been viewed in our society over time. and 5 we will start with dr. hammond, one of the famous early 6 researchers of the dangers of smoking. and let us look at 7 what he had to say. 8 (whereupon a tape is being played in open court but not 9 transcribed herein.) mr. furr: in 1954, i mean, the parallels are 11 uncanny. and in 1954, people are being warned, and what 12 they then want to do is their business. and what did sarah 13 duke tell her daughter-in-law when they asked her to stop 14 smoking? she said that is my business. that is my business. 15 it is written in there. let us look at the coverage of the 16 1964 surgeon general's report. you will see the same basic 17 message. (whereupon, tape is being played in open court, but not 19 transcribed herein.) mr. furr: so it sounds familiar, does not it? 21 once again, it is been known for 50 years that smoking is 22 dangerous, but in america, people get to make choices. but 23 they have to take responsibility for the choices that they 24 make. let us look at dr. koop.com. do you remember dr. koop, 103 1 a famous surgeon general who wrote the report that 2 nicotine -- who was responsible for the report in 1988 about 3 smoking addiction. but here is what he also said 4 afterwards. "the choice --you note they mention you this 5 word choice. they keep ridiculing and saying that addiction 6 -- once you are addicted, there no choice. look at what 7 dr. koop said. "the choice to light up is always yours. 8 ultimately, you are the one that has control over your 9 behavior. the cigarette is not going to light itself and 10 jump into your mouth." the cigarette is not going to light itself and jump 12 into your mouth. this is nothing new, ladies and gentlemen. 13 these are not themes or arguments developed by me, or the 14 tobacco companies, or anyone over here. this is the way 15 smoking has always been viewed in our society. ladies and gentlemen, i'm going to finish up with this 17 thought. as i said before, i'm going to say it a little 18 more directly. we live in the greatest country in the 19 world. and maybe the greatest thing about the greatest 20 country in the world is that we get to make choices about 21 how to live. we decide how to live. but the only way that 22 works is that we also must take responsibility for the 23 choices that we make in life. that is how our country works, 24 and that is why our country is so great. that is one of first messages we teach our children when 104 1 they are young. that is what we tell our loved ones, our 2 spouse. that is what we tell our friends, and we sure hope 3 they live up to it because we want to live approximate a 4 society where people get to make choices, but take 5 responsibility for their choices. that is how this whole 6 thing works in the america. 7 mrs. duke made her choice to smoke. she made her 8 choice to smoke, notwithstanding the fact that she knew that 9 smoking was dangerous. she did not try to quit. that is 10 fine. that is her choice. she gets to make those choices. 11 but now, here we are 2012 with her son, mr. duke. as you 12 heard, he and his wife are on the verge of retirement. and 13 they are asking you to make them millionaires and turn his 14 wife -- excuse me, turn his mother into the victim that she 15 never was during the course of her lifetime. ladies and gentlemen, for all of reasons i have 17 discussed today, i would ask that you return a verdict for 18 r.j. reynolds on all counts in this case. i want to tell 19 you it is been a pleasure working in front of you. and i 20 appreciate your attention. thank you very much. thank you, 21 your honor.