7 ms. shamp: thank you, your honor. good morning, ladies and gentlemen. first i want to thank you. this has been a pretty long two and-a-half weeks, and a lot of evidence has been presented to you, and i know that you were paying attention. you were listening and you were taking notes. and so what i'm not going to do today is to rehash all of the evidence that is been presented, because i know that you were paying attention. but what i do want to do this morning is to try and put some of the evidence that you have been presented in perspective, and i want to talk in detail about what it is that you are going to be called upon to decide, because you have got a lot of evidence that is relevant to the questions that are on the verdict form that the court just talked to you about, and you have got evidence that is irrelevant and that you are not going to be needing to decide. so what i 3533 want to do today is to talk about some of those things. now, when i got up here in the very beginning of the case you will remember i said that you are going to hear a lot of evidence, and some of it would sound like a movie script. and you did. you heard evidence about destroying documents. you will remember that the evidence was presented. and every time when i'm talking today you will see that there is a number on the bottom of the screen for the exhibit number. and you will have back with you binders, and all of these documents will be back in evidence with you so that you can look at them. and you will remember p287. once it becomes clear that such action is necessary for the successful defense of our present and future suits we will promptly remove all such reports from our files. you remember i asked dr. figlar about that. and you saw documents about deceit. absolute deceit committed against the american public. the false and misleading advertising regarding filter- tip cigarettes where the conclusion of the report to congress was that cigarette manufacturers have deceived the american public through their 3534 advertising of filter-tip cigarettes. and you heard evidence about deception. you heard evidence about how r.j. reynolds knew that there were carcinogens in their tobacco smoke, that they knew that there was a link between smoking and lung cancer, and they submitted the frank statement that went through -- and you saw how many newspapers that was published in. and you will have those documents where they said to the american public that there is no proof that cigarette smoking is one of the causes of lung cancer. and you saw evidence of fraud. you saw these documents where it said that very few consumers are aware of the effects of nicotine because we have not told them its addictive nature and that nicotine is poison. they knew that their own customers did not know this. and you saw evidence of greed. it is fortunate for us that cigarettes are a habit they cannot break. it is fortunate for us because we make a fortune off of it. you saw evidence of nicotine manipulation. you saw their documents where they indicated they were manipulating nicotine levels. you saw evidence of conspiracy, where the very heads of the greatest corporations themselves 3535 signalized the end of the old days when they linked arms and walked together to consult with us. i told you you would see evidence of a story of greed that is unparalleled in american history. unparalleled because of the scope of it, how long it went on. unparalleled because of the amount of documents that we now know, and that you are entitled to see. and unparalleled in the cost of human life. and you will have with you the surgeon general's report where it talks about the cost of that life. and you will have that entire report from 2014. you should look at it. it is exhibit 799. more than 20 million premature deaths are attributable to smoking, and smoking-attributable mortality is estimated to be about 480,000 a year. that is 1200 people in america, in america every day as a result of smoking cigarettes. and through the evidence we told you the story about greed; how in the 1950's, when more than 50 percent of americans smoked cigarettes, when it was advertised by athletes, celebrities, on television programs, on cartoons, that wynder and graham painted tobacco tar on the back of mice and discovered that in more than sixty percent of the mice 3536 tumors developed, and that this was big news, and that big tobacco was scared. and so they sent their own researchers to investigate what do we know, and claude teague came up with this is what we know. and you will remember he surveyed all the literature out there, and he reported this to r.j. reynolds, that the studies tend to confirm the relationship between heavy and prolonged tobacco smoking and cancer of the lung. 1953 they knew that. and that benzpyrene and (a)benzpyrene, both carcinogens, were identified in distillates of cigarette smoke. r.j. reynolds knew that. and they came to a fork in the road. they came to a fork in the road and they decided to lie. i suspect that you are going to hear a lot from mr. geise in his closing argument about choice. and i think this case is about choice. the choice they made to lie. they were the ones who had the power and resources to know about their product, and they had an obligation to tell us. and there is no dispute about that. and that is fraud. and remember, dr. figlar himself, when he came and testified, said, all right -- i asked him: all right. now, you agree, do not you, that r.j. 3537 reynolds has a responsibility to tell its customers what it knows about the health consequences of the use of its -- of the product it sells? he says, i mean, i believe so, yeah. and you agree that it has a duty to tell the truth? and he said, sure, yes. and a duty to disclose what it knows. there is no dispute about that, that they had a duty to tell. and they lied. they came to a fork in the road in the choices they made, with the evidence that you have heard. and you heard about how they lied and what they decided to do. they denied that cigarette smoking was dangerous. and you saw the press releases. you saw the individuals that went on television, ann browder and cullman, denying it. and they declared that there was doubt. and you will remember the papers that they sent out, the white papers, declaring that there was doubt about the harmfulness. and they deceived the american public by vowing to take out any harmful elements if they found it. the great filter lie that kept america smoking. it was hugely successful. and you will remember that witnesses talked about that, about how many people during that decade switched to filters, because they 3538 believed that that was not harmful. you heard testimony about the meeting in 1953 at the plaza hotel where they decided, when they knew that cigarette smoking caused lung cancer, to hire a public relations firm. instead of deciding how can we tell people, how can we get warnings on the packages, how can we let people know, they decided to hire a public relations firm. and then through the next four decades they sold doubt. was not really even important to sell cigarettes anymore. what they sold was doubt to keep people buying cigarettes. and that is their own document. doubt is our product. see, what they are trying to get is, sure the surgeon general is coming out and saying things, and other people are coming out and saying things, but what they want to do is just plant that seed of doubt. plant that little seed of doubt. well, i do not smoke four packs a day. i'm okay. i'm healthy. i exercise. i'm okay. i smoke filters or menthols. i'm okay. that is what they did. they planted that little seed of doubt to keep people smoking, because they knew they were addicted and they wanted that doubt. these were lies that they told. 3539 so i said in the beginning of this case that i would tell you a story about greed and fraud and lies, and also a story about addiction. and you heard that story. you heard the story of betty owens in the nursing home in the middle of the night calling her children saying, i need cigarettes, bring them to me. you heard the story about her leaving her daughter's home to go down in the basement. just image the picture. she is down in the basement pulling on a cigarette. you heard a story of addiction, and you also heard testimony about how big a problem addiction is in america and how we are trying just now to figure out ways to treat it. the lies that they told were intentional, they were conscious, and it was a choice they made. and i said it was about greed, because all of them were for one reason. one reason. profit. to continue to make more money, never once caring about the public health of the country they lived in, never once caring about who was getting addicted to their product. when i started this trial i asked you -- i said one thing that concerns me is that we become jaded. 3540 we hear a lot of stories about corporate greed or corporations make decisions. so the tendency to kind of let these things wash over, especially in a trial like this where you hear it so much. but i ask you to pay attention to each of those documents and look carefully at what they show, and how they show a real callous indifference to human life for their product. and so today, finally today is the day that you have to decide that that conduct needs to be punished, that that conduct is not victimless, that it caused harm. you see, they want you to believe -- no, they want you to decide that their greed and their fraud and their lies is victimless. they want you to decide that they did not harm anybody. they want to blame -- no, they want you to blame betty owens, not 5 percent, not a portion of it. they want you to blame betty owens one hundred percent. when i was working last night trying to think about what i was going to say to you one word kept coming up, and i thought i needed to talk to you about it. and that word is the truth. that is what we are here about. what is the truth? and i'll assert that r.j. 3541 reynolds has had a very loose association with the truth from the beginning. the truth. so i want to talk about some things that happened in this courtroom about the truth. joel dubow. you remember him. he was the guy that wrote this article that the defendants used to try and cross marvin goldberg. you remember dr. goldberg on the stand. and they tried to use this to say, oh, what you say about joe camel's not true. there is no studies that support that joe camel increased the risk of smoking for kids. and they put up this article, and you remember me objecting to the article, and you also remember my team starting to work when that happened. and what we came up with was, well, in fact, joel dubow was on r.j. reynolds' payroll. and you saw that evidence, and we presented it on redirect after we took a break and were able to come up with these documents, these documents that show that he was in communication with r.j. reynolds before he wrote the article, documents that show that r.j. reynolds was funding his research, documents that show that joel dubow was actually looking for a job. what is the truth? the evidence that they put up, the truth? this is a document from 1996 saying 3542 we are going to give an all-expense paid trip up to see r.j. reynolds. and that is the document that they tried to cross marvin goldberg with, was a document written by joel dubow, their guy. did they tell you that? did they tell you that was their guy? no. charles golden. you will remember when dr. proctor was on the stand and he talked about that stanley frank had written the true article. y'all will remember that. and that true article, and stanley frank was an employee of hill & knowlton, and he wrote that article that said there was no harm, that smoking did not cause lung cancer, that the link had not been proven yet. and that article was re-put in the national enquirer. and remember dr. proctor talked about that. then they got up and tried to cross examine dr. proctor, and remember they showed him a national enquirer from three years earlier that had the name charles golden attached, and said to dr. proctor, well, you are not right. charles golden is not a made-up name. he was writing articles three years before. so we had to go to work again. and you will 3543 remember we came back -- that is the national enquirer article. and you will remember we came back with the ftc report after the ftc had done a study and showed in fact it was stanley frank who had written the national enquirer article, and, in fact, charles golden was the name the national enquirer used. stanley frank, who at this time was an employee of hill & knowlton, was contacted and persuaded to write an article for the enquirer. the use of the name charles golden was the normal house byline used by the enquirer to keep the identity of the author confidential. we told you the truth. and the list goes on and on. you will remember when dr. figlar got on the stand he talked and talked about all the things r.j. reynolds was doing to reduce harm. remember all of that? we are designing our cigarettes differently. we are doing all these different things to reduce harm. and then i got up and cross examined him with the 1994 surgeon general report -- no, the 2010 surgeon general's report, which says -- and that is p487, which says: moreover, subsequent research demonstrated that the use of ventilation holes -- 3544 that is one of the things he talked to you about as being a way to reduce harm -- the use of ventilation holes produced higher levels of freebase nicotine, which led to a more addictive product, as well as deeper lung inhalation of cooler and less harsh smoke. what is the truth? and the list goes on and on. and i think it is fair for you to ask, can i trust any of the evidence that r.j. reynolds puts up? they formed a united front against the truth in 1953, and today they are not giving you the truth. mr. geise: your honor, i object. may we approach? (sidebar conference outside the hearing of the jury.) mr. geise: these are litigation tactics today that have taken place in the past. ms. shamp says question everything, ask if they are telling you the truth, and all that. she said it started in the 1970's. you should ask that today. it is directly a violation of the prior order and it is an implication that something started in the 70's is continuing in this courtroom today, and it is not permitted. it is a violation of the 3545 pretrial order. ms. shamp: i'm entitled to comment upon the evidence and the truth upon the evidence. and what i said was -- the court: one at a time. ms. shamp: well, i most certainly am entitled to say if they put up evidence that was subsequently found to be not true i'm mostly entitled to comment on that. that is closing argument. mr. geise: she can comment about all the lies that she is put up during this. but the point of the matter is she cannot say this was 1970 and they are still doing it today. the court: i think you can comment if you believe a piece of evidence is not factual. i do not think you can give the -- i think the way that was stated i would have to agree with mr. geise, the generality of the way it was stated i would have to agree with mr. geise. ms. shamp: i cannot say that -- i said in 1953 they formed the united front, and then i said -- i believe i said and today they have put up evidence that is not true. the court: i think you can comment -- ms. shamp: i can say that, today they put up 3546 evidence that is not true. the court: i think you can comment on specific evidence. i think under the pretrial order that in general you are not allowed to comment on litigation tactics. i think you can say the evidence presented is not true. ms. shamp: that is what i did. mr. geise: when she linked it to something in the past that is not what she is doing. the court: i think what he is saying is in the totality of it when it is linked today i think it is violating the spirit of the pretrial order. i think that is what he is saying. mr. geise: and i was ready for it, because ms. shamp has done this in the last two trials i've had with her. we have been to sidebar. so i knew it was coming, it was just a matter of when. the court: all right. thank you. (following sidebar.) ms. shamp: is the evidence they put up the truth? now, r.j. reynolds has put up a lot of distraction through this case. distractions like she did not die from lung cancer, they are not our cigarettes that she smoked, she knew it was harmful, 3547 ken ellis wrote a letter to his uncle, cancer was not caused by smoking, it was caused by something else, she smoked because she enjoyed it. they put up a lot of distraction evidence. so what i want to do now is i want to talk about what the evidence is, because when you go back in the jury room you are probably thinking you have one job, and that is to deliberate and reach a verdict. but you actually have two jobs back there. the other job is that you have to discuss with your fellow jurors why you hold the positions you do, what the evidence is to support the positions that you are going to take. and so i want to talk about what the evidence is and how it proves the things that we are supposed to prove. so before i do that i want to talk about the burden of proof. and the court just instructed you on the burden of proof, and the court told you that the plaintiff has the burden of proof to prove his claims by the greater weight of the evidence. and since we are in a courtroom i like to think of it like the scales of justice. we have to put our evidence that tilts the scale. when you put -- mr. geise: your honor, it is contrary to your 3548 order and the instruction you gave. the court: why do not you all approach sidebar. (sidebar conference outside the hearing of the jury.) the court: i believe that during jury selection i sustained the defense's objection about the issue of the scales of justice, that being not an instruction on the law that is appropriate. ms. shamp: well, i think it -- it was not appropriate to talk about what our burden of proof is when we are in -- before the court had instructed them and we were in voir dire. i'm certainly entitled to talk about what the burden of proof is, what it means, what greater weight of the evidence means. is not that what every lawyer does in closing argument? mr. geise: greater weight of the evidence does not mean tipping the scales just a little bit. that is misleading. that is the reason it was sustained in voir dire and it should be sustained again. the court: since it is closing argument and i do not think you are going to focus on the scales i will allow you to continue. (following sidebar.) 3549 ms. shamp: plaintiff has to prove his case by a greater weight of the evidence. so what i'm going to do throughout my closing argument is to talk about what the evidence is on either side of the issues that you are going to be called upon to decide. line them up. what is the evidence over here? what is the evidence over here? and where is the greater weight. all right. now, the judge just instructed you about what the evidence is. okay. and in this case you have got four categories of documents that are the evidence presented. you have got internal documents from r.j. reynolds. a lot of them. we will talk about some of them today, but there is a lot more in the binders that will go back with you. and all of those documents are evidence, and that means you can look at all of them, all of them in deciding the various issues you are going to be called upon to decide. the second category is government documents and other documents. and you have heard a lot about the surgeon general's reports. all of those are evidence. you can rely upon those reports in deciding the issues you have to decide. you have got ftc reports back there. look at 3550 them. those will contain evidence that will help you in deciding the issues you are going to be called upon to decide. and all of that, not just the testimony from the stand, but all of these things are evidence that you can utilize in order to reach your decisions. of course the testimony of the witnesses that you have heard, and there is also medical records from betty owens, including her death certificate. so all of these things together are the evidence that you have with you in order to consider the issues that you are going to have to decide. so the first issue that you have to decide is class membership. and the judge talked to you about that. so i want to talk to you about it just a little bit again. the engle class action. and you will recall we said in opening statement that the engle class action began in 1994. okay. again, just a year after her death this class started. and the engle class action was tried to a jury for over a year in 1999, and they heard all kinds of evidence, some of the same evidence you heard in this two and-a-half weeks, but a lot of evidence. and that jury made certain findings. and after 3551 the jury made findings those went up to the florida supreme court, and the florida supreme court affirmed the engle verdict, and then we brought this case. and what you have to decide is whether betty owens is one of the people who fits within the class membership definition so that she is part of -- i put her picture there -- so she is part of the class action. that is the first issue you are called upon to decide. and if you do then you get the benefit of the engle findings. i'm not going to go through each one of these now. you are going to have them in your jury instructions. so what is the definition of class membership? the judge just instructed you. to prove that betty owens was a member of the engle class, plaintiff must prove by a greater weight of the evidence that betty owens was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, and if so, was such addiction a legal cause of her lung cancer and death. pretty simple. and that is question one on the verdict form. when i was trying to figure out how i would organize my comments to you today i decided that the most effective way to talk to you about the issues 3552 that you were going to decide is to actually go through the verdict form one at a time, and what those questions are, and what the evidence is with respect to each of those questions so that we can talk about where the greater weight is, and what evidence was presented on these issues. so question one basically has three parts. the first part is addiction. was betty owens addicted? and you heard a lot of evidence about that. but it is very important that you understand what the question is not. the question is not whether she could quit. now, when you get to the part of the jury(sic) form about comparative fault, those are some things you might talk about, figure out, whether she could quit. but it is not -- and nobody said that whether or not she could quit determined whether she was addicted. even dr. hayes said that addicted smokers quit. addicted people who use heroin quit. so the question is not on addiction whether or not she could quit. the question is not whether she tried hard enough to quit. it is not whether she was motivated to quit. none of those things come into play on question one. whether she knew smoking was harmful, whether she chose to smoke. the question 3553 is was she addicted. it is quite simple. so what is the evidence about addiction? one, the evidence is that nicotine is an addictive drug that changes the brain. it actually causes physical changes that are measurable. we can look at them in the brain. we know that nicotine is a drug. everybody agrees to that. we know nicotine is addictive. everybody agrees to that. and we know it changes the brain. all of the evidence on those things is undisputed. you actually had pictures of pet scans of the brain showing how the brain in an addicted smoker is changed by the nicotinic receptors in there. you have evidence that eighty percent -- eighty percent of smokers try and quit every year. it is sort of an amazing statistic. and less than 5 percent are successful. you heard evidence that the longer you smoke, the more you smoke, the greater the likelihood is that you are addicted. okay. so this is what we learned about nicotine and addiction. we learned these things, this evidence. we also learned that beginning smoking in the early teens increases the likelihood 3554 of addiction. and you will remember the slide that dr. werner showed you and talked about how the brain is not fully developed, and because it is not fully developed, if you introduce a substance into the brain, not just nicotine, but any substance, alcohol, that teens who start utilizing a substance have a much higher risk of becoming addicted to those substances. that is why it is so critically important to keep drugs out of our children's lives. and this is a picture that has the frontal cortex of the brain, how it is not developed yet. all right. so what is the evidence that she was addicted? one, we have got nicotine is an addictive drug that changes the brain. cigarettes have nicotine in them. that is what she was exposed to. we know those things. we know her brain was changed by it. we have evidence of betty owens smoking. now, we know that from the witnesses who testified. so we have evidence from martha schofield, her daughter, from ken ellis, her son, and from bernice birdwell, her brother. and they talked about her smoking. we learned that she smoked between a pack and a pack and-a-half a day. all right. now, it is interesting to think 3555 about. if somebody enjoyed smoking, if they smoked because they liked it, would they consistently smoke a pack a day every day? no. and the defendants know that. we know that from their documents. we know she smoked for 44 years; that she was ingesting that brain-changing drug for 44 years at a pack and-a-half a day -- pack to a pack and-a-half a day. she began smoking when she was 13 years old. undisputed. and we know she smoked first thing in the morning, all during the day, smoked in the evening, smoked in bed at night. so we know a lot about her smoking behavior, the way she smoked. we also know that she had withdrawal symptoms and cravings. that is undisputed. undisputed that she was fidgety, anxious, from the people who observed her when she was not able to smoke. she got fidgety, restless, anxious, irritable. and you heard that from her daughter and from her son. and that she had cravings. that is undisputed. in the middle of the night calling and asking her son. going downstairs in the basement at her daughter's house. going in and out of her son's house when she was there. she had cravings for nicotine. undisputed. 3556 and she meets the dsm-5 criteria for nicotine addiction. you will recall dr. werner actually took the book and went through the criterion. and these are the 11 criteria in the book. it is the same book that dr. hayes said is the book, and dr. werner said is the book. dr. werner went through every category. did not give her all the categories. gave her 8 of the 11. and she talked about each one of those categories, so that she met the dsm-5 definition for addiction in the category severe. and then of course you had dr. werner's opinion that she was addicted. dr. werner testified to that. i'm listing what all the evidence is that she was addicted on one side. dr. werner, as you will remember, is a medical doctor. she is board certified in two specialties, she is double-board certified. she is the vice-chairman of the department of psychiatry at the university of florida. she is also an assistant professor and director at the forensic psychiatric division. she is the director there at the university of florida. she teaches medical students about addiction and about the dsm. she is the 3557 director of all inpatient psychiatric care at the university of florida. now, we kind of split up her testimony. she did her qualifications one day and her testimony the next day, but you will recall she said she is in charge of all inpatient psychiatric care at the university of florida, and that she currently sees, treats, and prescribes for patients with addiction. sees, treats, and prescribes for patients with addiction, including nicotine addiction. she is published journal articles on addiction, and she is been appointed by the governor to review cases and testify in court. she is a highly-respected expert in the state of florida, and her testimony was that betty owens was addicted, based upon the dsm-5 and her clinical judgment. but you do not only have that. you also have r.j. reynolds' internal documents, which you can consider when looking at the issue of addiction. r.j. reynolds' own documents, p302, say that they know nicotine is a potent drug. it is a potent drug with pharmacological effects. this is document p302: the tobacco industry may be thought of as being specialized, highly ritualized, and a stylized segment of the 3558 pharmaceutical industry. tobacco products uniquely contain and deliver nicotine, a potent drug. and you will see throughout their documents that they describe their product as a nicotine delivery device. it is a nicotine delivery device. their document, p285, describes it as the sine qua non. that means without which -- sine, without. without which nothing. they describe a cigarette without nicotine as without which there is nothing. it is the reason that people smoke cigarettes, is to get the nicotine. it is the sine qua non, nicotine, of smoking. and then they talk about in their own documents how they have to put enough nicotine in the smoke of their products sufficient to supply the necessary requirements of the smoker. the requirements of the smoker. it is their dose. their addiction and their dose. they know it is an addiction. fortunately for us it is a habit they cannot break. they know that their product is deeply addictive. not only know it, they count on it. they design their products to do that. and yet they come in today and say she is not addicted. she smoked because she enjoyed it. the evidence that we have put on that betty 3559 owens was addicted -- i said we should put them on two sides of the scale. what is the evidence that she was addicted? and we put -- we spent a lot of time doing it, putting on evidence about addiction. we put on a lot of evidence about addiction. and what evidence is there that she was not addicted? that is it. dr. jill hayes. now, i say doctor because she is a psychologist. she is not a medical doctor. remember that testimony. she is not board certified in anything. there are board certifications in psychology. she has no board certifications. she is never written or published about addiction. she is not listed as an expert on addiction anywhere. remember when ms. bryan pulled up the website? does not list addiction. she does not treat patients with nicotine addiction. i was surprised when she said that from the stand. she does not even treat patients who have nicotine addiction. she does not currently teach. she cannot even prescribe medications. she cannot prescribe medications to treat nicotine addiction. but what did she even say? she stood in front of you -- sat in front of you and listed her five factors. you remember. these are my five factors 3560 for why i say she is not addicted. here are her five factors: cognitive capacity, awareness, personality, smoking, and quitting. where did she get these five factors? she testified that it is the dsm-5. remember? she said, i used the dsm-5. these are not in the dsm-5. her five factors are not in any publication. her five factors that she used she had no support for. she did not even go through the dsm criteria. i thought it was an extraordinarily telling question from the jury, why did you decide she was not addicted? because she did not even tell us. she did not go through the dsm-5 criteria. she said she thought she could quit. that was one of the reasons she told you that she thought she was addicted, because she thought she could quit. if that is the standard, she could quit, no one is addicted. nobody. everybody who testified said that addicted people can quit. it is not the question you have to decide. so where is the greater weight of the evidence? we suggest that the far greater weight of the evidence is that betty owens was addicted. okay. the second thing you have to decide is whether addiction caused her smoking. the surgeon 3561 general's report you will have says that nicotine addiction is the fundamental reason that people persist in using tobacco products. for the typical smoker, nicotine satisfaction is the dominant desire. the dominant desire as opposed to flavor or other satisfactions. their own document says: we cannot defend continued smoking as free choice if the person was addicted. that is p363. r.j. reynolds' own documents prove that the addiction caused her to smoke, that that is why she smoked. all the evidence regarding her smoking behavior and dr. werner's testimony. what was the evidence that she smoked for a reasons other than addiction? dr. hayes. remember what dr. hayes said. we asked her: dr. hayes, you cannot rule out nicotine as a reason that betty owens smoked; is that correct. no. no, it is not correct, or, no, it is correct? no, i cannot rule out that nicotine was potentially a reason that she smoked. so even dr. hayes admits that she smoked -- or that she cannot rule out that she smoked because of nicotine. so all of the evidence is that she smoked because of her nicotine addiction. and finally the last question is that her 3562 smoking caused lung cancer and death. and of course you remember a long time ago, several -- i guess the first week, we put up -- the second week we put up dr. wright. and you will remember dr. wright, he is a pathologist and he was the chief medical examiner in dade county for a long time. and dr. wright testified that smoking was what caused her lung cancer what caused her death. we of course put up her death certificate that she died from lung cancer that had metastasized to her brain. we also put up medical records, and the medical records are in evidence, that she died as a result of smoking and lung cancer. what is the evidence that something other than smoking caused her lung cancer? none. nothing. now, this is one of the things that the defendants spent a enormous amount of time on. and let me say this, this is a very simple question, and that is, r.j. reynolds' brands are clearly one of the causes of her smoking. and i want to talk for just a minute about this, because it is a point i think i need to clarify that is not an issue that you have to worry about. all right. the testimony is that betty owens smoked this list of brands: belair, camel, salem, 3563 kool, lucky strike, winston, pall mall, benson & hedges, raleigh, marlboro, and kent. okay? mr. geise: your honor, i object. may we approach? (sidebar conference outside the hearing of the jury.) mr. geise: for the vast majority of the time that mrs. owens was alive benson & hedges was a liggett brand cigarette, not philip morris. ms. shamp: my research shows that benson & hedges was a philip morris product. now maybe the -- mr. geise: late in life they bought it. ms. shamp: they bought it. mr. geise: the brand, not liggett. ms. shamp: well, if they bought the brand -- mr. geise: they did not buy the liability, they bought the brand. the court: okay. this is outside of my scope of knowledge. mr. geise: i mean, it is just a -- again it is just testimony that never came in the case about the manufacturer of benson & hedges. ms. shamp just put up a slide in front of the jury that said it is philip morris. they have the stipulation on philip 3564 morris. i'm sure that is what she is going to go to next. so it is misleading to put up a brand and indicate it is manufactured by somebody else when there is no evidence of that, there is no stipulation, and then make whatever argument she is going to make. the court: well, i mean, if that is accurate then i do not believe you can show that, if what he is saying is true. i do not have the knowledge of the corporate structure of all of these cigarette brands as you do, but if that is accurate, that would be -- i have no reason to question that that is not right. ms. shamp: what i know is that it is a philip morris brand now. mr. geise: now. ms. shamp: it is a philip morris brand now. and so you know -- mr. geise: and there was no evidence about that whatsoever in the trial. the court: you are right. mr. geise: so she is arguing evidence that is not in this case. ms. shamp: all right. i'll move on. the court: all right. thank you. (following sidebar.) ms. shamp: so you heard a lot of evidence 3565 about these brands. all right. now, it is important to know the vast majority of winston, salem, kool, belair, those are all made either by r.j. reynolds or by one of its predecessors, brown & williamson or american tobacco. all right. now, the court also read you a stipulation, and what the stipulation says is that belair, camel, kook, lucky strike, pall mall, salem, and winston cigarettes were manufactured in the united states by reynolds or its predecessor in interest. that is not an issue. all those brands are r.j. reynolds. they are responsible for all of them. now, the other brands that were discussed that are philip morris brands, they have stipulated. this is an agreement. and you remember the court instructed you that you can consider all of the evidence as well of the all the facts that parties have agreed to. and you will have this in your jury instructions. this is actually one of the jury instructions. it says that any smoking by decedent betty owens of any cigarette manufactured by lorillard or by philip morris was minimal and did not directly and in natural and continuing sequence produce or contribute substantially to producing any 3566 injury sustained by betty owens, if any, that was caused by smoking cigarettes. all right. if there was use by philip morris or lorillard, those two manufacturers, of those brands of cigarettes, the defendant has stipulated that it was minimal and did not contribute. okay. now, i suspect that they might say something about the off brands that she smoked, and there was some testimony that very occasionally that there would be smoking by an off brand. all right. but what you have to understand is read what the jury instructions say. okay. in order to be regarded as a legal cause of death an addiction to cigarettes need not be the only cause. addiction to r.j. reynolds' cigarettes may be a legal cause of injury and death even though it operates in combination with the act of another, or some other cause, if some other cause occurs at the same time as the addiction and the addiction contributes substantially to producing such injury and death. all right. even if there is some minor use by somebody else, minor use of generic brands or off brands. and the only testimony is that was very occasional. the vast majority was rjr. that is what 3567 the evidence is. it was rjr brands. and you heard that from martha schofield, and you heard that from ken ellis, and heard that from bernice birdwell, that she smoked lucky strikes when she started. this is a nonissue that the defendants are trying to make an issue of. their own stipulation -- their own stipulation said that philip morris or lorillard smoking was minimal. all right. but even if there was some other cause, the question you have to decide is was the smoking of r.j. reynolds one of the causes. that is all you have to decide. it is a red herring to your deliberations. in order to be regarded as a legal cause of death addiction to cigarettes need not be the only cause. you know, i comment for a minute about how versatile r.j. reynolds is. very versatile. so 1999 in the engle trial they argued that nicotine is not addictive, and then once there was a finding, that jury had to listen to testimony for a year and had a finding. they came back and said nicotine is addictive. r.j. reynolds said, okay, nicotine is addictive, but this person is not addicted. okay. all right. maybe if betty owens is addicted -- 3568 well, if she is addicted, she did not smoke because of such addiction. they are versatile. they keep moving it around, and we have to block them at every turn. the truth, ladies and gentlemen, is that betty owens is a member of the class. that is the truth. she was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine. she was part of the engle class. she is the reason the engle class was brought on behalf of this group of people. she is one of them. that is what the evidence shows. that is the question you have on question 1 of the verdict form. was betty owens addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, and if so, was such addiction a legal cause of her death? the evidence is overwhelming she is a member of this class. so if she is a member of the class then the plaintiff is entitled to the benefit of the engle findings. and what the court has instructed you on is they cannot deny them, they cannot question them, and the weight you give them is as if you had decided them yourself. and they are: that cigarettes cause lung cancer, that nicotine in cigarettes is addictive. these -- again, these are all in your jury 3569 instructions that you will have back with you. that r.j. reynolds placed cigarettes on the market that were defective and unreasonably dangerous. the product itself. that r.j. reynolds concealed or omitted material information not otherwise known or available. and that is important. that piece right there, because the defendants are going to argue that betty owens knew, she knew. but the finding that you are bound by says they concealed information that was not otherwise known. they hid things that people did not know, knowing that the material was false or misleading, or failed to disclose a material fact concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes, or both. five -- and this is the conspiracy where they linked arms -- r.j. reynolds agreed with other tobacco companies to conceal or omit information regarding the health effects of cigarettes or their addictive nature with the intention -- intentionally, we talked about that -- intention that smokers and the public would rely upon that information to their detriment. rely. remember i put up -- dr. figlar said we expect people to rely, and they should be able to 3570 rely. it is our obligation. they put out false information with the intention that smokers and the public would rely to their detriment. and that r.j. reynolds was negligent. these findings may not be denied or questioned. they must carry the same weight they would have if you had determined them yourselves. all right. so what is the second question that you are going to be asked? second question on the verdict form is the fraud question. this is where we start talking about their fraud. this is it right here. state whether r.j. reynolds' concealment or omission of a material fact -- whether their fraud -- about the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes, or both, were a legal cause of betty owens' death. this is where we get to the important stuff. whether their conspiracy, the agreement to conceal or omit a material fact regarding the health effects of cigarette smoking or the addictive nature of smoking cigarettes was a legal cause of betty owens' death. the judge read to you what does that mean, that their conspiracy, and their fraud was a legal cause. 3571 well, it means reliance. it is that word we have been talking about. this is from your jury instructions. the next issue for you to determine is whether concealment or omission of material information concerning the health effects or addictive nature of cigarette smoking by r.j. reynolds was a legal cause of the death of betty owens. betty owens' reliance on such statements to her detriment is a legal cause of the loss, injury, or damage if it directly and in continuous sequence produces or contributes substantially to producing her loss, injury, or damages, so that it can be reasonably said that but for betty owens' reliance on her loss, injury -- her loss, injury, or damage would not have occurred. all right. reliance. and what the judge will instruct -- the judge did instruct you is that when you are deciding that issue you can consider all of the facts. as to each of plaintiff's claims of concealment and conspiracy to conceal i hereby instruct you that you may consider all of the evidence in the case in determining whether or not plaintiff has satisfied the reliance question. all right. so this is a very simple concept. 3572 okay. did their fraudulent conduct cause smoking? did all the stuff they do cause people to keep smoking? and did it cause betty owens to keep smoking? remember how i said they want to believe that it was victimless? this is where you say no. your fraud has victims, including betty owens. what were the fraud messages that were put out? we talked a lot about that. the evidence that we put up that defendant's fraud was a cause of betty owens -- now, again it does not have to be the only cause, but whether their fraud was a cause of betty owens' death. you have the engle finding that says that they concealed or omitted information that was not otherwise known. you have all of the statements that they put out, and you will have all these documents back there, and you will remember this whole campaign, the frank statement, we believe the products we make are not injurious to your health, the campaign of doubt and denial. you actually had videotape that will go back with you that we played in court from howard cullman, you will remember, bill dwyer, e. horrigan from rjr, ann browder. you remember ann browder. the testimony in front of congress. all that are the messages that they were 3573 putting out. a campaign of doubt and denial. the press releases. the entire hill & knowlton campaign. the white papers. you remember the distribution of the white papers, how many people it was sent to. smoking and health, the continuing controversy. how it was sent to all the doctors. but in addition to all of this information about this campaign of doubt and denial that was put out -- that is the circulation of how many doctors it was sent to. 205,000 copies of the white paper was sent to doctors. 178,000 doctors. they knew that they had to try and create confidence and public assurance. that was a hill & knowlton document about how they were trying. but not just those messages. the ti document, the tirc documents, which you also have, is their massive advertising campaigns. you will recall dr. goldberg was on the stand for two full days, and we talked about those messages that the tobacco company was putting out, messages that were determined to be false and misleading. cigarettes are one of the most heavily marketed products in the united states. between 1940 and 2005 u.s. cigarette manufacturers spent about 250 billion dollars on cigarette advertising and 3574 promotions. cigarette advertising reaches virtually all americans who can either read or understand the spoken word. the amount of cigarette advertising in the united states is the most heavily advertised product in america. it has been estimated that the six major cigarette companies spent more than one billion dollars in 1980 to sell their product. the commission believes the warning label on the cigarette package has not succeeded in overcoming the prevalent attitude toward cigarette smoking created and maintain by the cigarette companies through their advertisements, particularly the barrage of commercials on television which portray smoking as a harmless and enjoyable social activity that is not habit forming and involves no hazards to health. these false messages were being sent out to the american public. can we play one of the ads now? play 121b-008. (the video clip was played as follows.) there is a wonderful world of softness, a wonderful world of freshness. it is the wonderful, wonderful, wonderful, wonderful salem cigarette. salem softness freshens your taste. salem softness 3575 freshens your taste. smoke salem cigarettes. salem gives you a modern filter plus rich tobacco taste, smooth with menthol, softened with fresh air, for salem's special paper breathes in fresh air with every puff to bring you salems air-softened taste. there is a wonderful world of softness, a wonderful world of freshness. it is the wonderful, wonderful, wonderful world of salem cigarettes. salem softness freshens your taste. (video clip concluded.) ms. shamp: this is just one. you will have plenty of those messages that we will send back that this is a harmless activity, that the filter filters out the bad stuff. and i use that particular ad because how it shows fresh air, you are smoking fresh air with the salem cigarette. these were false, misleading advertisements. and we know that betty owens watched television. we know she saw the commercials. we know that she bought and collected belair coupons, which were advertised. we know, and the evidence shows, that this massive advertising campaign created more smoking. what is the evidence of that? the evidence 3576 that it created more smoking. we put up the evidence from dr. proctor who said that their advertising campaign and the messages of doubt and denial kept people smoking. that is the evidence that you have. dr. goldberg said that the massive advertising campaign created more smoking. we also have surgeon general reports, which we read to you, which said that the advertising and the messages of doubt and denial kept people smoking. you will also have the ftc reports which showed -- and i showed some of them earlier -- that people continued to smoke even after the surgeon general's report. we also have rjr's internal documents. mike, bring up p976 at page 58. the reason i'm putting these things up, they put this message out, not into the ether, they were not putting this message out just for the heck of spending billions of dollars. they did it to keep people smoking. that is the causation. they did it to keep people smoking. bring up the top paragraph on that page. the cigarette industry dramatically demonstrates the force of advertising in the united states today. we have millions of individual 3577 purchases every day of the year, and every consumer is pre-sold specifying his brand by name. the rise and fall of every brand of consequence has been traced in detail, and their year-to-year success or failure has shown to be the direct result of consumer advertising. people smoke because of the advertising. if you will turn to page 60, please, michael. bring up conclusion 3. the basic human motivation, the strongest of which is the desire for security. hence the compelling success of campaigns such as no throat irritation, camels never get on your nerves, et cetera. contrary to popular belief, advertisers do not instill fear into consumers to make them buy, they simply recognize its existence and do their best to profit by it. their advertising of filters. people's fear. and they profited by it. look at the final paragraph on that page, michael, please. in every instance of vigorous aggressive campaign presented with imagination and showmanship has met with success regardless of copy theme media or comparative size of appropriation. 3578 they are advertising what? it created more smoking. now, we also had in this case -- what is the evidence that they presented that their fraud did not cause people to keep smoking? [#deleted objection dialogue#] [#deleted recess#] ms. shamp: thank you. i think when we took our break we were discussing questions 2 and 3 on the verdict form, that is the fraud and the conspiracy questions. and where i was talking about was what is the proof that their fraud and conspiracy was a cause of betty owens' death. and again, we are going through the process of weighing the evidence for each of the questions on the verdict form. each of the questions on the verdict form, what is the evidence that it was the 3587 cause of betty owens' death and what is the evidence on the other side. we went through a lot of trouble and put up a lot of testimony and evidence about this. we brought in dr. proctor from stanford university. you will remember dr. proctor. he was, i think, our first witness that we put up. dr. proctor from stanford talked about the history of the tobacco industry and put up a lot of the industry's internal documents. we also put up dr. goldberg, and dr. goldberg talked about the mass marketing campaigns. we also put up the surgeon general's reports, various ftc reports, rjr's own internal documents. we put up all of this evidence that their fraud was a cause of betty owens' continued smoking and death. i want to talk about one particular piece because it relates specifically to betty owens. the judge will instruct you that you may use reason and common sense to reach your conclusions. and you can draw reasonable inferences from the evidence. common sense and you can draw reasonable inferences. okay. we put up evidence that showed that smokers are more likely to have incorrect beliefs about the relationship between smoking and lung 3588 cancer than are nonsmokers. we believe the inference is that the defendant's conduct, the advertising, the message they put out of doubt worked, that smokers are more likely to have incorrect beliefs about the relationship between smoking and lung cancer than nonsmokers. we also gave you the national enquirer. all right. and it is very important that we put this in context, all right? and the context we gave you was the testimony of dr. werner yesterday. and you will remember what dr. werner said about denial and addiction, all right. i think if you asked any person on the street who is a more reliable sort of information, the national enquirer or the surgeon general. i mean, people on the street are going to say the surgeon general. and what dr. werner talked about is how denial factors into disease and the disease of addiction. and this was not news to r. j. reynolds. they put this in the national enquirer on purpose and in true magazine. now, just enough -- and i asked dr. werner the question, what -- how does this create an obstacle 3589 or barrier for somebody to quit? and it is like a crutch they hold. r. j. reynolds gave people the crutch. why? to keep selling cigarettes. it is a little crutch. sure, people are quitting. we will talk a minute in about youth marketing. and they are trying to get new smokers for the ones that quit, just give some of them a crutch. that is why they did this. and the national enquirer in particular, you have evidence that she read the national enquirer. read it. you have evidence of that, that during this time, this is 1968, that she read the national enquirer. all right. and that in conjunction with dr. werner's testimony that information like this was a barrier to people quitting. that is evidence of reliance that caused her disease. but it is very personal, they will have a very different argument. at first, before the engle trial, they argued that there was no fraud, no fraud at all. now that they have the engle findings, they cannot argue that. now they argue, well, our fraud did not cause betty owens to smoke. right? it did not make any difference. all of that fraud did not cause her to keep smoking. 3590 ask yourself, what is the evidence of reliance? we put up dr. proctor, dr. goldberg, surgeon general's reports, the ftc reports that their fraud was a cause of betty owens' death and dr. werner. what evidence did they put up that it was not? we put up proof, you would expect them to counter it. the greater weight of the evidence, ladies and gentlemen, we put up proof they did not counter. now, the second question on the verdict form: state whether r. j. reynolds' concealment or omission of a material fact about the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes or both were a legal cause of betty owens' death. the greater weight of the evidence shows it was. that their fraud -- the conspiracy count goes hand in hand with the fraud count, all right? the first one is whether -- the third question on the verdict form: state whether r. j. reynolds' agreement to conceal, that is, the conspiracy, the agreement to conceal or omit a material fact regarding health effects of cigarette smoke or the addictive nature of smoking cigarettes was a legal cause of betty owens' death. the greater weight of the evidence 3591 says it was. now we move to question 4 on the verdict form. and that is comparative fault question. and this is the one where we start talking about whether betty owens did not try hard enough to quit, what were her efforts to quit, should she have tried harder, should she have tried sooner. and you have to decide how much responsibility to put on r. j. reynolds and how much on betty owens. so let us look at what the evidence is with respect to these two parties' conduct because we have to compare, right? let us compare. r. j. reynolds lied, we know that, with the intent that smokers would rely, with the intent, that is the finding, with the intent that smokers would rely to their detriment. and dr. figlar said it. we expect people to rely on us when we put out statements. they said, fortunately for us it is a habit they cannot break. i'll go through all of the evidence of the conduct of r. j. reynolds on this side, think about their conduct and compare it to betty owens. she started smoking when she was 13 years old. and now mr. geise will say that she was making adult decisions because she got married at 13. i guess 3592 just because you make a decision does not necessarily mean it is a good decision that you make. 13 years old she started smoking. that -- that choice she made at 13. patches, medications, they were not available. there was an early cessation clinic, that is what the testimony was. there were very few things to help somebody like betty owens to stop smoking. so let us compare what they did, to what she did. she did not try harder. compare that to their intentional lies and deceit. compare what she did when she was addicted buying their product, buying their product, every day to what they did. she was addicted. that has to factor into your consideration of choice. what are the two choices here that we are looking at? the choice of a 13-year-old who then became addicted to their product, not to try harder to quit when she became an adult, but when you talk about choice, you cannot talk about choice without talking about informed choice. sure, she made a choice, but did she know -- did they inform her about what was in their product? was it an informed choice that she made to continue smoking, or because of their deceit, because of 3593 their lies did she continue to smoke, making that choice. now, the defendants are very versatile, very versatile. so now they want to argue that it does not matter about all these things, this was her choice, she should be one hundred percent at fault, responsible, one hundred percent at fault. so, ladies and gentlemen of the jury, i'm not going to tell you what i think the numbers should be for the percentage of fault. you are going to assign some fault to betty owens. that is okay. but we think the vast majority of fault has to go on r. j. reynolds, that when you compare the conduct of r. j. reynolds to that of our client's, the vast majority has to be laid at their door given that the evidence was that you heard about her smoking, given what you heard. now, the next question that you reach, question number 5, is damages. and i want to talk for a minute about what the evidence is with respect to damages. and there are two questions on the verdict form about damages, question 5. two sections to question 5. one is the amount, if any, that ken ellis sustained and then that martha schofield sustained. 3594 they are both on the verdict form as her two children. and, of course, becky is deceased so she is not on the verdict form. so you heard the mortality tables. 25 years to life was what her life expectancy was in '93. she died at 57. 25 years that ken ellis and martha schofield lost the companionship of their mother. now, we go to work every day and we do our jobs, we go about our business, but the value of our life is really about our connections with the people we love, our connections with our family. that is what makes our life really meaningful, makes it important. and so that relationship, i submit, is an extraordinarily important and valuable relationship, and for ken and martha, you heard the testimony, she was their only parent. she was the only one they had. so what -- 25 years lost of christmases with your mother, 25 years of thanksgivings, birthday parties, weddings, 25 years lost. and i will not represent to you that i'm an expert in knowing how to put a value on something like that. i'm going to leave it to you, the collective consciousness of you. but there is some things that you ought to think about. 3595 when you think about harm and the amount of harm, and the amount of harm, the amount of loss, i'd like to think that there are things that are small harm, you break your arm, right? and it is small because it stops me from doing a couple of things but it heals and it is better and after a short time i'm going to be normal. and then there is a group i call the medium harms. you hurt your back on your job and you are out for a year and troubled, i call that a medium harm, but eventually you get back. now talk about the harms that are large. and those are the ones that are permanent, that cause pain and suffering that lasts, and i think you saw the evidence of that on the stand with martha and with ken. this is a large harm. it is a pain that lasts, and it is life altering. now, it is very important to note what you write on here really has nothing to do with what the other evidence in the case is. this is the -- the full amount. and the judge instructed you, that if you reduce it, the percentages you put on the prior question, they will be applied, but this has to be the full amount. so when you are looking at this question, really just that question, what is the 3596 loss of betty owens' value to ken ellis and martha schofield, what is the -- the full amount? what is the full amount of that loss? it has two parts. the first part is the pain and suffering as a result of her injury and death. and that is the pain watching her die. and in this case, that was pretty powerful. very powerful. what is the total compensation for that loss? and then the second part is the loss of his parental companionship and instruction and guidance. it is the same question for martha and for ken for those two pieces. and i'm going to let -- i'm not going to give you a number. i think the number that collectively you believe would be the full amount of that loss, that is good for us. but let me suggest that one way of thinking about it is to ask, because we live in a capitalist society, we are capitalists here. so what something is worth is often what somebody would pay for it or what you would give it up for. just ask yourself what would you have to pay for somebody to say, i'll give up 25 years with my mother, how much would you have to pay somebody for them to raise their hand and say, that is a good deal? i'll take that deal. 3597 of course, he was not given the choice to raise his hand. it is a large harm. and the last question is punitive damages. and this is the part where you have to decide do they get punished or do they get a pass. and the stuff we have been talking about, their conduct, their lies, their greed, their selfishness, their profit motive, all of that goes into the decision. under the circumstances, whether by clear and convincing evidence, punitive damages are warranted and the judge instructed you about that and when those -- read those instructions, you have to think, r. j. reynolds. the conduct causing loss to the plaintiff was so gross and flagrant as to show a reckless disregard for human life -- that is r. j. reynolds -- or the safety of persons exposed to the effect. fortunately for us, our cancer-causing cigarettes are a habit they cannot break. the conduct showed an entire lack of care that r. j. reynolds must have been consciously indifferent to the consequences. the conduct showed an entire lack of care that r. j. reynolds must have wantonly or recklessly disregarded the safety and welfare of the public. 3598 look at the surgeon general's report. the conduct showed such reckless indifference of others to be equivalent of an intentional violation of those rights. that is the evidence that we have built. and you have to decide do they get punished, or do you give them a pass? and the judge will tell you that it is about punishing them but also deterring this kind of conduct, deterring it. in determining whether punitive damages are warranted, you may consider similar harms suffered by other parties -- persons not parties to this lawsuit in assessing the reprehensibility or wrongfulness of r. j. reynolds' acts as proven in this case. you can consider the amount of harm this caused, 480,000 deaths every year, you can consider that in determining if they should be punished, or they get a pass. so i do not want to talk again about all their deceptions and lies. i want to focus on two things they did that i think are particularly egregious in addition to what i talked about, and, that is, they marketed this product who they knew would kill our kids, to people whose brains were not developed yet, 3599 people's brains they could establish that addiction. you saw those documents, those intentional documents marketing it to 14-year-olds. manufacturers have studied the 14- to 20-year-old market. creating a fad in that market is a bonanza. a bonanza because you can addict those kids and sell them cigarettes for the rest of their lives until they die from your product. a bonanza. this conduct has to be punished. they talked about the -- the delicate, sensitive nature of our kids and how to market their product to tie into that. the expected or derived -- first, for the presmoker, those we have not got yet, and learn the physical effects of smoking are largely unknown, unneeded or actually quite unpleasant or awkward. the expected or derived psychological effects are largely responsible for influencing the presmoker to try smoking and provide sufficient motivation during the learning period to keep the learner going despite the physical unpleasantness and awkwardness. and they targeted their marketing and their products at our kids. and this one probably is the -- one of the 3600 hardest to read. it says that: finally, the older establishment is preaching against smoking -- if the older establishment is preaching against smoking, the anti-establishment sentiment discussed above would cause the young to be defiant and smoke, thus a new brand aimed at the young group should not in any way be promoted as a health brand and perhaps should carry some implied risk. in this sense, the warning labels might actually be a plus for us. they want kids to smoke. young kids. they want young kids to smoke. we also have the joe camel, and we talked about the joe camel. michael, if you will bring up p102a-194. the evidence showed -- the evidence showed that this type of advertising, smooth character appealed to children and caused an increase in children's smoking. the surgeon general's report talked about it in the 1994 surgeon general's report. all right. you can put that down. bring up 387-05. the top paragraph. younger adult smokers are critical to rjr's long-term performance and profitability. therefore, rjr should make a substantial long-term commitment 3601 of manpower -- it is hard to read, but that says and money -- dedicated to younger adult smokers programs. an unusually strong commitment from executive management will be necessary, since major volume payoffs may lag several years behind the implementation of a successful younger adult smoker strategy. you will remember -- i will not go through all the documents that said what they defined as younger adult was 14 to 20-year-olds. it is document number 16, that is where they define the younger adult. and the second thing i want to talk about is manipulation of nicotine. now, they said they did not add nicotine to their product. you remember that testimony? what the testimony is that they use the tobacco to blend it so that they get the nicotine content they want out of each cigarette. all right. they know that the tobacco product is a vehicle for the delivery of nicotine that they have to keep sufficient amounts in there to supplier the smokers with necessary requirements. and then they did studies about how do we manipulate the nicotine levels in our cigarettes. you saw a document, p681, lucky 100 blend was 3602 treated with compound w to increase to yield 2.85 nicotine, a 21 percent increase. this is document p240: certainly the nicotine level of b&w, brown & williamson, cigarettes given in the above table was not obtained by accident. they manipulate the nicotine level to keep people addicted. these are the additives that they put in their product, including ammonia. and we talked about ammonia and how it increases the effect of nicotine in the cigarettes. you now today get to decide do they get punished for their lies, for their greed, for their fraud or their marketing of their products to our kids, for manipulating the nicotine to keep people addicted? and then under clear and convincing evidence, punitive damages have to be awarded in this case. now, i suspect that the defendants will talk a lot about betty owens in their closing, talk a lot about betty owens. they said in their opening that she was street smart. i think the evidence showed that betty owens is our most vulnerable. she is our most vulnerable. the ones they aim our products 3603 towards the ones with an eighth grade education struggling to make a life for themselves and their kids in america. she is our most vulnerable, and they want to blame her one hundred percent. that is who they prey on, the eighth grade education, the working people of our country, that is who they prey on. they will talk a lot about betty owens, and i suspect that mr. geise will. and when he does, i want you to think what about rjr, talk about rjr. they want to blame betty owens without accepting any responsibility themselves. i know you have listened to me for a long time. mr. geise will get an opportunity to talk now, and then i'll have a chance to come back and speak after he does. i thank you for your attention, and i appreciate the opportunity to be able to present this evidence to you. thank you. rebuttal closing argument ms. shamp: thank you. good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. i know that you are anxious to start deliberating, so i am not going to speak for very long. i took a lot of notes, responses to some of the things mr. geise said, and i'm not going to go through all of them. you have heard all the evidence and you have heard argument from both of us. and now it is time for you to go back there and make decisions based on 3721 what the evidence is that you heard. i do want to touch on a few things that he said just to point out some things that i think were not correct or that there was more to the story. he mentioned the flinstones and how we had not told the whole story. i think if you remember what the evidence was with respect to the flinstones, we told you specifically it was a prime time show, and then we had dr. goldberg talk about the number of children who watch prime time shows. and that that, in addition to the fact that children associated cartoon characters with increased smoking and there was testimony about that. but i also wanted to draw your attention to something else, and that is exhibit 243. you will remember that both mr. ellis and ms. schofield said that they watched both gun smoke and wagon train, and exhibit 243 is what dr. goldberg put up during his testimony, which showed the shows that were sponsored in 1963 by the tobacco industry. and if you look there, both gun smoke and -- gun smoke is on saturday at 10:00 o'clock, and they watched gun smoke, and wagon train on the top part, there is it, monday, 3722 which was sponsored by r.j. reynolds, and that started at 8:30 at night. and so the evidence is that they were watching shows at night that were sponsored by r.j. reynolds or r.j. reynolds' predecessor in interest. mr. geise said one thing i caught really quickly. and he said this, he said, any addiction she had did not cause her smoking. you remember he said that. i think that sounds like he admits, of course, that she did have an addiction, that she was addicted, and that is of course question 1 on the verdict form. yeah, he talked about dr. wright and you will remember that dr. wright did give a lot of testimony because dr. wright was, in fact, the chief medical examiner in miami dade county, and he talked about the amount of testimony he gives because he is the called in as the medical examiner and what his expertise is in determining cause of death. and that is what he came in and told you was the cause of death. and he told you that the cause of death was lung cancer caused by smoking cigarettes. i'm not going to go through all of the lung cancer, i do not really think that is an issue 3723 in this case. she had lung cancer, it was caused by cigarette smoking. you can look at exhibits 4 and 5. those are the medical records. they show over and over again that she had lung cancer, that she had lung cancer diagnosed in several different ways, that she had lung cancer diagnosed at least three times by biopsy or by bronchoscopy. and i want to touch on the thing about what the percentage is of the addiction today that was listed in the new -- the brand new dsm v. and you heard the testimony about that. the dsm v it is a fifty percent, but in the dsm iv tr before that it was 80 to ninety percent, and we talked about that little bit. and then it is very likely that the percentage of addicted smokers now is less than it was in 1993 and that is because we really changed -- fortunately, the public health community has really changed smoking behavior by limiting the places that people can smoke. it is very difficult for a person to smoke throughout the day anymore if they are employed. it is very difficult for them to smoke in just about any public place. so that is forcing smokers to cut back and cut back and cut back, and i just 3724 wanted to point that out. i think the evidence is that in 1993, and certainly in 1960, '70, '80 when ms. owens was alive and smoking, that the prevalence of nicotine addiction was 80 to ninety percent of regular smokers. i also want to mention this idea about relaxation and remind you about dr. werner's testimony, that what happens when addicted smokers goes without nicotine, when the nicotine substance is withdrawn, that it causes the brain to go out of balance, caused them to go out of equilibrium and that feels bad, feels bad. so that when they smoke and they tell people it relaxes them, it is because their body is going back to equilibrium. and so a report -- and dr. werner testified to this -- of feeling relaxed or calm or enjoying smoking is a feeling of going back to equilibrium when an addicted smoker's body has gone out of equilibrium because the nicotine has been withdrawn. it is interesting, mr. geise talked a lot about the different choices that betty owens made and whether she had tried hard enough to quit smoking. but you will have the verdict form and that is not on the verdict form, whether she tried hard enough. 3725 the question is whether she was addicted, that is the question that you have to answer. and again, he mentioned -- and i thought it was a strange argument to make in 2014, but mr. geise said that in america that teenagers who have children are mature enough to make that decision. i think that is a strange argument to make, that a teenager who has to -- a child is mature enough to make those choices. i think the evidence that you heard is that the 13-year-old, a 15-year-old, brains are not fully developed when she became a regular smoker. another argument that he made -- and he showed you a lot about the information that is publically available, that there was information that the surgeon general had said and various other people, and he put up some articles from a long time ago that people knew the hazards associated with smoking, everybody knew because these people were making these statements in the reader's digest, et cetera. well, look at your jury instructions. because the jury instructions say that the defendant is not entitled to question or challenge the engle findings. and what the engle findings show -- pull 3726 up finding 4 for me, please. the engle findings show that r.j. reynolds concealed or omitted material information that was not otherwise known. what they withheld are things the public did not know and they are not allowed to challenge that. that is established in this case once you have established class membership. mr. geise talked about the issue of reliance, and it is an important point. i want to just remind the court -- remind the jury about the testimony of dr. figlar that said it is -- that r.j. reynolds' customers both can and should rely upon their statements and that they had an obligation to tell the truth. and essentially what the defendant is arguing is, is that it does not matter. their argument is it just does not matter that we did not tell people what we knew. that is their argument that it does not matter. even though they admit that they are the ones that have to know about their product, that they have to disclose what they know about their product. mr. geise talked about jacksonville being the city of -- the river city and the bridges and that there is no bridge. but mr. geise cannot get around 3727 the bridge that is the national enquirer. the evidence shows that the national enquirer was written by stanley frank -- this article was written by stanley frank, who was an employee of hill & knowlton, and that the activities of hill & knowlton were directed by the tirc and dr. figlar testified that anything the tirc did was approved by r.j. reynolds. all right. so this article is approved by r.j. reynolds, okay? a statement by them in a paper she read regularly. that is a bridge. it is a bridge between their conduct and betty owens. it is just one of the bridges, but that is a bridge that they cannot ignore. as the court will instruct you, you have the ability to make inferences from the facts and the facts that are presented when she was a regular reader of the national enquirer. the evidence is also that during the 1950s and '60s almost everybody switched to filters because the public perceived that they were safer. and you will have exhibit 977, which discusses that specifically, that the defendants were falsely advertising filtered cigarettes and it created a 3728 public perception that they were safer. we talked about the coupons. and the reason we put in the coupons and we showed you the coupons is -- and we also showed you the advertisements, that the coupons were on belairs. those are cigarettes manufactured by the defendant and they promoted the belair cigarettes. and we showed you some of the advertisements for belair where it said cleaner smoking and had the couple in the window with the snow falling behind them, that was a belair advertisement, and it connects betty owens to r.j. reynolds advertising. the coupons connect them together. all right. and i hope i do not want to belabor this again because i was surprised when mr. geise said that we had to somehow tape something together with respect to the charles golden writing this -- the national enquirer story. we had to tape it together because the defendants left you with the impression -- until we came in and brought you that ftc report, they left you with the impression that charles golden had written something previously and he was a real person. and what proctor said and what goldberg said, which was absolutely true, he was not a real 3729 person. it was the employee of hill & knowlton, stanley frank, who wrote that. again, i think you know what the evidence is that all of the brands, lucky, winston, belair, camel, kool, salem, all brands manufactured by r.j. reynolds, there is a stipulation to that effect, and the brands that were manufactured by either philip morris or lorillard did not contribute or cause injury in this case. so finally, i want to touch on punitive damages because mr. geise spent some time talking about punitive damages. and what he said was -- and he said it several times, was that mr. ellis, if you get to that portion of the verdict form, mr. ellis would have already been fully compensated. and that is because that section on the verdict form which talks about the full amount should be written in that section. all right. so when you get to this section of punitive damages, mr. geise was saying that mr. ellis had already been compensated. you will remember in voir dire, i asked that question. i said that at the end of the case we will ask for punitive damages and punitive damages 3730 go to the plaintiff, but that should play no role, no role in your determination as to whether punitive damages are warranted. where they go should play no role. all right. the question and the only question is whether r.j. reynolds' conduct merits being punished and whether you feel like -- that they need to be deterred. that is the only question. and whether or not he has been fully compensated should play no role in your decision as to whether to award punitive damages and whether plaintiff is entitled to punitive damages. i want to bring up 287 because i think mr. geise talked about the new r.j. reynolds, a different company. and i started my closing argument with this document, the document which shows that if -- i think -- sorry, "once it becomes clear that such action is necessary for the successful defense of our present and future suits, we will promptly remove all such documents from our files." mr. geise relied upon dr. figlar's testimony to say it was a new and improved r.j. reynolds so that you do not have to punish them. but is that really what r.j. reynolds -- what the testimony was 3731 from dr. figlar? the evidence is about all those changes is right here. it is in the 2010 surgeon general's report. all of those changes that they talked about, unfortunately -- unfortunately, we find out that the public health community is always a step behind r.j. reynolds. they will say things. and then we find out a step behind that what they are doing is, in fact, not what they say, that it is not aiding the public health and that is consistent. you remember i asked him about snus and he got all angry about that because the public health community said that that is actually a -- contributing to young people smoking, initiation of tobacco use. you remember on their website, they say that nicotine is not harmful and yet the surgeon general says, in fact, that nicotine harms the fetus. it harms the brain of young people who are smoking. nicotine itself. we are always a step behind them, including the 2010 surgeon general's report where it says, "at the same time tobacco company documents all are so clearly demonstrate that the industry understood that smokers would not achieve the claimed deliveries because of smoker compensation. in 3732 contrast to industry awareness, the various ways that cigarettes were physically modified and the nature and level of compensation in response to design changes were not well understood by the parties outside of the tobacco industry itself. "public health officials have little basis to anticipate the degree to which manufacturers could design cigarettes to allow the smoker to draw more smoke and nicotine from cigarettes than was represented by the machine-measured yields of tar and nicotine." we are always a step behind. they have not made changes to make their product safe. the question you have to ask, based on all the evidence you have heard, is whether you punish them or you give them a pass. ladies and gentlemen, i want to thank you for your service, and i want to thank you on behalf of myself and my team and my client. but i want to make it very clear that the service you provide is not to us. it is not to me or my client or even to r.j. reynolds. the service you provide, by sitting in this jury, is a service to this country and to this community and to our society. and the decision you make, based upon the 3733 evidence you have heard in this case, is important to all of those people. and how you respond to that evidence, how you respond to the evidence you have heard, is important to our community, to our country, to our society. ladies and gentlemen, the word "verdict" means to speak the truth. "ver," it is from veritas, which means true, and dict from dictaphone or dictate, means speak. what it means is speak the truth. and so we ask you when you go back in that jury room to render a verdict that speaks the truth in this case. thank you so much.