11 mr. geise: may it please the court? the court: yes, sir. mr. geise: ms. shamp, ms. bryan, mr. ellis. good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. the jurors: good afternoon. mr. geise: i think when we met three weeks ago, i had a similar spot to introduce myself and that was right after lunch. so it is after lunch again. i'm hoping you did not fill up on a lot of food and you are going to fall asleep on me because i do have a few things to say today, and i'm going to be up here probably longer than you want me to be. but i think they are important things to say, and i'm going to take my time talking about the case. so i ask you once again for your time and your attention 3623 and your patience while i address you. and once again, it is not only after lunch, but it is the bottom of an inning. and once again, i want to thank you for your service. as i said in voir dire, as i said in opening, we could not have a jury trial without a jury. the lawyers, we have to be here. we -- we choose to do this for a living. mr. ellis is here because he chose to file this lawsuit. but you did not choose to do this. we chose you to do this. and there are a lot of ways in this country that people can contribute. on the eve of september 11, i think we think of the first responders and the people serving in the military as really paying that highest price. many of us vote on election day, as it was a couple weeks ago during voir dire. in the past three weeks, you have done your duty of serving on a jury. so whatever you decide, whatever the verdict, you can go home to your friends, to your family and to your co-workers, and you can feel proud that you have helped make this country work because you have. and for the three weeks that you have dedicated to this process, by being here, by paying attention, 3624 by taking notes, by asking questions, we thank you. on behalf of myself, my client and my team, we thank you. when this case started two weeks ago, i told you that this case is not about other smokers. it is only about betty owens. and in particular, this case is about the choices she made when it came to smoking. as this case now comes to a close, that is what it is still about. and, yes, i am going to talk about betty owens today. i'm going to talk about her a lot. two weeks ago, i told you that you would hear an avalanche of information and testimony about things that had nothing to do with betty owens. and you sure did. in fact, you heard about some of those things again today, things that judge norton said had already been resolved in that other lawsuit in the findings, things that i told you in my opening statement were not an issue and were not going to be issue. dr. burns and dr. wright spent a lot of time telling you that smoking causes lung cancer. you heard that from judge norton and from me on day one. it was not an issue then. it is not an issue now. dr. werner and dr. burns told you that 3625 cigarette smoking is addictive. you heard that from judge norton and from me on day one of this trial. it was not issue an then. it is not an issue now. and this case is not about whether cigarettes should be or are legal. they are. they are legal to make. they are legal to advertise and they are legal to sell. and in this case, you heard that reynolds manufactured, advertised and sold cigarettes, all legal acts. you can look at page 18 of your jury instructions. it will tell you that. and cigarettes are also legal to smoke. everyone has the right to smoke or not smoke. and smokers like mrs. owens made the choice to smoke cigarettes, all legal acts. you may recall in my opening statement that i told you that the plaintiff had the burden of proof and needed to provide all the pieces to the puzzle. in my closing argument, we are going to look at the pieces that mr. ellis failed to provide, and in addition, the pieces they offered that just do not fit this case. i also told you you would hear two sides of the story, the two sides about who betty owens was. now, the plaintiff tried to tell you that betty owens was a weak, naive, uneducated woman who was 3626 unaware of the risks of smoking and unable to stop smoking. we provided evidence that paints a different picture of mrs. owens, a picture of a -- of a woman who faced adult matters from a very young age, made adult decisions from a very young age, but used her determination to overcome personal hardships in her life to support a family and have a life of her own. and it was also a picture of a woman who was repeatedly told about the risks of smoking, but was never interested in quitting because she enjoyed smoking and she wanted to continue smoking. and i also told you in my opening statement that the plaintiff would only tell you half of the story, and you would probably have to wait until we asked questions into our case to hear the whole story. and the plaintiff did just that. it started with their first witness, dr. proctor. now, you may remember him. he is the $2 million man who had that travel plan mr. carter took him through that is already seen dozens of trials this year, including five in the month of august. and when he took the stand, he started by 3627 telling you about -- you remember the rocks falling from the sky and things from the cosmos. and he said -- he was talking about something called the celestial realm of the fifth essence. i have no idea what that means. i did not know then; i do not know now. but dr. proctor also said that one of his specialties was "the history of ignorance." and i thought that was pretty telling because when it came to betty owens, ignorance was right up dr. proctor's alley. he was completely ignorant of any and all facts about betty owens. you recall mr. carter walked him through things he did not know. "as a result, you have no opinion for this jury as to why mrs. owens began smoking, correct. "that is right. i do not have an opinion about her biography one way or the other. "that includes not having any information about whether she ever tried to quit smoking? "that is right. "you do not have any understanding as to why she chose any particular brand of cigarettes, do you? "that is right. as i said, i do not have any biographical information about her in general." that is dr. proctor. 3628 the second live witness you heard was dr. goldberg. but just like dr. proctor, he could not tell you anything about mrs. owens either. "so with respect to specific advertising, you cannot identify any specific advertising campaign for any brand of cigarettes that mrs. owens, in fact, saw, read or heard at any point in time, correct? "that is correct. "and you cannot identify any specific statement from the tobacco industry that mrs. owens, as an individual, in fact, heard, read or saw, correct? "that is correct." but saying nothing at all might be better than just saying half the story. how many times did we have to show the rest of the story with dr. proctor and dr. goldberg? they would plant the seed with you on direct examination and wait to see if we would bring out the whole story on cross. ms. shamp showed you the winston ad with the flintstones twice in her opening statement, and dr. goldberg mentioned it during his direct exam. it is just planting a seed that reynolds had advertised with cartoons and focused on kid shows. i called this half story in opening statement. i told you they were going to do it and by golly, they 3629 did it. so on cross, you had to learn the other side of the story. you learned that the flintstones were originally an adult comedy, modeled after the honeymooners. and it aired in the evening, not saturday morning. and that the flintstones were cosponsored by alka seltzer and one a day vitamins, hardly targeted at kids. we showed you the ad for alka seltzer and one a day. and you also learned reynolds never advertised on the show when it moved to mornings. now, dr. goldberg did not know either one of those facts, or if he did, he just did not share them with you. so we had to show you and him the other side of the story. and one other part of that story that relates to betty owens, you heard that she was a grown woman, on her second marriage and had already raised three kids by the time the flintstones debuted. and the last part of the story they did not share, there was no evidence in this courtroom that she ever saw or watched the flintstones or saw that ad. another half story, teague, '53, one of the first documents that ms. shamp showed you in opening, one of the first documents she showed you 3630 today. she told you that dr. teague did a research project and found all of this information about cigarettes and that reynolds did not make that research public. but on cross, you heard that all 78 articles cited by dr. teague were publicly available. now, dr. proctor said, well, some of them were in german, so he had to work a little harder to find those. well, dr. teague should not be criticized for doing a thorough job on his research paper. another example of telling you only half the story is about internal company research on nicotine. they suggested during dr. proctor's examination and again today that this research was done to find a level of nicotine -- nicotine to keep smokers addicted or that the ph level was adjusted in a way to drive market share. do you remember that? again, on cross, and through cross of dr. proctor and through dr. figlar's testimony, you heard the other side of the story. the research was done at the urging of the public health authorities in conjunction with the nci with their tobacco working group that was looking to find a less hazardous cigarette and that it was at the 3631 instigation of the surgeon general to do that as well. and you also saw that later studies showed that there was no connection between ph and market share. ms. shamp calls it nicotine manipulation. but the nci called it progress. dr. proctor did not tell you any of that on direct. dr. burns, dr. proctor, dr. goldberg showed you lots of memos from bench level scientists and other people at reynolds, but they failed to show you this one. this is from the president of r. j. reynolds to the head of r&d in 1968. and what did it say that the plaintiff's experts did not tell you? "in cooperation with others, you should push the work concerning tobacco and health. you should prepare a plan to foster any relationship with government personnel in the quest for mutual understanding of facts, ultimately to gain their cooperation in proper research of the subject. if there is a safer cigarette, let us continue and increase our efforts in this program. please prepare a plan to carry it out." this was not a memo that was prepared to be a trial exhibit. it was a directive to continue, which means the work had already started, and to 3632 increase their efforts to develop a safer cigarette. and you heard from dr. figlar about those efforts. dr. burns, dr. proctor, dr. goldberg, they knew about this document, but they kept it from you. why did you have to wait for cross examination or for our witnesses to get the full story, the side the plaintiff did not tell you? why? the answer is simple, to get you mad, to upset you. the first three witnesses had three things in common. they were here to reprove the findings that do not need to be reproven and get you mad. they could not and did not say a single word about mrs. owens. and, finally, they each became millionaires testifying in cases against the tobacco companies. those three were not here to offer a single opinion about mrs. owens. in fact, they could not. they were here to get you mad so that you would decide this case based on emotion rather than on the facts of the case of betty owens. because if you focus on the facts of betty owens, unlike these three, mr. ellis loses. he loses because he cannot meet his burden of proof that mrs. owens' adenocarcinoma was caused by smoke. he loses because betty owens was not addicted. she 3633 maintained control over her smoking choices and smoked because she enjoyed it, never expressed an interest in quitting and was not motivated to quit. and he loses because any addiction mrs. owens had was not the legal and substantial cause of her injury. instead, her adult choice to do what she wanted to do was the legal cause of her actions and whatever consequences came from them. finally, mr. ellis loses because he cannot prove a link between anything reynolds said or did and any smoking decision made by mrs. owens. i showed you this slide in opening. and it is the burdens that the plaintiff has to meet in this case. and ms. shamp identified these three in her closing argument to you today. and as i said in opening statement, the plaintiff has the burden of proof. it was true then and it is true now. and -- and let me tell you something about the burden of proof. ms. shamp tried to suggest it is just a tipping of the scales. it is not. it is not. it is not a comparison of how many pieces do you have here versus how many documents over here? that is not how it works. if you look at your jury instructions, when you go back to deliberate, on page 4, it tells you that 3634 the greater weight of the evidence means the more persuasive and convincing force and effect. it does not talk about a scale. it does not talk about a tally. it does not talk about size. and when you look at the burden of proof and you consider the evidence, consider what you saw, but consider what they could not show you. i do not know how you weigh missing evidence, but you need to consider it in this case. if mr. owens fails -- or mr. ellis fails to prove that mrs. owens' adenocarcinoma was caused by smoking, he loses. but if he meets that burden, he also has to prove that she was addicted. and if he meets that, that her addiction was a legal cause of her death, not other factors, such as her choice to smoke in the face of multiple warnings and constant hounding from her children because she did what she wanted to do. these three burdens are all contained in that first question on your verdict form. all three are separate hurdles. all three are separate burdens. if the plaintiff fails to meet his burden on any one of those issues, he fails to prove his entire case. in order to check -- check yes on that first question, the plaintiff needs to clear all three 3635 hurdles by the greater weight of the evidence. and one by one, i will address each of those burdens and show you why the answer to that question should be no. now, in my opening statement, i said there would be no dispute that mrs. owens had lung cancer and was a smoker. that is not in dispute. but i told you that the plaintiff would not be able to meet his burden of proof because the available medical evidence is scant, and important pieces of the medical puzzle are missing altogether. and i asked you to hold the plaintiff to its burden of proof instead of jumping to that knee-jerk reaction that anytime a smoker gets lung cancer that it has to be caused by smoking. now, instead of hearing from any doctor whoever met, saw or treated mrs. owens, you heard from dr. wright. dr. wright's another professional witness. he is testified over 1600 times, most often in cases involving electrocutions. he gets 100 percent of his income from litigation. and he said he stopped treating patients to be a full-time expert because he did not like sharing his money with his hospital. that is who they brought to talk to you, not her doctors, but dr. wright. 3636 and dr. wright told you that this case was aberrant. it was abnormal. it was unusual. he told you the records were scant. he admitted that he had just a few smattering of things, hardly any medical records, and he said everything appears to be basically gone. that is what he had. he admitted that the gold standard for diagnosing cancer is tissue analysis, but then he could not meet that standard because there was no tissue for him to analyze. that was just one missing piece for dr. wright. there were others -- no pathology, no pathology reports, no tissue from the bronchoscopy, the lobectomy or the wedge resection -- resection, no radiology, no films and no autopsy. with all of the pieces missing, dr. wright could not do an independent evaluation and could not put the puzzle together himself. he told you that. so what he did is he had to take the word of another doctor that mrs. owens had adenocarcinoma. but he never tried to get a word in with that doctor. he told you he did not bother to try to talk to her doctors. now, the words that those doctors did use in the scant records we do have are pretty telling. 3637 dr. wright was asked this. okay? "regardless, there is no indication here on the death certificate that ms. owens' lung cancer was caused by tobacco or smoking cigarettes? "correct. the medical records here which were filled out by ms. owens' treating physicians also do not report on the cause of her lung cancer being smoking or tobacco? "no. "and similarly, none of the medical records list adenocarcinoma secondary to or caused by smoking? "correct." so the only word you had in this case linking mrs. owens' adenocarcinoma to cigarette smoking comes from dr. wright. and you might recall, dr. wright was asked in his deposition, did he think that the medical records at some point referred to mrs. owens having small cell cancer. you might remember that. and on the stand, he said, yeah, that is what i believed at the time; i was wrong. dr. wright was wrong on other things too. to link mrs. owens' adenocarcinoma to her smoking, he 3638 said he had to base his opinions on epidemiology. but look at what he said about epidemiology and his experience. "now, you do not have a degree in epidemiology? "no. "you talked about your board certifications. you are not board-certified in the field of epidemiology? "i am not. "you have not published on the topic of epidemiology? "i've published in epidemiology. "have you published on the epidemiology of cancer? "no, just gunshot wounds. gunshot wounds." so as a result, dr. wright had to admit this. "so today, do you believe yourself to be an epidemiologist in cancer? "no." and this case involves cancer, specifically mrs. owens' cancer. it does not involve gunshot wounds. so despite a complete lack of expertise and with only scant records, dr. wright told you that mrs. owens' adenocarcinoma was caused by smoking. 3639 but you know the opinion he tried to tell you is directly contrary to an opinion he offered in a different case just a couple years ago when he said this. he was asked, about his transcript in that other deposition: "what types of cancers are associated with lung cancer? "answer: squamous cell, small cell, undifferentiated and large cell too. adeno, close call." the next question: "when you say close call, you mean you do not believe there is sufficient evidence to link smoking?" his answer: "i do not. some people may. adeno, it is pretty not clear. to me, it is not clear. "was that your testimony in november? "that was my testimony." that was his testimony then. which was the truth, his testimony then or his testimony to you? is this something else that he must have believed at the time, but was wrong about? and ms. shamp will criticize r. j. reynolds for not saying until 2000 that smoking caused lung cancer. this was 2012 for their expert. now, not surprisingly, dr. wright, when he 3640 comes in here to testify, admits he was previously wrong when he needs to for purposes of his opinion in this case. ladies and gentlemen, at the end of the day, there are too many missing pieces for mr. ellis to satisfy his burden of proving his mother's adenocarcinoma was caused by smoking by the greater weight of the evidence. the tissue and records that would allow you to prove that are missing. the records we have do not say anything about smoking being the cause of adenocarcinoma, of her adenocarcinoma. and dr. wright lacks the expertise to offer an opinion about the cause of her cancer, and, more importantly, lacks the credibility to do so since he testified exactly the opposite in a different case when a different opinion was called for. for all these reasons, the plaintiff fails to meet his burden of proof of cause -- of -- of proving what caused mrs. owens' adenocarcinoma and death. and for that reason, the answer to question number 1 should be no. now, if you move beyond that, you move into the question of addiction. and you will need to decide what addiction means in this case. the court will 3641 not define it for you. we went through the jury instructions. there is not an instruction on what addiction means. ms. shamp asked, where is the evidence that she was not addicted? i'm going to talk about the evidence that showed that she was not addicted. first, you heard from dr. hayes and dr. werner. there is no medical record from any doctor who treated mrs. owens that reveals a diagnosis of addiction, of dependence, of tobacco use disorder, nothing. i do not know what you do with that. you cannot put that on a scale because it does not exist. it is a burden they have that they cannot prove. and you heard that people who are addicted experience a loss of control and become significantly impaired and distressed. mrs. owens had the ability to control her smoking and you saw evidence of that. martha did not allow smoking in her house and her mom complied. mr. ellis did not allow smoking, she respected his wishes. he did not allow smoking in his car, she did not. both martha and ken did not want her smoking around their kids, she did not. she went to baptist services every sunday, you could not smoke at church, she did not. i told you in opening statements you would hear 3642 some simple facts about nicotine and nicotine addiction, and you did. nicotine addiction does not permanently change brain receptors. it does not. it does not interfere with a smoker's ability to understand the risks of smoking. it does not interfere with the smoker's ability to make a choice to quit or to make a choice to continue smoking. and it does not prevent a smoker from quitting. any smoker can quit. everybody agreed to that -- dr. burns, dr. werner, dr. hayes. on cross examination, even dr. werner admitted that millions of smokers, over 60 million smokers, have quit smoking and millions of them were addicted and yet they were able to stop for good. i want to talk a little bit about dsm-5. both dr. werner and dr. hayes talked about it yesterday. ms. shamp said in her closing -- i wrote down -- she said, dsm-5 is the book; it is the book. well, oddly, despite using it, dr. werner does not think that the book is authoritative. you remember i asked her that question yesterday, i believe. and -- and her back story on dsm-5 is interesting. first, she has never, never used dsm-5 to treat one of her own patients, never. she only uses it for litigation. and then she explains why 3643 she cannot use it in her practice by saying, it is impossible. and remember, you she said those diagnostic codes, the icd codes, are different from dsm-iv-tr and dsm-5. but -- but you saw the truth yesterday. i showed you the dsm-iv-tr and i showed you the dsm-5. and i do not know if you will remember, but the code in both of them is 305.1. it is the same code. and i showed you where the american psychiatric association told practitioners to use the dsm-5 immediately, and that is when it came out, in the spring of 2013. leaving that aside, what does the book say about addiction? the book, dsm-5, says that 50 percent of daily smokers are addicted. so that means fifty percent of daily smokers are not addicted. now, in her rebuttal, ms. shamp may come back and say, well, let us go back and look at an earlier version or let us go back to this one. let us not look at the new -- the book, the dsm-5. let us not look at that. let us base it on something else. look, the earth is not flat. you can base your decision in this case on the current thing, the book that both addiction experts in this case used. now, dr. werner agreed that different mental 3644 health professionals can look at the same set of facts and apply dsm-5 and reach different opinions. and she said each professional has to apply their own critical judgment based on their experience, their background and their training. now, after telling you that dsm-5 cannot be used as a cookbook, dr. werner did exactly that with ms. shamp, and ms. shamp showed you it again today. they put up a list of things. they check the boxes and say, that is what it adds up to; it must mean addiction. well, first of all, even though i questioned dr. werner on this, you remember the -- the checklist that -- that they used where it said, dsm-5, addiction? dsm-5 does not have a diagnosis of addiction. it has tobacco use disorder. but never mind. set that aside. the second step in using this cookbook is dr. werner misapplied it. the dsm says right up front that you must look for clinically significant impairment or distress. and i do not recall dr. werner telling you that mrs. owens was clinically significant impaired or distressed. now, in her closing argument today, ms. shamp said that dr. hayes never told you why mrs. owens 3645 was not addicted. so she may not have been listening when mr. carter put dr. hayes on direct, when she walked through the reasons she said that. but she also was not listening to the question from one of you. and i do not know which one of you asked it, but in your questions to dr. hayes, one of you asked, explain how you came to your conclusion. and she did. she told you that mrs. owens was not distressed. she was not impaired, she retained the choice to smoke, and she did not make the choice to stop. dr. hayes used her experience, her background and her training, and she told you that mrs. owens was not clinically significantly impaired or distressed and she told you why. now, in addition, when dr. werner walks through the cookbook and tries to pick it off, she did not even follow the recipe correctly. you remember, in dsm, it says, you have got to look for those criteria in the same 12-month period? well, dr. werner picked something from the '60s, something from '80s, something from the '90s and tried to mix it altogether. it does not work that way. and moreover, dr. werner admitted this. "and, in fact, ms. owens would say that she 3646 enjoyed smoking. it relaxed her and she liked to smoke, correct? "yes." choosing to do something you enjoy is not a sign of significant impairment or distress. doing what you want to do is not a disorder. it is a decision. and betty owens had the choice and the control to make a different decision if she wanted to. dr. hayes told you it takes motivation, determination and persistence. you heard that mrs. owens' quit attempts, if any, were not motivated, were not determined and were not persistent. yesterday, ms. shamp asked dr. werner to speculate. do some people try to quit and not tell anyone? it is complete speculation in this case because the facts and the proof in this case tell you differently. do not accept speculation. look at the proof. martha told you her mother never went a full day, 24 hours, without smoking a cigarette. she does not recall her mother making any attempt to quit at any time before she moved out of the house in 1968. and after she moved out, she recalled one time coming home, and her mom was sucking on a 3647 lozenge in between smoking two cigarettes. she was not necessarily trying to quit, but just sucking on a lozenge. not only is that not an attempt to quit; it was not a quit at all. mr. ellis only recalls two times when his mother may have been trying to cut down. in the 1960s, he recalls her sucking on something, a pill, a lozenge, something, and in that time, she never told him she was trying to quit. and in the 1980s, he was not around, but he heard that she tried something again, but he was not there to observe her. ladies and gentlemen, that was the evidence you heard. that was it. two times over the course of 30-plus years. that is not persistence. and these attempts, whenever they may be, had one thing in common. her method to allegedly quit smoking was to keep smoking. no other steps. no plan, no motivation, no determination. she never took the step of throwing away her cigarettes or her ashtrays in an attempt to quit smoking. she never made what the surgeon general calls a "serious quit attempt" of 24 hours. and when cessation aids became available in the '80s, mrs. owens did not try them. and before cessation aids and after cessation 3648 aids, the most popular way to quit is cold turkey. mrs. owens never tried that either. now, the plaintiff said that his mother appeared to be moody or agitated when she was sucking on that lozenge in the 1960s. well, first, again, one of you asked a great question. smokers who are not addicted can also have withdrawal symptoms. and, secondly, mr. ellis told you his mom was going through a divorce at that time, a divorce that he and his sisters knew nothing about even though they were living in the same house. you heard a little bit this morning, and i guess you will probably hear it this afternoon, about when mrs. owens asked for cigarettes when she was in the nursing home. now, you also heard from martha that during that visit in the nursing home, what were the other two things that they got mrs. owens? they got her a nightgown and they got her a television, things to make her comfortable, things that she enjoyed. and as mr. ellis wrote on that letter that we will talk about in a little bit, he said his mom enjoyed it. and you also heard about many other times where mrs. owens was unable to smoke, and no one told you that she asked for cigarettes, complained or 3649 experienced any withdrawal symptoms. and that was her hospital stays. you heard from dr. hayes. she was in the hospital for different treatment for 20 days in april of 1991, six days in july of that year, 19 days in september of that year, 14 days in june of 1992 and 28 days in january of 1993, five different stays. and on each of those occasions, neither ken nor martha testified that she was moody or fidgety. nobody testified she had any cravings. there was no evidence that she asked, somebody get me cigarettes or somebody take me outside so i can have one. no evidence. more importantly, because of the lengths of some of these stays, you know that all of the nicotine was completely out of mrs. owens' system at that time. when she returned to smoking after those stays, it was because she wanted to, not because of addiction. that is evidence she was not addicted. now, one other point. through some of the witnesses, the plaintiff tried to suggest that there was a genetic reason for mrs. owens' initiation and her continued smoking. well, if -- if that is true and that theory applies to mrs. owens, you know that ken and martha bucked their genes. they never 3650 smoked. and you know that uncle bernice bucked his genes because he quit smoking. and dr. werner had to admit yesterday that uncle bernice's quit is a good indicator of success for mrs. owens, but it would only be successful if she wanted to quit. mrs. owens was always in control of the decision to quit. dr. werner said this yesterday on direct examination. ms. shamp asked her: "now -- and i heard you say that smokers have control over their decision to quit." and dr. werner said: "that is correct." mrs. owens never experienced a loss of control over that decision. she never lost the ability to quit. she was never significantly impaired. she was never significantly distressed. she was not addicted. now, because the plaintiff did not prove she was addicted, he did not clear that second hurdle either, and for this additional reason, the answer to the first answer on the verdict form has to be no. let us move to the third hurdle. if you find that mrs. owens was addicted, the third hurdle is to determine if her addiction was the legal cause of her death. 3651 and you have it in your jury instructions at page 12, i think, and the instruction says: an addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine is a legal cause of betty owens' lung cancer and death if it directly and in a natural and continuous sequence produced or contributed substantially to producing betty owens' death so that it can reasonably be said that but for that addiction, her death would not have occurred when it did. you have that in your instructions. and the evidence here proves that addiction is not the "but for" reason for any of mrs. owens' smoking behaviors. the "but for" cause of her smoking was her choice, her decision to smoke for as long as she did because that is what she enjoyed and wanted to do. now, ask yourself this question: if mrs. owens was not addicted, would she have continued to smoke? and i think from the evidence you heard in this case, the answer is, of course, she would have. for this reason alone, addiction cannot be the legal cause of her death because it was far from the substantial cause of her smoking. if her smoking behavior would be the same whether she was addicted or not, then addiction cannot be a substantial cause 3652 because it did not make a difference. as you look at this question in this case, keep something in mind. this case is about mr. ellis seeking money on account of mrs. owens' decision to do what she wanted to do for years. ms. shamp said, just because you make a choice does not mean it is a good decision. well, in this trial, it really does not matter whether you think mrs. owens' choices were good choices or bad choices. what matters is that they were her choices and we should not second-guess them. yes, mrs. owens started smoking as a teenager. there is no dispute about that. dr. werner told you yesterday, though, that she was mature enough at 13 or 14 to make the decision to get married and to start a family and also mature enough to make the decision to smoke. we should not second-guess the choice. now, in response to the constant nagging and hounding she received, mrs. owens told her children that she enjoyed smoking; it relaxed her and she liked to smoke. those are the reasons she offered for smoking. she did not say she was addicted. she did not say she was unable to quit. when asked, she responded she enjoyed it; it relaxed her and she 3653 liked it. when mrs. owens chose not to sleep over at mr. ellis's house, it was not because of an addiction. it was because it was her decision. she was a homebody who liked to be home. as i covered with mr. ellis on monday, mrs. owens would say that she preferred to go home where she could relax, where she could be in her own house and do what she wanted to do. it sounds like the things that homebodies like to do. and the other thing is she never expressed any interest in quitting so she could spend the night. you heard from martha about how close she was with her mother, and you heard how she asked mrs. owens to stop smoking every time she saw her. if mrs. owens wanted to quit smoking and just could not do it, do you think she would have asked her daughter, a nurse, for help in quitting? of course, she would have. but she never did. why? because she did not want to quit. martha told you that. this is the evidence in this case. "you never heard your mother say that she wanted to quit smoking? "never. "your mother never told you, i'm trying to quit 3654 smoking, did she? "no, she did not." and mr. ellis told you he does not think anybody could have said anything to mrs. owens to make her quit. mrs. owens was smart enough to know the risks of smoking, but she was not motivated enough to want to stop. she smoked for as long as she did not because she was addicted, but because she wanted to. and mr. ellis should not be awarded money for mrs. owens' decisions. so even if you decide betty owens was addicted, that addiction was not a legal cause. and here's another way to look at what legal cause requires, as you are instructed. it requires that it naturally, directly, continuously and substantially caused it. you saw that did not occur in mrs. owens' case. you saw that mrs. owens' choices were the direct, the natural, the continuous and the substantial causes of her injury. why? because she made the choice to begin smoking against her father's wishes. she made the choice to continue smoking despite the health warnings and hounding from her children. she made the choice to control her smoking. and she made the choice to not make a serious quit attempt. and 3655 that is just not me saying this. the plaintiff's experts agree that the decision and the choice lies with the individual. dr. burns, you saw him by videotape. he was asked: "all right. and you see what he wrote at the last paragraph, e. koop or surgeon general koop, wrote 'cigarette smoking is an addictive behavior.' "yes. "'and the individual smoker must decide whether or not to continue that behavior?' "you agree with that statement, do not you?" and dr. burns said: "absolutely, sure." dr. werner agreed with that very statement again yesterday. mrs. owens had a decision to make, and her decision was to continue her smoking. she never said she wanted to decide otherwise and quit. and even mr. ellis admitted it was his mother's decision to make. you might remember this testimony from monday. he answered one of my questions. "well, i did not allow her to smoke in my house. i do not tell adults what they should or should not do." 3656 and then i asked: "is smoking an adult decision?" and mr. ellis said: "well, when you are an adult, whatever decision you do is your decision. i do not make decisions for people." that is the plaintiff in this case talking about his mother, said whatever decision you do is your decision. but now, 21 years after her death, mr. ellis does not want to respect mrs. owens' decision. in this lawsuit, to get money for his mother's choices, mr. ellis tells you that his mother's decisions were not her own, that she lost control, and her decision to smoke was based on addiction. that is not what he told you on the stand. and dr. koop reported, who is in control: "ultimately you are the one that has control over your behavior. the cigarette is not going to light itself and jump into your mouth, nor are you going to go into a brain-induced hypnotic trance and light the cigarette. no matter how much you have smoked or how much you smoke, the choice to light up is always yours." ladies and gentlemen, the cigarette did not jump into mrs. owens' mouth. she made each and every 3657 choice, despite the knowledge of the harm it could do to her. whatever decision she made was her decision. when mrs. owens made that choice to smoke, her choice was the legal cause, the direct, the natural and the substantial cause. as a result, any disease or death brought about by her smoking was not legally caused by addiction. i want to look at the verdict form, and you have a copy with you. based on the evidence in this case, looking at question 1, the answer to number 1 is no for three separate reasons. because the plaintiff can only bring you a professional expert who relies on aberrant and scant records that cannot be confirmed and more importantly because that expert has testified in the past that he does not believe there is sufficient evidence for a link between adenocarcinoma and smoking, the first hurdle is is not met. because mrs. owens did not suffer from a loss of control or significant impairment or distress, she was not addicted, and that hurdle was not met. and because addiction was not the "but for" cause of mrs. owens' smoking or death, the plaintiff failed to prove that addiction caused it, so that hurdle is not met. so be -- can i get the elmo, please, michael? 3658 because the plaintiff failed to clear all three of these hurdles, the answer should be no to question 1, which you can see it has all three parts in it. the cause of her lung cancer; was she addicted and was addiction a legal cause for lung cancer. because they failed to clear any of those three hurdles, the answer to question 1 should be no. now, you will also see on the verdict form that if your answer to question 1 was yes, you continue. but if your answer to question 1 was no, you proceed no further. i represent that the evidence in this case shows you you should check no and proceed no further. but i'm going to continue anyway. if you continue past that first question and clear those three hurdles, you need to consider mr. ellis's concealment and conspiracy to conceal claims in questions 2 and 3. and i think we have a slide of those. these are the two questions pulled off your verdict form on pages 2 and 3. now, one thing i'll tell you upfront, when you look at these two questions, you will notice specifically that betty owens' name is in both of those. these questions relate only to betty owens, 3659 not to some other smoker who is not in this courtroom. they relate only to betty owens. and there essentially two parts to these questions. first, you need to determine if information about the health risks and the addictive nature of smoking was a secret to mrs. owens, and if so, you will need to determine if she reasonably relied on any statement to her detriment. here, the information was not a secret to mrs. owens, and she did not rely on anything any tobacco company said. so let us start with that first question. were the dangers of smoking a secret? you will remember that ms. shamp told you in opening statement that the evidence would show that the public did not know smoking was harmful, but the other side of the story showed just the opposite. it showed the public did know about the risks of smoking and its addictive nature, and more importantly, so did mrs. owens. in fact, it was drummed into her over and over by her children. and we need to even start this story before mrs. owens was born. you heard this from dr. proctor. he said before reynolds even existed, it was known tobacco contained nicotine. it was known for hundreds of years that it could be 3660 addictive and it could be hard to quit. it was known for a long time smoking can be bad for you. and since the beginning of the 20th century, it was common to refer to cigarettes as "coffin nails" or "cancer sticks." and incidentally you heard from mr. ellis that -- the growing up, he heard the term "coffin nails" and "cancer sticks." and it would be used to make fun of people because they smoked, because there were health ramifications. you saw this, florida health notes, 1906. "today, the cigarette is looked upon by all smokers as the very worst form of tobacco addiction. and dr. proctor told you that in that early 1900s, the movement after alcohol prohibition, the crowds would chant "nicotine next, nicotine next." and he said nicotine was synonymous with tobacco because everyone knew it was a drug in tobacco that made it hard to quit. in the 1930s, you saw the three stooges in that movie scene involving what? the coffin nails cigarette company from the 1930s. now, dr. proctor can call it a joke, but the material information that the stooges had and all of their fans understood was that smoking could kill you and put 3661 you in your coffin. if people did not understand that, nobody would get the joke of coffin nails cigarette company. you heard that mr. owens -- or mrs. owens' father did not want his children to smoke. mr. ellis told you that his mom told him that if she got smoking, she would be disciplined, and she would likely get the belt. as a result, she started smoking behind her father's back so she would not get caught and punished. you saw the coverage in the reader's digest. reader's digest, a magazine that mrs. owens not only read, but she collected. you saw the coverage -- ms. shamp showed you a mouse this morning. you saw the coverage from the mouse skin painting that appeared in life magazine in 1953. again, a magazine that mrs. owens read and collected. the messages made it to the papers in tennessee. you saw these from the 1950s. and illinois, when they moved there after she married mr. owens, it made it there in the 1950s. and it followed them to virginia when they went to roanoke. ann landers said "anyone who can read or hear knows by now that there is a definite link between lung cancer and cigarettes." 3662 now, they can try to minimize mrs. owens' education all they want, but there is no doubt that mrs. owens could read and hear. now, not surprisingly, the public health officials in the 1950s recognized this widespread dissemination and awareness of the information. you saw these quotes from two of the pioneers back then. leroy burney, who was the surgeon general said: "our position is that we have informed the public through the excellent coverage of the press, radio and tv." and dr. heller, who was the head of the national cancer institute, said: "newspapers, radio and tv and other media have done an excellent job covering this problem and a very objective job. this is an exceedingly valuable way of informing the public." when mr. carter pressed dr. proctor on these statements, what did he say? dr. proctor said that dr. burney was engaging in -- and i wrote it down -- self-congratulating, and he said that dr. heller was ignorant. his theory is that these giants and pioneers in public health work -- remember, he said they were beating their chests when they made these comments. 3663 now, these were guys making history in the 1950s, the head of the nci and the surgeon general. but now 60 years later, dr. proctor, a guy who studies history, said they were way off base. these officials had their boots on the ground back then and were eyewitnesses for what the public knew. and at the time, they said the public knew. now, instead of praising these public health officials for their contributions, dr. proctor calls them ignorant chest-beaters. in 1964, 50 years ago, the first surgeon general's report linking smoking with lung cancer was published, and you saw that it was front-page -- a front-page story around the country. in florida, in 1964, the times-union. and you know who was a paper boy for the times-union from 1964 to 1968. we know who that was. it was mr. ellis. it was not just in the paper. it was in life. they covered the 1964 surgeon general's report, again, a magazine that mrs. owens read and collected. and that night, it was on the evening news on all three stations and there were only three. so if the tv was on in the owens' household that night, that story was on. and -- and it was communicated in big red 3664 letters at the very spot that mrs. owens bought her cigarettes. this sign was posted at each of the navy exchanges. so if you bought cigarettes, you were going to see the words from the surgeon general's report in big red letters. from 1960- -- january 1966 and every day thereafter, every pack mrs. owens had in her hand came with a warning label. and we know mrs. owens was aware of this warning label. how do we know? the evidence in this case. martha told us. "when you first saw that warning label on a package of cigarettes, you mentioned it to your mother? "correct. "you mentioned it to her during one of your conversations when you asked her to quit smoking? "correct. "and you told her specifically that even the packet says that cigarette smoking could be harmful? "correct. "your mom had already seen the warning label on cigarettes; is that correct? "yes, she said that she saw it." ken told you about it too in his testimony on monday. 3665 and you heard that when that warning label came out, in the next four years, 13 million people made the decision, made the choice to stop smoking. they had that warning in their hand, and they took matters into their own hands and quit. mrs. owens could have too. now, this message was being communicated to americans in towns large and small around the country. you remember dr. horn, his "you could stand on a rooftop and shout 'smoking is dangerous' at the top of your lungs, and you would not be telling anyone anything they did not already know." that is dr. horn. dr. burns also got on his own rooftop. he was the plaintiff's expert in this case. and he was asked: "now, in 1981, you gave a speech to a lung association group about the percentage of smokers who were aware of the risks, correct?" "yes. i'm well familiar with that group. "all right. and you told that group in 1981 that 95 percent of smokers were thoroughly aware of the health risks, and ninety percent thought that it might affect their own health, correct? "that is correct. and i believe i said that 3666 more smokers know that cigarette smoking causes disease or cancer than know the name of the president of the united states." that is the plaintiff's expert in this case. and dr. burns also told you that he knew dr. horn, and dr. horn had told him on a number of occasions the same thing he said about people shouting it from the rooftop and not telling them something you would not know. now, i suppose if we had asked dr. proctor, he would probably say dr. burns and dr. horn were ignorant chest-beaters as well. and you know the warnings kept coming, 1970, 1985. through all this time, on top of all these warnings you see, mrs. owens was receiving repeated warnings and messages from whom? her children. even before martha graduated from high school, before she got married and before she moved out of the house in 1968, she talked to her mother about smoking. and she told you how those conversations continued every time she saw or talked to her mother, especially when she was going to nursing school. let us look at what martha told you in this case. 3667 "something you learned during nursing school, that smoking was associated with lung problems? "correct. "and as you just said, you saw healthy lungs versus damaged black lungs? "right. "and you learned that it was the chemical -- chemicals in tobacco smoke that caused that damage to the lungs? "correct." martha continued. "and these things that you were being taught, you shared what you were learning in nursing school with your mother? "yes. "you told her that cigarette smoking was not healthy for her? "yes. "you told her about the damaged lungs and the chemicals in the tobacco smoke that you learned about? "yes. "you told your mother if she kept up smoking, she would have respiratory issues? "yes, i did. 3668 "you told her about chronic obstructive coronary disease, copd, that would get if she kept smoking? "correct. "you told her about the possibility of cancer if she kept smoking? "correct. "you also told your mother that there was a possibility she would have to wear oxygen if she kept smoking? "correct. did mrs. owens ever respond to martha by saying, well, i saw a story somewhere else that conflicted with what you just told me you learned in nursing school? no, not once. now, martha tried to tell you she did not know if her mother received the paper, but as we established, mr. ellis was a paper boy. and you remember when i asked if he thought his mom received the paper prior to the time he was a paper boy and we had that exchange over what it means to believe or not believe, well, i'm not sure how mr. ellis would finally define the word "believed." but martha testified that her mother "believed" 3669 everything that anyone would tell her. remember that testimony? if that is true, that would include life. that would include reader's digest. that would include the navy exchange. it would include the warnings on the packs. but more importantly, it would surely include what her own flesh and blood told her. her own children, including her daughter, the nurse, told her over and over and over about the risks of smoke and the need to quit. if she believed everything that anyone would tell her, she certainly would have believed everything that her son and daughter told her about cigarette smoking. when we talk about material information and when you try to answer questions 2 and 3, page 15 of your jury instructions tells you what material information is. and it says: material information is information that is of such importance that betty owens would have considered it significant in her decision-making process. the information that betty owens was getting from her daughter was material information. she had the material information about the dangers of cigarette smoking and its addictive nature. so on the first prong of questions 2 and 3, was 3670 that -- were the dangers a secret? the plaintiff cannot prove the material information about the health effects or addictive nature were secrets from mrs. owens. they assured me they did not. so for that reason alone, the concealment claims, questions 2 and 3 on your verdict form, the answer has to be no on those. now, that alone is enough to deal with those two questions, but there is a separate reason why the answer has to be no there. and the second component to these is the issue of reliance. and ms. shamp spent some time talking about that this morning. to -- to let you know what that means, jacksonville's called the "river city," and as a result, jacksonville has a number of bridges -- the main street bridge, the acosta bridge. to prevail on questions 2 and 3, the plaintiff needs to build a bridge in this courtroom. they need to build the betty owens bridge. and for the second part of the concealment and conspiracy claims, they need to build a bridge between statements, something that was said and on the other side of the bridge, something mrs. owens did. and they need to build that bridge with evidence. 3671 for purposes of the verdict form, the bridge is called "legal cause." it is defined as reliance. and you have to decide if the reliance, if they can show any, is reasonable. now, the plaintiff then has to prove that reynolds' conduct caused mrs. owens, not some other smoker, but mrs. owens to take some action to rely on something that was or was not said and then get a disease caused by smoking that she otherwise would have avoided. if the plaintiff cannot build that bridge, then they will have failed to meet their burden of proof with regard to the concealment and conspiracy claims in questions 2 and 3. ladies and gentlemen, the evidence you heard never let the plaintiff make the first step towards building that bridge. i told you in opening statement to keep this question in mind: what does this have to do with betty owens? dr. proctor came here and spent hours telling you about statements from industry representatives to the public. now, dr. figlar told you that some of those positions, whether they were based on science or not, were -- were clung to for probably too long. and in some other smoker's case, one of these other cases that dr. proctor's in, maybe those statements matter. maybe they are 3672 relevant. but not in mrs. owens' case. for the second and third claims, the plaintiff has to build their bridge between something reynolds said or did and mrs. owens. and mr. ellis did not do that. fact witness after fact witness confirmed that fact. no witness testified that mrs. owens ever saw, heard, read or relied on any of these things, not the frank statement, nothing from ctr, tirc, ti, press releases, anything from reynolds, anything from brown & williamson or anything from the american tobacco company. that was the evidence in this case. now, the plaintiff will argue that even though there is no evidence specifically about betty owens hearing, reading, seeing, or relying on something that reynolds ever said that you can assume it happened. but assumptions are not facts. someone who has proof does not need to rely on an inference or an assumption. but ms. shamp said, well, maybe you can infer that. ladies and gentlemen, do not infer something that is contrary to the facts you heard in this case. and i'm going to show you some of the facts in betty owens' case. as mr. ellis would say when i 3673 asked him questions, these are what you would call the one hundred percent true facts. ms. shamp asked in her closing, what evidence did we put up? i'm going to show you that. evidence we put up from martha. "and it is fair to say you do not know anything r. j. reynolds said or did that caused your mother to smoke her first cigarette? "since i was not born yet, no, i cannot say. i do not know. "your mother never talked to you about why she chose a brand of cigarette; is that correct? "no." what evidence did we put up? this is from martha. "you never heard your mother say that something a tobacco company said or did caused her to start smoking? "no. "or to continue smoking? "no. "in fact, your mother never talked about statements that she heard or read from any tobacco company? "no. she did not talk to me about anything, no." 3674 what evidence did we put up? how about this from mr. ellis? and this is hard to read and i'll summarize. he basically said he never had any conversation with his mother about tirc, ctr, frank statement, any -- any contact with a tobacco company, hill & knowlton, british american tobacco, philip morris, lorillard, reynolds, american, brown & williamson, nothing. there is no evidence in this case, nothing, nothing from ctr, nothing from ti, nothing from reynolds or any of its companies, nothing. that is the evidence that was put up here, the evidence that there is no reliance because she never saw anything or heard anything that they could identify in the first place. i thought it was interesting in her closing argument, ms. shamp put up and mentioned the -- the testimony before congress. and that testimony before congress was in 1994. you learned that mrs. owens died in 1993. she could not have relied on something that happened a year after she passed. now, ms. shamp did and may continue when she gets up later this afternoon -- she talked about filters and menthol, maybe lights and low tar. she may talk about that. but you know who never did? 3675 mrs. owens. and there is no evidence that that stuff had anything to do with her selection of brands. she asked what evidence did we put up? we put up this, from martha. "you never heard your mother say that filtered cigarettes were safer or that they were healthier? "no. "your mother never told you that light cigarettes were healthier or that they were safer? "no. "you mentioned menthol cigarettes. you never heard your mother say that the menthol cigarettes were healthier or safer? "no. "your mother never said to you that low-tar or low-nicotine cigarettes were healthier or that they were safer? "no." mr. ellis told you the same thing. these are the one hundred percent true facts. there is no reliance. instead, what you heard, the basis for mrs. owens' decisions were based on price. martha -- or mr. ellis told you. "and price was the primary factor in your mom in her selecting a brand of cigarette, was not it? 3676 "i would say so. "and price is the only reason you can think of of why she switched from one brand of cigarette to another, correct? "that would probably be true." her decisions were not based on anything about the filters or menthol or ads or coupons or statements. her decisions were based on price. ms. shamp told you in her closing this morning that you would get evidence that is relevant and evidence that is irrelevant. i'm going to talk about evidence that is irrelevant right now. and that is evidence about coupons. the plaintiff attempted to make a big deal out of coupons. i submit that the evidence about coupons is not relevant to the issues you have to decide. why? well, to begin with, there is nothing illegal or fraudulent about coupons. they cannot be a basis of liability if they are not illegal or fraudulent. and as dr. goldberg told you, there is nothing materially false about the coupons. he was asked by mr. carter: "have you come across any examples that you believed contained materially false information with respect to the coupons? 3677 "no. they promised goods and they delivered the goods. "so you have never seen a materially false statement in a coupon that you have reviewed for reynolds? "they promised the goods and they delivered the goods. that was the deal. that was the deal." so moreover, even though coupons were legal and delivered exactly what they promised, there is no evidence that they impacted mrs. owens' smoking decisions. did she collect coupons? sure. i do not dispute that she had them. but what does it mean? this was what martha told you. "now, your mother never told you that she started smoking a specific brand because it offered coupons, did she? "no. "your mother never told you that she continued to smoke a brand specifically because of the coupons; is that correct? "correct, no. "and your mother never told you that she would quit smoking if not for those coupons; is that correct? "oh, we never had that conversation, no." 3678 and ken told you he could not recall mrs. owens sending in coupons to get something and not getting what she wanted back. that was the deal. if she smoked and -- and the cigarettes she happened to smoke had coupons on them, she saved them. you heard she also saved the s&h green stamps. from whatever else she bought, she saved the stamps and she turned in those -- turned those in too. coupons cannot be a basis of liability here. and it is a similar story with advertisements. i told you that you would see a lot of ads from dr. goldberg and you did. and they were trying to upset you with allegations about youth marketing and casting stones about ads being used by a variety of consumer goods, whether it is santa claus or the military or attractive women or people having fun. and they showed you documents that contained demographics on teens in the 1970s and the 1980s, again, trying to tick you off. but remember in the '70s and '80s, betty owens was what, 40s, 50s? far from youth. she was a mature adult with a job, had three grown children. she had raised one to be a nurse, one to be a successful person in the corporate business world. and the other thing about ads, dr. goldberg 3679 could not link any statement or ad to mrs. owens because he did not know anything about her. and mrs. shamp -- ms. shamp said people in the public smoke because of ads. well, this case is not about people in the public. this case is about betty owens. and we asked the witnesses who knew mrs. owens if she ever discussed advertisements with them or if she ever made any smoking decision based on an advertisement. every witness said no; uncle bernice, ken, martha. let us look at what they said. martha was asked: "your mother never talked about cigarette advertisements with you, correct? "no. "she never told you that she started smoking a specific brand of cigarettes because of an advertisement that she saw? "you mean -- well, my mother was growing up, there were no tvs in that home, so she never saw any ads on tv, so no." that is evidence in this case that she did not see any ad or rely on any ad, and according to martha, she never even saw them because they did not have a tv. and it is a similar story with mr. ellis. she asked, what evidence did we put up? we put up this 3680 evidence. "now, your mother never told you that she smoked a particular brand because of an advertisement she saw, did she? "i cannot ever recall that. "and you do not recall your mother ever telling you that she smoked because of tobacco advertising, correct?" the answer: "correct." those admissions where mr. ellis and ms. schofield sealed the deal on any allegation about advertising. the important facts for this case are that no witness who knew mrs. owens testified that she ever smoked a brand of cigarette because of an ad or a slogan or any statement by r. j. reynolds, not the kool jazz festival, not nascar racing, not the beverly hillbillies and not joe camel. you heard a lot about joe camel both ways in this case. the truth is at the time of the joe camel campaign, mrs. owens was in her 40s and her 50s. nobody testified that she saw the joe camel campaign. nobody testified that she smoked camel cigarettes because of the joe camel campaign. and over this back and forth, over what the stats show 3681 and what was in this book, what was in this, if you look at anything on joe camel, look at am 2645. that is a june 1994 study from the ftc, after the surgeon general's report that ms. shamp mentioned this morning. and the ftc concludes -- you remember, mr. carter did this with dr. goldberg. and the ftc concluded, you know, look, we would like to think that joe camel got kids to smoke and it really drove initiation. but we looked at it, we investigated it and the conclusion is it did not. ladies and gentlemen, i do not want to go back and forth all day on joe camel because it has nothing to do with betty owens, but that was the fact you heard from the ftc about joe camel. and when it came to mrs. owens' choices with cigarettes and brands, the only thing that mattered to her was price. another thing about advertisements, every advertisement the plaintiff showed you in this case was a legal advertisement. in fact, you will remember dr. goldberg said he had not really looked at sports illustrated, but for some reason this year, he happened to pick up the swimsuit issue. do you remember that? and he started to talk about it. 3682 and the judge cut him off and instructed you that reynolds has not broken any law with sports illustrated and ordered you to disregard dr. goldberg's testimony. but the final point on advertising is the instruction you have in your jury instructions. page 18, second paragraph, the court instructed you: manufacturing and selling and advertising cigarettes is a lawful activity. i, therefore, instruct you that r. j. reynolds cannot be held liable for merely manufacturing, selling or advertising cigarettes. the plaintiff knew that was the instruction. and worse yet, they knew that advertising had nothing to do with mrs. owens' decisions, but they still spent hour upon hour showing you ads in the hope that it would upset you. now, throughout the course of this trial, you did hear two things that i think the plaintiff may come back this afternoon and say, well, this shows you that mrs. owens thought something different. and you heard that when she was diagnosed with lung cancer, they said that she did not believe she had lung cancer. well, if mrs. owens really believed everything that anyone told her, you would have to ask, would she have believed her doctors; would she have 3683 believed when they told her those facts, when those facts were the same ones that her daughter martha had told her throughout her life? and finally, if you do not think you have lung cancer, why would you proceed with chemotherapy and radiation and lung surgery? second, i think martha testified that on one occasion her mom told her that the government would not allow something to be sold if it was harmful. now, mr. ellis told you that mrs. owens was skeptical of the government, but martha told you she would not -- she did not think the government would allow something to be sold that was harmful. either way, it does not matter for -- for purposes of this case. mr. ellis has a beef with the government for selling cigarettes. that is not an issue in this case. ladies and gentlemen, use your common sense and focus on the facts about betty owens. when the plaintiff cannot produce a single witness to say mrs. owens heard, read, saw and, most importantly, relied on anything reynolds said or did not say, do not infer otherwise. because when you get this question, did concealment of information cause mrs. owens' death, the answer has to be no. if 3684 there was any evidence that betty owens relied on any statement from reynolds, do not you think they would have given that information to dr. proctor or dr. goldberg so they could talk about it? of course, they would have. but they did not because they cannot. that evidence does not exist in this case. that is why ms. shamp kept talking about the public and other smokers and not about betty owens. now, after listening to dr. proctor and dr. goldberg, it is not surprising that mr. ellis, on the witness stand, spouted out a couple times saying, well, there is conflicting stories. i believe he probably picked that up here at trial because there was no proof in his deposition or no proof on the witness stand that his mom ever saw, heard or relied on such a conflicting story. where was the proof? there is not any. that piece of the puzzle is completely missing from their burden of proof. otherwise, mr. ellis and martha would have shown it to you. this case is only about mrs. owens, and there is no evidence at all that she relied or heard statements from r. j. reynolds. and no matter what some other smoker in some other case might have done, the plaintiff has to prove in this case that mrs. owens did. he has to 3685 provide the puzzle pieces. he did not. there is no betty owens bridge in this case between statements from reynolds and some action from mrs. owens. there is no evidence. there is no proof of reliance. and that is the one hundred percent true fact in this case. can i get the elmo again, please? thank you. so if you look at your verdict form, questions 2 and 3, because mrs. owens knew the material facts about the health effects and addictive nature of smoking, the answer must be no. and because there is no reliance or what is called "legal cause" on anything reynolds said or did, the answer has to be no. so for those reasons, the only answer on question 2 and question 3 is no. i want to address a couple other points. i told you in opening that the plaintiff would overreach and force pieces into spots where they do not fit and try to create pieces to fill in for those that are missing. and i think he did it. and one i want to talk about was one that ms. shamp stressed in her closing and that is the national enquirer. the national enquirer, a magazine known for preposterous stories that elvis is still alive; the next royal baby is going to have 3686 two heads; president obama's visited by martians, whatever they have on a week-to-week basis. and the plaintiff's story in this case was that there was an article that ran in the national enquirer that was a reprint of an article that ran in true, and the article in the national enquirer was -- said it was authored by charles golden. and dr. proctor said that charles golden was a fictitious name made up by hill & knowlton. now, i do not dispute that mrs. owens read the national enquirer. but no one suggested that mrs. owens ever saw, read or heard that article that appeared one time in the national enquirer or discussed it with mr. ellis or ms. schofield, no one. now, martha did suggest that her mom may have believed a different story about a woman turning into a snake. she never suggested that her mother heard or read any article in the national enquirer about smoking. and even if she had seen it, you would have to decide if relying on a single article in the national enquirer over the decades of health warnings in the reader's digest that she read and collected, the life she read and collected, the 3687 local newspapers that ken delivered, the information on her cigarette packs, the information at the checkout counter at the navy base and the constant hounding from her children, you would have to decide if that one article, if she saw it, it would be reasonable to rely on that compared to everything else. again, getting back to the burden of proof, what is the more persuasive and convincing force there? i submit it cannot be that somebody would rely on something in the national enquirer over the wealth of other information that she had. but this attempt to really create something out of the national enquirer, all it really did was expose two of the plaintiff's experts, dr. proctor and dr. goldberg. this is what dr. proctor said first. "and that is exactly what my next question is. i believe you said twice on direct and now again that charles golden was not a real person and it was a fictitious name, correct? "yes. "and you said it was invented by hill & knowlton to conceal the fact that it was a version of the stanley frank story, correct? 3688 "i think that is basically correct." so dr. proctor said hill & knowlton invented charles golden. so on cross, you will remember mr. carter showed him an article from the national enquirer from 1963 -- or from 1967 that linked a murder in miami to the jfk assassination in 1963. and when mr. carter showed dr. proctor that, dr. proctor had to come clean. and mr. carter asked him: "so you had not bothered to look at the national enquirer to see if charles golden existed and if he had written other stories for the national enquirer before you came in and told the jury that he was created by tobacco companies for that story, did you?" and dr. proctor said: "that is correct." now, i think the plaintiff was not pleased that that puzzle piece got ripped apart, and so i think they tried to have dr. goldberg tape it back together for them. so what they did is they spoon-fed him documents the day before he testified so -- documents he did not have at his deposition, documents not on his reliance list, and they asked him to clean up the mess that dr. proctor created. this is what dr. goldberg said. 3689 "the national enquirer article, had you seen that prior to yesterday? "no. "and, in fact, the first time you reviewed those documents as a group to offer the opinions you gave today was yesterday, correct? "that is correct. "they were provided to you by ms. shamp; is that true? "yes." but that puzzle piece still did not fit. look at what dr. goldberg said. "is it your testimony that the tobacco industry created charles golden as a cover for mr. frank, that his identity and his use of a pseudonym was one that was created by hill & knowlton? "no. it was created by the national enquirer." i do not think the national enquirer means anything in this case, but those are the facts you heard from their witnesses on two different stories about who created it or who did not. and no matter that, nobody ever said mrs. owens saw it. so inquiring minds want to know, why did dr. proctor stretch the story without checking the facts first? and inquiring minds want to know, why 3690 did plaintiff's counsel have to give the documents to dr. goldberg the night before he testified? and inquiring minds want to know, why spend so much effort on an article that neither ken nor martha said mrs. owens ever saw or read? and the answer, it was another attempt by the plaintiff to force a puzzle piece, or worse, make one where it does not exist because there is absolutely no evidence that mrs. owens ever saw that article or could have reasonably relied on an article in the national enquirer. it is a misshapen puzzle piece that does not fit in this case. but that was not the only puzzle piece the plaintiff tried to create. mr. ellis created his own puzzle piece and sent it to his uncle bernice. you saw mr. ellis's letter. you will have it in evidence. it is ara 2091. now, before bernice gave a deposition in this case, a deposition you got to see, mr. ellis sent him a letter to "jog his memory." but on the stand, mr. ellis is like, i sat down five, ten minutes and just sent it to him. but i do not know how good a typist he is, but that is pretty good to pound that out in five or ten minutes if you are not really giving it any thought. 3691 but mr. ellis also said that mr. birdwell, he could not read or write very well. well, why send him a letter? either way, the letter contained facts mr. ellis wanted to plant with his uncle bernice. now, one fact he got right in here was where he said his mom smoked because she enjoyed it. but you know that there were many facts in this letter that were just fraud. wrong as to how much mrs. owens smoked. wrong as to how many times she tried to quit. and wrong as to what she did to try to quit. all of the things he wrote in that letter would have made their case here better if they were true, but they were not. ms. shamp said this morning she wanted to talk about the truth. mr. ellis did not want to talk about the truth in that letter to his uncle bernice. now, not only were many of the statements in that letter just wrong; they were directly contrary to what mr. ellis had testified to under oath. so inquiring minds want to know, why send the letter to someone that you know contains wrong information and is contrary to your own sworn testimony? inquiring minds want to know, why fail to mention that you sent the letter to your uncle in your deposition, 3692 and why did not you save a copy of it? the answer is simple. the letter was an attempt by mr. ellis to put words in his uncle's mouth, to make puzzle pieces for use in this trial. but you got to see and hear his uncle bernice. you heard what he said about the letter. and you heard what he said about his relationship with mr. ellis. you can judge who to believe. these pieces that the plaintiff tried to manufacture in this case only bring his believability and the credibility of their experts into question. they do not help meet his burden of proof, and instead, they shine a spotlight on the gaping holes in this case and further support a verdict in favor of reynolds. now, if you get beyond the first three questions, you will get to question 4 on comparative fault. if you get there, you will have had to decide that mrs. owens died of adenocarcinoma caused from smoking, that she was addicted, that addiction was a legal cause of her death and that reynolds' conduct was the legal cause of her death. and i submit that the evidence i'm showing you today that you saw during the trial does not allow you to get to this question. 3693 but if you do, you will have to allocate responsibility between reynolds and mrs. owens. the question is the allegation of -- allocation of fault for her death. and there are a couple points to keep in mind. the assignment of fault relegates only to actions that were a legal cause of mrs. owens' death. and r. j. reynolds cannot be assigned fault for actions that were not a legal cause of mrs. owens' death. these points are in your instructions and they are very important. comparative fault is not a global comparison of conduct. it is not what did betty owens do over the course of her life versus the global conduct of the tobacco industry. it is a comparison of actions of betty owens and r. j. reynolds that were the legal cause of her death. it is a very narrow inquiry. now, you may have seen things throughout this trial that the tobacco company said in public or wrote internally that you do not like, but the issue in this case is whether they affected betty owens and caused her death. if you find that something reynolds did was wrong and you do not like it, but is it connected to betty owens, it cannot be considered part of your analysis under comparative fault. now, ms. shamp raised the issue of the brands 3694 that mrs. owens smoked. and i told you that they would have the burden of proving the brands she smoked, when she smoked them, how long she smoked them, why she smoked them. now, both mr. ellis and ms. schofield identified a number of different brands, but neither one of them could tell you how long she smoked any of them. you saw from martha. "you observed that she would often buy cigarettes that were on sale at the base? "correct. "and, now, the brand she bought depended on whether the brand was on special at the base that week? "correct. "but of those, there was not any particular brand that you observed that would be her regular brand? "no. "sometimes it would change from week to week, sometimes two weeks it was the same? "correct." mr. ellis told you. "you do not know what your mom's favorite brand of cigarettes was, do you? 3695 "no. i have no idea of her favorite. "and that is because she switched brands all the time, right? "well, she rotated with a certain more than others. "she never told you that she had a favorite brand of cigarette, did she? "we did not talk about cigarettes like that, no." then he was asked: "and you cannot put a time frame on when she smoked any of those brands to the exclusion of any other brand, correct? "probably not. "and you cannot tell us the order in which your mother smoked any of the brands that she smoked, can you? "i did not study it that hard to know that answer. no. i would say no. "so you cannot identify a decade in which she smoked any particular brand of cigarette? "i just said i do not have the answer." plaintiff failed to prove how long mrs. owens smoked any of my client's brands. now, ms. shamp pointed out to you a stipulation, a stipulation that two other companies, lorillard and philip morris, 3696 that their brands were not a legal cause, and i'm not here to tell you they were. but what i am here to tell you is that stipulation does not say reynolds' brands were a legal cause, and it is their obligation to prove that. just because other companies are not in this case, it does not mean we are responsible for every other bit of smoking without them proving what it was. so that is something to keep in mind in this case if you have to allocate fault for the acts that caused mrs. owens' death because reynolds can only be responsible for its conduct and its cigarettes. so when they cannot even identify the decade that she smoked any one of them, please consider that. now, leaving the brand identification and smoking history aside, mrs. ellis's [sic] attorneys and ms. shamp today tried to play this question a little cute, and they say it is up to you to determine if mrs. owens is responsible at all. but she never accepted or acknowledged any responsibility for mrs. owens' decision to start smoking and continue smoking, despite the knowledge of the risks and ken and martha's nagging and hounding, never. no responsibility at all for someone who made her own decisions and did what she 3697 wanted to without regard to the risk to her health. i come back to the words of their experts. "dr. burns, you have said many times that smokers are responsible for their own smoking behavior, correct? "that is correct. "and even if they are addicted, the smokers are still responsible for their own smoking behavior, correct? "that is correct. the fact that someone's addicted is a barrier to behavioral change, but it does not free them from responsibility for their own behavior." dr. burns says smokers remain responsible. he does not say reynolds does. and -- and look at how mrs. owens accepted responsibility during her life, without blaming anyone. she left school. she got married and accepted the responsibility of starting a family when she was a teenager. when her first husband killed herself [sic], she did not seek to blame anyone. she got a job and she accepted the responsibility of raising ken and martha. when she remarried, had another child and ultimately decided to divorce mr. owens, she did not 3698 blame anyone. she accepted the responsibility of raising three children, getting her ged and getting a job. now, ms. shamp has pointed out through a number of witnesses in this trial that i called this "street smarts" and i did. i did not call it street smart as a way to demean mrs. owens, but as a way to praise her. maybe instead of "street smarts," i should have called all these accomplishments a sign that she had and took personal responsibility because that is what she did. when she was diagnosed with lung cancer, she never placed the blame on reynolds or any other tobacco company. you heard martha on that. "ms. schofield, last question. your mother never blamed the tobacco companies for her decision to smoke, did she? "we never had a conversation of any kind whatsoever like that, no." and you know that mrs. owens never told mr. ellis that she blamed the tobacco companies. in fact, for 17 years after her death, it never entered mr. ellis's mind to sue until he saw something in the paper and embarked on what he said is a vindictive personal vendetta. 3699 if mrs. owens had to assign responsibility, would she accept it? of course, she would. mrs. owens faced adult matters, she made adult choices and she shouldered adult responsibilities her entire life. smoking was no different. she is responsible for her decision to choose to smoke and keep smoking despite knowledge of the risks. and she is responsible for the injuries she suffered because of those choices. i showed you a slide earlier for mr. ellis. and you remember he said this: "when you are an adult, whatever decision you do is your decision. ultimately, you are the one who has control over your decisions." that is what dr. burns says and that is what mr. ellis says. they do not say you have ten percent control, they do not say you have fifty percent control, but you have one hundred percent control of your decisions. nobody made mrs. owens' decisions for her. nobody could decide for her to choose to smoke, and nobody could choose for her to stop smoking, not burns, not martha and not ken. only mrs. owens could make her adult decisions. as mr. ellis told you, she was going to do what she wanted to do, and there was not anything you 3700 could say to make her stop. she had the control and she had the responsibility. so if you get to that point on the verdict form, i ask you to give mrs. owens one hundred percent responsibility for her conduct. now, i've got a couple minutes left. if you find everything that i've said this afternoon unpersuasive and decide to return a verdict for mr. ellis, you will have to decide on an amount of damages in question 5, an amount that you want to award him for his mother's death 21 years ago. and this is hard. we all feel compassion. it is sad whenever anybody loses a loved one, and we all wish mr. ellis the best, but compassion and good wishes are not reasons to exceed common sense and good judgment. your instruction will tell you there is no exact standard and that any such award should be fair and just in light of the evidence. ms. shamp did not suggest an amount. and it is not a question of whether the defendant is a big company or not. if you find reynolds liable, it is a question about what damages mr. ellis and his sister have as a result of their mother's death. and, again, your instruction will say you need to be fair and just in 3701 light of the evidence. the evidence you heard was that mr. ellis was 41 when his mother died and martha was 43. the evidence you heard is that this lawsuit was not martha's idea. the you evidence you heard was that becky's family does not even know about the lawsuit. the evidence you heard is that nobody has sought counseling or grief therapy in the 21 years she is been gone. you heard no evidence about any expenses that mr. ellis or ms. schofield have. and the evidence you heard is that mrs. owens was not financially supporting either ken or martha at the time of her death and had not been for over two decades prior to that. so that is the evidence you have to consider. so if you make an award and you decide to compensate mr. ellis, please compensate him based on the evidence you heard, using your common sense and good judgment. finally, if you get all the way through the verdict form, you have to decide whether punitive damages are warranted. now, if we get that far, you will have already fully compensated mr. ellis for his mother's death. punitive damages are not about compensation or making someone whole. punitive 3702 damages are about more money for mr. ellis. they are damages in addition to damages that fully compensate him. they can be awarded only for conduct that was a legal cause of the harms suffered by the plaintiff, and punitive damages cannot be based on the findings. now, since the plaintiff continues to stress the findings, let me stress this: and this is in the instructions that the judge gave you this morning on page 21. it will tell you: the engle findings may not be considered in any way when determining whether punitive damages may be warranted. you cannot consider the engle findings in any way to make that determination, not at all. ms. shamp said, punitive damages are designed to punish and deter, punish for conduct that is tantamount to reckless disregard for human life. and to prove it, the plaintiff must meet a higher level of proof called "clear and convincing evidence." page 20 of your jury instructions talk about it and i pulled it out here. clear and convincing evidence differs from the greater weight of the evidence in that it is more compelling and persuasive. it requires evidence that is precise, explicit, lacking in confusion and 3703 of such weight that it produces a firm belief or conviction about the matter in issue. when considering this, consider the testimony you have heard. consider what you heard from dr. proctor. he told you that dr. rodgman at reynolds used the best available science to identify constituents of cigarette smoke. his research was excellent. he did not keep the research secret. and the 1964 surgeon general's report relied on that research. you heard from dr. proctor. you heard from dr. figlar. dr. rodgman was the first person to identify many of the compounds and constituents in cigarette smoke. he published the methods reynolds invented to identify the constituents, submitted them to the surgeon general's committee and even gave a speech to the american chemical society talking about them and drawing the compounds. now, the plaintiff subpoenaed dr. figlar to be here. he is the one witness who was not getting paid to be here. and i'm glad you got to hear from him. and please consider dr. figlar's testimony about what he and others before him at reynolds have done for decades to develop tobacco products that may reduce risk and also talked about what reynolds has 3704 done in his time there. dr. proctor also talked about other contributions that the tobacco companies made, larson, haag and sylvette. remember the green monster? said it was a comprehensive account of the world literature, summarized thousands of articles, included information that was both favorable and unfavorable. and it was also relied upon by the surgeon general in the 1964 report. and dr. proctor said he still uses not only the green monster, but the red one, the blue one and the yellow one. you also heard about reynolds' cooperation with the public health community. you heard about the nci's tobacco working group that reynolds participated in from ten years, from 1968 until 1978, when the government shut it down. you heard that reynolds has spent a fortune to make cigarettes less hazardous and develop reduced-risk products. and you heard that reynolds addressed every suggestion from the public health community. in the 1970s, the low-tar medium-nicotine cigarettes, they were suggested by the surgeon general, the nci and dr. russell, who you heard was a pioneer in this area. reynolds explored those things. and it is interesting because i -- remember, i 3705 asked dr. figlar, in the surgeon general's report -- and i held up the 2014. i'm like, does it tell you in here what to do to make cigarettes safe or safer? and he said no. if they did, reynolds would try to do it. and interestingly, while ms. shamp read dr. figlar lots of quotes from the surgeon general's reports that had nothing to do with cigarette design, she never asked dr. figlar about this chart on cigarette design in the 1979 surgeon general's report. and i know it is really hard to read, but you recall that dr. figlar walked you through this, and he talked about all these different efforts that reynolds had taken, some on their own, some at the suggestion of the public health community and these were efforts designed to try to make the cigarette safer. and where these ones were identified with a plus or two pluses, these are ones that the surgeon general gave a thumbs up to and said, this is a good development; this is a step in the right direction. in the 1980s, you saw reynolds' efforts and the focus on -- on cigarettes that heat and did not burn tobacco, with premier and then eclipse. and you heard that reynolds still sells eclipse today, even 3706 though they lose money on every pack. dr. figlar told you it is because they are committed to the idea and think it is a step in the right direction. you heard that reynolds discovered a way to cure tobacco to lower tobacco-specific nitrosamines. you remember how they talked about they noticed the heat exchange and where it was coming back and it was leading to higher tobacco-specific nitrosamines? so reynolds came up with a way to change it so that it lowered tobacco-specific nitrosamines. and reynolds shared their research work. and no matter what ms. shamp says now, during the entire time mrs. owens was alive, the public health community, including dr. burns, encouraged reynolds to make lower tar and nicotine cigarettes. you also heard about reynolds' involvement and the -- and the tobacco industry's involvement in publication. now, ctr, dr. proctor would call it distraction research, but he had to admit that it produced over 7,000 peer-reviewed articles. it had research on -- it had substantial influence on the public health community. the grantees were cited repeatedly in the surgeon general's reports and that the research funded 10 nobel laureates. you heard about reynolds' publications that 3707 have been cited in -- in the surgeon general's reports from the first one in 1964 till the most recent one in 2014. and dr. figlar told you that reynolds has taken up dozens of patents, patents that are not secret, but they are available for anybody to look at. you saw that reynolds published a big book on premier, the premier monograph, and it published a book called the biology of nicotine that talked about nicotinic receptors in the brain. and in addition to traditional cigarettes, dr. figlar talked about reynolds' mission to transform tobacco, other focusing on snus and e-cigarettes and nicotine replacement therapy. and they are even now using tobacco technology to develop drugs for diseases such as ebola. ladies and gentlemen, this is not a record of a wanton conduct or reckless disregard for human life. this is a record of trying to lower the risks of an inherently risky, but always lawful product. it is a record of contributing to science that has been recognized by the public health community. there were some successes and there were some failures, but they tried. and in trying to lower the risks of an inherently risky -- i'm sorry. and in trying to 3708 lower the risks of an inherently risky, but legal product, it should not be punished or deterred. you also heard of an industry that reynolds had changed and evolved to take steps in the last couple decades. you heard that there was an agreement that disbanded the organizations you heard about from decades ago -- the ctr, ti and tirc. those organizations are gone. the employees you heard so much about, teague and horrigan and rodgman, they long ago left the company and some of them are dead. ms. shamp started today by talking about documents. and one of the things she said is this case is unparalleled because of the amount of documents. even though they claim that documents were destroyed, you have an unparalleled amount of documents. and dr. proctor talked about previously secret documents that are secrets no more. there is a public website with millions and millions of documents available. when this trial is over, if you want to -- the judge will let you -- you can go online, and you can look at any document you want from reynolds. it is online. you can do it in the comfort of your own home. now, if the company position on smoking and 3709 health and addiction throughout the years angers you, dr. figlar told you that reynolds' position changed over a decade ago, when it admitted that smoking caused cancer and was addictive. and in the past, industry representatives, they would challenge the new surgeon general's reports, but not anymore. you saw that reynolds has a link to the newest and even the most recent surgeon general's reports on its website and refers the public to them. dr. proctor talked about industry restrictions, and dr. figlar discussed how the many fda regulations impact his job on a daily basis. reynolds meets with the fda scientists and presents to them and other government organizations on product development. and those organizations have not told reynolds, take this out of smoking and make it safe, do this with that, get rid of this combination. looking at all of this, there is no need to punish or deter for changes that have already taken place over a decade ago. so if you get to this point and you have already fully compensated mr. ellis, i suggest that the evidence does not justify awarding more money. with the higher standard of proof of clear and convincing, i suggest 3710 that that standard will not be met. and so if you get to question 6 -- may i have the elmo, please? thank you. if you get to question 6, based on all the evidence you have heard in this case, i submit that your answer should be no. in jury selection, each of you committed to holding the plaintiff to his burden of proof, and if the evidence warranted, committed to your ability to enter a verdict in favor of my client. at the end of this trial, the evidence compels a verdict in reynolds' favor on every question. on the question of the cause of death, on the question of whether mrs. owens was addicted and on the question of what was the legal cause of her death, the plaintiff failed to meet its burden. mrs. owens made adult decisions on adult matters her entire life. she persevered and she provided. she did what she had to do for her family, and she did what she wanted to do for herself. and one of those decisions was her decision to smoke. but do not reward the plaintiff by making mrs. owens a victim in this lawsuit because of her decisions. 3711 this is the only and last chance i get to speak with you. as the plaintiff had the burden of proof, when i sit down, ms. shamp gets to get up and give you a rebuttal. because i cannot respond to her, i would ask one of you to be my advocate in the jury room. you have seen throughout the last two weeks how we have responded throughout this trial to give you the other side of the story. and as you deliberate, i ask you to keep the full story in mind and answer ms. shamp as you think i would. ladies and gentlemen, i'm going to end as i've begun every stage of this trial and that is by thanking you. i have enjoyed having the opportunity to present this case to you. it is frustrating that i do not get to talk to you personally and -- and get your feelings about this. but i know you have done your job, i know you have paid attention, and i know you will do the right thing. and for your service to this community and this county and this process, we thank you very much.