13 mr. gustafson: good morning. jurors: good morning. mr. gustafson: been a long two weeks. juror erato: yes. mr. gustafson: y'all have learned a lot. juror holden: oh, yeah. mr. gustafson: clarence sonny ellis. the evidence says he started smoking between 1948, when he was 12 years old, and 1953, 1954, when he was 16, 17 years old, a senior in high school. he was smoking daily by the age of 18. by the age of 19, when he was married to betty ellis, he was showing clear signs of addiction, 3151 smoking when his feet hit the floor on the way to the bathroom first thing in the morning. the tobacco company documents tell you they intended to sell their addictive product to kids. they knew that if you got a teenager addicted to nicotine, they were going to get a lifetime of profits. that is exactly what they intended. that is exactly what they accomplished to an entire generation of americans. he was a teenager like all those others, and they enjoyed decades of profits off his lungs. and as we all know from growing up, peer pressure is real. peer pressure gets to young people. the defendant knew that and the other companies knew that, and they exploited it in their search for replacement smokers. you add a little marketing, you add a little nicotine, just the right amount, and lo and behold, seventy percent of the people in sonny ellis's age group were smokers. now, it would have been unusual if sonny ellis was not a smoker. he would have been in the minority. that is how accepted and normal this was. the decision to start smoking in 1948 or 1949 or 3152 1954 or whatever it was for sonny ellis, that decision is nothing like a decision to start smoking today. what we know today, what you know now is more than you knew when you walked in here two weeks ago. they want to tell you that sonny ellis knew all of that back in the '70s and '80s and '90s. it would have been really unusual if sonny ellis were just able to put cigarettes down and walk away like the defendant says he should. and you know why that would have been really unusual. they engineered cigarettes to be addictive, through technology, through additives, through monkeying with what they put in their product, they engineered cigarettes to be hard to give up. they knew exactly what they were doing long before the public health authorities who testified here knew. long before the experts knew. long before the tobacco control people who studied this and lived this in their professional lives. long before they knew, the tobacco companies knew because they were doing it on purpose. but they say sonny ellis should have known all along. they spent the next few decades perfecting ways to make cigarettes as addictive as they could. 3153 they take the nicotine out when they process the tobacco. they put just the right amount of nicotine back in so they can maintain addiction, because the documents you have in evidence show you that if they did not put enough nicotine back in to maintain addiction in their customers, their customers would stop smoking, because nicotine is why people smoke. they ain't smoking for the turkish blend, they are smoking for the nicotine. they changed the ph level of the smoke to make the smoke more inhalable because the more inhalable it was, the more addictive it became. they added ammonia compounds so that their customers would freebase nicotine to the brain. they added levulinic acid to increase nicotine binding in their customers' brains. they tried their best to make quitting as hard as they could. and they were successful because only 3 percent of people who try to quit are successful long term. they have to try over and over and over again for years, and many of them are never successful. despite that evidence, despite the unrebutted evidence on these points, they say it was sonny ellis's free, unfettered choice to continue smoking. and there is strong evidence in this case 3154 of sonny ellis's addiction. excuse me. there is no question, this is unrebutted, uncontested evidence, that the defendant and the other companies designed cigarettes to be addictive. they intended people like sonny ellis to get addicted when they used the product. that was the point. it was unrebutted, uncontested evidence that they concealed what they did to make cigarettes addictive. and that they lied for decades to keep it going. and they want you to give them a pass. there is no question that what they did worked. their own documents that we have in evidence here and showed you in this trial showed they knew it worked. they knew it was working, they congratulated themselves on how well it was working. and it not only worked, it made them a lot of money. they congratulate themselves on that. the only question now is what are y'all going to do about it? you are going to have to decide whether you are going to tolerate lies and liars because that is just business. you are going to have to decide whether it is right or wrong to design something to 3155 be addictive and then lie about it; market it as safe when you know it will kill people; and exploit addicted people to keep doing what they are addicted to by lying to them and telling them that it ain't proven that what you are addicted to is even harmful. all the while knowing that their business plan is going to result in millions of people dying, and they did not care. did you see any evidence from r.j. reynolds in this trial that they cared? things do not square up till your verdict speaks that you are not going to let the defendant profit from lies and deceit. every r.j. reynolds executive who testified in this trial, either on videotape or on the documents they wrote, their statements show that what they did was intentional. their statements show it was all something they knew was false. and it was something they knew was working. and it was all done for money. they knew what they were doing was wrong. they knew that when they were doing it. and we found out what they did, and now y'all know what they did. you have just got to decide what you are going to do about it. so why do people smoke? well, you learned in 3156 this trial that the reason people smoke cigarettes is for nicotine. even though they have known for decades how to take the nicotine out, the defendant keeps putting it back in there at just the right amount to maintain addiction. even though they have been able to grow tobacco with no nicotine in it, they keep growing the kind that has the nicotine in it. they not only choose to keep the nicotine in their product, but they engineer the cigarettes to maintain addiction and make it as hard as they can for people to quit. they were doing all they could to take choice away, and then they tell you that smokers like sonny ellis simply choose to keep smoking. they want to have it both ways. they add things to cigarettes to engineer addiction, and then they tell you that sonny ellis should have just quit. and you know now why it is that people smoke until they die from lung cancer. you know now why it is they make adapters for tracheostomies for people to put a cigarette in and smoke it through their throat. they are not doing that because cigarettes are so much fun to smoke. they are doing that because they are addicted. and they lied about 3157 cigarettes being addictive and they lied about cigarettes causing cancer. now, all those lies were just designed to speak to people like sonny ellis who were addicted smokers, to give them a psychological crutch to keep doing what it is they are addicted to. that was the whole point of their conspiracy. that was the whole point of all of them banding together to lie about cigarettes not being proven to cause cancer or copd or anything else, to create that controversy. and they lied about addiction, because it gave them an excuse to blame smokers for their behavior, all the while they are back there with chemists and everybody else engineering these things to make them as addictive and hard to quit as they can. they do not get it both ways. you have got to take yourself back in time, though. they promised, they promised, in the videos we showed you, if there is anything bad in it, we are going to take it out. if there is anything bad in it. and then promised your health is of paramount concern to us. trust us, we are going to work with the public health authorities, we are going to set up these 3158 tobacco research institutes and we are going to hire all these esteemed scientists, we are going to be first to let you know if what we find out. we are going to hire the most esteemed scientists, people like clarence cook little, who lied. we are going to set up this research committee and fund it and it lied. we are going to spend all this money to research all of this and tell you what our findings are, and they withheld the findings. they withheld the findings from us, and they withheld the findings from the public health authorities. they promised to look out for everybody and cooperate with the public health authorities, and they did everything but. hugh cullman said "we want to be the detectives just as much as the surgeon general and the ama, and we will cooperate in every way." ask yourself, what evidence did they bring you? that they were detectives just as much as the surgeon general and the ama and that they cooperated in every way. what evidence did r.j. reynolds bring you in this trial that that is what they did? they knew this message was a powerful one. they said things like, you saw the document from 3159 the '60s, "if it causes lung cancer, we will stop making cigarettes tomorrow." they knew that message is a powerful one for addicted smokers. they designed it that way. they knew that if you are addicted and you try to quit and you fail, that it can be so overpowering and crushing the idea of failing so many times, you latch onto a message that gives you a psychological crutch to keep doing what you are doing. their customers, though, the difference in this kind of addiction and this kind of product is that the customers can be addicted to nicotine in cigarettes, but they can still be productive members of society. can be a good parent, good father, good mother, could be a good employee. could be all the things that sonny ellis was, a good breadwinner, devoted family member and friend, do all the things that life requires and you can be an addict, a nicotine addict. and sonny ellis was that kind of person. you heard all the words to describe him. he was intelligent, he was honest, he was loyal, he was determined, he was a hard worker, he was kind, he was a quiet man, he meant what he said and said what he meant and did not say any more. he could not 3160 have been a lawyer. he could not have talked for two hours. but he was trustworthy and he is someone -- he is someone that you would want as a friend. that is the kind of person that was described to you. and he was addicted. you heard all the things about how determined he was and how he was somebody who could do all these things. well, the one thing that he could not beat, he could beat alcohol, got in that wreck, got hit by that steamroller, cement truck, whatever it was, in 1984, developed a drinking problem, goes to a rehab center, he is able to quit drinking, but he cannot quit smoking. what does that tell you about the type of addiction that he had to nicotine? he never touched alcohol again, but he smoked until he died. addiction to nicotine is why he smoked two cartons of cigarettes a week for 34 years. it is what caused the smoking. it caused the lung cancer that metastasized and killed him. and what did r.j. reynolds bring you to dispute that? they brought you dr. jaffe. did dr. jaffe explain to you that mr. ellis did not freebase nicotine to his brain? did dr. jaffe explain to 3161 you that all that ammonium hydroxide and diammonium phosphate and rat poison they were putting in lucky strikes cigarettes, the interrogatory with the recipe is in evidence, did he tell you that that stuff somehow did not affect sonny ellis? did he explain to you how it is even possible to be exposed to a powerfully addictive drug, hundreds of doses a day for decades, every day, did he explain to you how it was possible you could do that and not become addicted? did he explain that sonny ellis was impervious to this powerfully addictive drug? because, you know, nicotine addiction, and by the surgeon general and folks that write on this, they compare the pathways of addiction to heroin and cocaine, which are illicit drugs, illegal to buy, unlike cigarettes, you get them at the winn dixie, convenience store, wherever you go, you can get cigarettes. if sonny ellis had been dosing himself with cocaine hundreds of times a day for 30 years, would we even be having this conversation? would there be any question that he was addicted? and the reason why we look at it differently, i submit, is because we all grew up with 3162 cigarettes. we have got pockets on our shirts to put cigarettes in. we used to put ashtrays out in our homes. if we did not even smoke, we put ashtrays out for people to come over and smoke in our house. even if we did not smoke, we owned the ashtrays. we used to -- we made cigarette ashtrays for our fathers when we were in seventh grade shop class. we brought them home to our dads who were trying to quit. it was such an accepted part of american life, unlike these other types of drugs, that the idea that it was addictive was just foreign to everyone except the defendant and the other companies. sonny ellis grew up when everybody smoked. heroes smoked, athletes smoked, actors smoked. at his school, when he is in high school, the joint board of education took a picture in his high school yearbook, it is in evidence. what is on the table in front of these gentlemen, the role models in sonny ellis's life as a teen, were smoking cigarettes. all the role models smoked. it was how boys wanted to look like men and it was how girls wanted to look like women and be glamorous. it seems silly now knowing what we know today in 2014, 3163 knowing what we know about cigarettes now, it is a completely different mindset than what it was like back then. imagine, imagine if leon high school's yearbook or godby or whoever had their deans and principals in the yearbook with ashtrays on the table in front of them. there would be a public outcry. it is a very different time. so as the plaintiff in this case, we have got to prove certain things. y'all have heard me talk about this in jury selection, and the judge just read you the instructions. we have got to prove sonny ellis was a member of the engle class. and we have got to prove that by the greater weight of the evidence. not by beyond and to the exclusion of all reasonable doubt, like we are sending someone to jail or something. it is a different standard. it is a lower standard in a civil case than in a criminal case. so did we tip the scales in our favor in this case? did we provide the more convincing evidence of sonny ellis's class membership? i submit to you that we did. first question on the verdict form is "do you find that clarence c. ellis was addicted to 3164 cigarettes containing nicotine, and that mr. ellis had lung cancer, and, if so, that his addiction was a legal cause of his lung cancer and death?" i want to point out to you, it says "that his addiction was a legal cause of his lung cancer and death." you get that question repeatedly on this verdict form, and you are going to see that in the instructions "a legal cause", not "the legal cause." and it is important. and i talked about this in opening statement. his addiction does not have to be the only cause of his death. the addiction can be one of the causes of his death as long as it contributes substantially. it can work in tandem with other causes. r.j. reynolds' concealment. r.j. reynolds' participation in the conspiracy all those years and lying about what these companies knew to be true about their product in order to keep addicted smokers smoking. it works in tandem with sonny ellis's failure to try harder to quit. mrs. ellis comes to this trial telling you her husband bears responsibility here, but not alone. 3165 and so we do not exclude all these other causes. they all work in tandem together because the law recognizes that life is complex and that events do not just happen usually from one single event, usually it is a bunch of events that work together. the law recognizes the complexities of that, and that is why you get this kind of instruction about "an addiction to smoking cigarettes containing nicotine is a legal cause," not the legal cause, "a legal cause of cancer and death if it directly and in natural and continuous sequence produces it." but then it says, in the bottom paragraph, "in order to be regarded as a legal cause of cancer and death, an addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine need not be the only cause." these things all work together. you are going to get this instruction on every claim in this case. "an addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine may be a legal cause of cancer and death even though it operates in combination with the act of another or some other cause if the addiction contributes substantially to producing the cancer and death." so what was the evidence in this case on sonny 3166 ellis's addiction? dr. burns, who writes the chapters in the books in our doctors' offices on nicotine addiction. dr. burns said mr. ellis was addicted. dr. cummings, who is a cancer researcher and teaches physicians how to do this, set up the new york state quitline, has worked with something -- i think if he said 10,000 smokers in his 30-year career doing this. he says that mr. ellis was addicted. dr. mccoy, his family doctor, dr. sheedy, his oncologist, dr. martin and dr. bianco. betty ellis said, not a doctor, but i think he was addicted. and sonny ellis told us that. sonny ellis in the depositions you saw, and i'll show you the transcripts in a minute, "i wish to goodness i could quit. i've been doing it so long, i just cannot." ms. ellis said that her husband would get tearful at times when he failed to quit. sonny ellis wanted to quit, sonny ellis tried to quit. listening to dr. jaffe, wherever it is dr. jaffe comes from, whether it is michigan or connecticut or wherever it is, you know, he made it sound like in order for someone to be addicted and in order for someone to demonstrate they want to 3167 quit smoking they have to talk to everybody about it. do you remember him saying that? if he is not talking about it, that means he does not want to quit. and that is not fair. we are not all talkative, we are not all like dr. jaffe. some of us are quiet. some of us do not talk about every problem we have. and so you heard the evidence about mr. ellis being a quiet man like his father. and so he did not talk about quitting smoking with everybody. but that does not mean he did not want to quit. we use the fagerstrom test, dr. cummings talked about it, and you are going to learn that the evidence, r.j. reynolds tobacco company uses the fagerstrom test to evaluate nicotine addiction in their own internal company studies, when they bring addicted smokers in and want to migrate them off cigarettes onto another product called snus, they evaluate these people at r.j. reynolds with the fagerstrom test, not this dsm thing that dr. jaffe uses. r.j. reynolds uses the fagerstrom. what does the -- sonny ellis's medical records say about his smoking history? two packs a day for 34 years. two packs of lucky strikes per day. smokes two packs per day tobacco habit for 34 3168 years. dr. cummings, "no doubt in my mind that he was addicted and heavily addicted. not a shred of doubt in that regard." dr. burns, "was he addicted? "yes. "the continuous exposure sustained the addiction. he was addicted to lucky strikes and the winstons." dr. sheedy, "he was addicted to nicotine contained in cigarette smoke." dr. mccoy, "there is no doubt in my mind he was addicted to nicotine and smoking." betty ellis, "he said, 'i'd just fail.' he said, 'i just attempted and i could not quit, and i'm not going to do it again right now.' and i'm not a doctor so i could not say he was addicted, but i believe with all my heart he was." barbara dixon. he told her he tried to quit. "i wish to goodness i could quit." martha martin, "i've got to give up this nasty habit. i've been doing it so long, i cannot." so what was his fagerstrom assessment, how soon do you wake up, remember, this was the one thing that was most predictive about whether 3169 someone was going to be successful at quitting or not. the one thing that identified how addictive it was, "how soon do you smoke?" within five minutes he gets three points. "he would get out of bed, and cigarettes next to the bed, and he would pick them up on his way to the bathroom and light up, and he kept cigarettes in the bathroom." dr. cummings scored him a three because he would smoke within five minutes of waking. did he find it difficult to refrain from smoking in places? well -- where it was forbidden. what was the testimony on that? he left a funeral to smoke, he left his daughter's graduation to smoke. and tammy said, as dr. jaffe was being cross-examined, tammy testified in any social setting, if it was indoors, he would end up outside smoking. he left friends' homes to go outside and smoke. now, you did not hear any evidence in this case that sonny ellis was one of those people who was an inconsiderate man? so he would leave, but he would have to leave. which cigarette would he hate most to give up? he is not here to tell us that and nobody knew, so 3170 we have to give him zero. how many cigarettes did he smoke a day? he smoked two to four packs -- two packs a day, which is 40 cigarettes a day. dr. jaffe admitted it was two to three packs. dr. cummings's testimony was two to three packs, and betty ellis said it was two to three cartons a week. so he gets three points on number 4. do you smoke more frequently during the first hours after awakening than during the rest of the day? well, the testimony was he chain smoked in the morning when he got up. he did not chain smoke all day. that is a trick. you would have to smoke nine packs a day or something if you chain smoked all day long. what you heard was people go to sleep, the nicotine levels in their receptors get low, and when they wake, they got to replenish it, and they replenished it first thing and then they chain -- (snaps fingers), (snaps fingers), (snaps fingers), and he chain smoked in the morning to replenish his. and he chain smoked at night before he went to bed. and you will hear, he got up in the middle of the night to smoke cigarettes. next one, jeff. 3171 did he smoke when he was sick? well, we know he smoked when he was diagnosed with lung cancer and told to stop smoking. but he also smoked when he was sick with the flu and was staying home. dr. jaffe admitted to that. and he continued to smoke after his diagnosis. so a total score is eight points, which under the fagerstrom is heavily addicted, heavily addicted, using the test that r.j. reynolds uses in its own clinical studies to evaluate nicotine dependence. so the evidence in this case, every doctor who testified in this case, all four of them testified that he was addicted. dr. jaffe confirmed that on the stand. dr. mccoy, dr. sheedy, dr. martin, dr. bianco, they all say he was addicted. ask yourself if dr. jaffe was believable. 150 hours in this case? let us talk about lung cancer. the evidence was that he had lung cancer, bronchogenic carcinoma caused by cigarette smoking. it was undisputed, uncontroverted evidence that smoking was the only exposure sonny ellis had in his life to cause lung cancer. was not exposed to asbestos. he was not exposed to radon. 3172 he was not exposed to these other things that cause lung cancer. he smoked two packs a day for over 30 years. the evidence was undisputed and uncontroverted that it looked like a primary lung cancer, a bronchogenic carcinoma. "solitary left upper lobe nodule. this is very worrisome for a bronchogenic carcinoma." not a metastatic carcinoma from somewhere else, but a bronchogenic primary lung cancer. it was undisputed, uncontroverted evidence that when they stuck a needle into that spot in the lung and drew the tissue out of that lesion in his lung, it came back as large cell undifferentiated carcinoma compatible with lung primary. it is undisputed, uncontroverted evidence that this cancer did not start in his brain, it did not start in his spine, it did not start in his shoulder, it did not start in his orbit. their own expert admitted that none of those went to the lung. that they could have -- that it could have started in the lung, he called it a distinct possibility. but you remember this whole thing about them wanting to have it both ways. first he said, well, that tumor in the lung was only a centimeter and a 3173 half, 2 centimeters, small he said. 2 centimeters to an inch, i believe. it was too small to spread to all those parts, so it needed to be a bigger tumor. well, they did a ct scan of the abdomen, they did a ct scan of the pelvis, and they did not find any big tumor anywhere else. he gave a whole list of things, that it could have come from his testes. well, he spent two months in the hospital, saw 15 doctors, do you hear anything about testes cancer in any of these records? everybody poking him and prodding him and running him through all these tests? nobody said anything about kidneys. and he had a scan that did not show a big tumor in his kidneys or in his bladder or in his pancreas or in his esophagus. they scanned him and it was normal. the only place they saw was that spot in the lung, which they biopsied, and i think dr. okun said the tissue is the issue, and it darn sure is, and the tissue was lung cancer. and there is no question about that. they pulled it out and he said it is a large cell carcinoma compatible with lung primary. and so after saying it needed to be a big 3174 tumor, then they say, well, this was a really aggressive one because it was undifferentiated. and that is the part that we agree with him on. it was undifferentiated, you darn right, that is aggressive. you heard dr. burns talk about it, you heard dr. okun talk about it, it is very aggressive. you can have a centimeter and a half, 2 centimeter or 3 centimeter nodule lesion in your lung that is cancer and it can go to all those places because it is very aggressive. they did not find a single tumor anywhere else other than the metastatic sites and the spot in his lung. and they could not tell you where it came from, and they admitted that it was lung -- that it was -- they admitted that it was a distinct possibility that it was lung cancer, but every single one of his doctors said it was lung cancer. and showing you mr. ellis's medical records is not an exercise in quantity over quality that dr. okun said. that was -- you evaluate what you think of that statement in the context of the physicians who worked hard trying to help mr. ellis, whether that was not quality, it was just quantity. 3175 and you evaluate the way he would say it was a fact if he liked it, but if he did not like it, it was just an opinion. when he liked what dr. bilek said about unknown primary, that was a fact. when he did not like it when dr. bilek said it was a bronchogenic -- biopsy-proven bronchogenic carcinoma in september and december and late january and on february 8, two weeks before mr. ellis died, his office is calling it lung cancer and he is signing off on it? they did not show you that. we had to show you that. but evaluate dr. okun, who, on direct examination, could tell you the thought processes of the doctors who were writing these medical records but somehow lost that ability when he was on cross-examination. ask yourselves how it was that r.j. reynolds' expert knew what dr. burgert meant. on direct exam when dr. burgert -- if you can put that path report up, jeff, when dr. burgert said that it was a large cell undifferentiated cancer compatible with lung primary, to dr. okun that somehow meant that it was not lung cancer. but then all the other doctors who knew dr. burgert and worked with dr. burgert, all of 3176 them interpreted that same path report as primary lung cancer. in fact, dr. bilek said that it was a biopsy-proven bronchogenic carcinoma. every doctor that knew dr. burgert, the pathologist who made that diagnosis, knew that he meant lung cancer. and here is where the evidence really comes down on this. more doctors than we can even identify in the medical record said it was lung cancer. the best they have got is i ain't sure. it is a distinct possibility. so was cancer the cause of his death? dr. okun is not sure, but he did say, if you recall, that the cancer is what caused his death, he is just not sure if it started in the lung. but dr. sheedy, dr. mccoy, and dr. burns, and the death certificate is in evidence, that he died from metastatic lung cancer. and ask yourself, you know, what else does addiction do but cause you to repeatedly expose yourself to what it is you are addicted to? and the problem with smoking is if you are addicted to the nicotine and you expose yourself to that cigarette smoke over and over again and get that nicotine and, unfortunately, all the carcinogens 3177 come with it. that is why nicotine addiction causes people to die, and that is why nicotine addiction causes people to get diseases like copd. and we are not claiming damages for mr. ellis's copd, the law would not allow us to do that because he died of lung cancer and that is our claim. but did you hear any evidence in this case from r.j. reynolds that cigarette smoking did not cause his copd? you heard the testimony, uncontroverted testimony that copd was caused by cigarette smoking, but then they turn around and say that, oh, well, we are not sure cigarette smoking causes lung cancer. so we have two packs a day for 34 years. and let us show the dosage demonstrative. you get eight to ten inhales per cigarette. so eight to ten inhales per cigarette -- per -- per cigarette, and 20 cigarettes in a pack, two packs a day, that is 40 cigarettes, 40 times eight, that is 320 to 400 hits of nicotine every day. 4 million hits over his lifetime. and with each one of those doses of nicotine comes all those carcinogens. and the defendant did not call anyone to say that mr. ellis was immune to this powerfully 3178 addictive drug. they did not explain to you how it would even be possible to expose yourself to a drug like that that many times for that long and not be addicted. so on verdict form question 1, you know, the issue there is not whether mr. ellis had free choice. the plaintiff has not come here saying that he lacked the ability to make a choice. the issue is not whether sonny ellis was unable to control himself, because we know he was physically able to control his actions. the issue is not whether addiction took over sonny ellis's life completely. the issue is whether addiction was a substantial contributing factor, one of many causes. and ask yourselves, if sonny ellis was not addicted to nicotine, would he have exposed himself to dozens of carcinogens day after day after day for 40 years? and if sonny ellis was not addicted to nicotine, would he have smoked until he died while undergoing surgery to remove vertebral bodies out of his spine that had cancer in them? because he wants to live. and he is undergoing all this treatment. 3179 look at the medical records. he had a horrible, horrible time in the last five months of his life trying to live. why would -- what other reason would he have to smoke other than nicotine addiction? was r.j. reynolds wrong when they told themselves that people smoke for nicotine, that "nicotine is the sine qua non of cigarettes, without which cigarettes would not exist"? were they wrong? were they wrong when they said, "if we take the nicotine too low, people will stop smoking"? were they wrong when they said, "most people cannot quit"? their internal documents show that is what r.j. reynolds believes when they are talking to themselves. they were right about nicotine being addictive. they were right about why it is people cannot stop. and they were right about it causing cancer. and without addiction, people do not smoke until they get these diseases and die. now, if you answer yes to question 1 on the verdict form, sonny ellis -- you will have found sonny ellis is a member of the engle class. if you answer no, then mrs. ellis loses and r.j. reynolds wins and it is over, you will have pinned a blue 3180 ribbon on r.j. reynolds. mr. persons: objection, your honor. the court: sustain. mr. persons: it is an improper argument. move to strike. the court: it is granted. mr. gustafson: a yes answer, though, that means that the engle findings apply. the engle findings are that "cigarette smoking causes lung cancer" and it lists the one that sonny ellis had, large cell carcinoma. "nicotine in cigarettes is addictive. r.j. reynolds placed cigarettes on the market that were defective and unreasonably dangerous. r.j. reynolds was negligent. r.j. reynolds concealed or omitted material information not otherwise known or available, knowing that the material was false or misleading or failed to disclose a material fact concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes or both. and that reynolds agreed with other cigarette manufacturers and corporations to conceal or omit information regarding the health effects of cigarette smoking or the addictive nature of cigarettes with the intention that smokers and 3181 members of the public would rely on this information to their detriment." those findings are binding on the jury and the court and parties if you answer yes to question 1. now, the engle findings were the result of a trial lasting over a year. there was not any effort to reprove engle findings in this trial. we had a four and a half days of the plaintiff's case. there is no way we could try to reprove the engle findings here. what we did was show you how those kinds of things affect people like sonny ellis and how they, in fact, affected sonny ellis, how he responded to their message, how it was that cigarettes are so addictive that sonny ellis smoked until he died. this is one of those stories that only has one side. there is no other side to the story of this tobacco company and the other co-conspirators and what they did. agreeing to lie to smokers, agreeing to conceal what they knew to be true about causing cancer and addiction, carrying that scheme to lie to the american people for almost 50 years, all for money, did not matter who died, did not matter how many, they did not care. money. question 2 on the verdict form is concealment. 3182 "was r.j. reynolds' concealment or omission of material information about the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes, or both, a legal cause of clarence c. ellis's death?" when an addicted smoker tries to quit smoking and they fail and they are told it is just because of their behavior, that they are choosing to pick cigarettes up one more time, that they do not know how powerfully addictive nicotine is, they do not know that the company that they are buying the cigarettes from is putting ammonia in the cigarettes so they freebase the nicotine to their addicted brain, they do not know that the company is putting things like levulinic acid in it and monkeying with the ph to make it more inhalable, therefore, making it more addictive, they do not know that. all of that stuff is withheld from sonny ellis. ask yourselves if you knew that when you showed up for this trial, did you know those things, it is 2014, and if you learned those things here, ask yourself how it is that r.j. reynolds can say sonny ellis should have known himself. mr. persons: objection, your honor. golden rule. 3183 the court: sustained. mr. gustafson: you know now that reynolds sold defective and unreasonably dangerous cigarettes. you know now what reynolds was doing to those cigarettes. you know now that reynolds knew that their cigarettes were addictive and that they designed them to be that way, and they lied about it. you know now that reynolds knew that addiction made it so most of their customers could not stop. and reynolds lied about that. and you -- reynolds knew that their customers would get addicted and that addiction would lead to what they call unattractive side effects, like lung cancer. and they lied about that. and those are exactly the things that happened to mr. ellis. and you know that, that when they say that smoking is a choice, that they were doing everything they could to engineer cigarettes and add things to them to make it really, really hard to carry through on that choice. because what they say is very different than what they do. you know that now. [#deleted recess#] [#deleted motion for mistrial#] mr. gustafson: may it please the court? the court: yes, sir. mr. gustafson: sonny ellis died february 26, 1993. two days ago was the 21st anniversary of sonny ellis's death. he died in 1993. and was there any evidence that sonny ellis knew that the defendant was putting additives in his cigarettes? was there any evidence that he knew there was ammonia being added to it? was there any evidence that he knew that they were manipulating the ph? was there any evidence that he knew that they were engineering the cigarettes he smoked to be addictive? and there is not because they kept that to themselves. and so 3188 sonny ellis blamed his behavior on himself. he would get tearful when he tried to quit. because the message from the companies was it is your behavior, it is not anything we do, even though they know they are doing it, this is your behavior. but, you know, knowledge is a powerful thing. when you know why it is that you cannot quit, when you know why it is that you keep smoking, just like dr. daniel horn said in that slide that we showed you and in dr. burns's testimony, when dr. horn said people need to know why it is they cannot stop smoking, they need to know why it is they smoke. sonny ellis did not know those things. the defendant kept those things to themself. and they tell you it is just sonny ellis's behavior, it is just his choice. well, that is true -- if that is true that smoking is just a choice, and addiction does not play a role in it, nicotine does not have nothing to do with it, you know, lay aside why they are monkeying with it, doing all the stuff they are doing to cigarettes to increase addiction and maximize -- let us put all that aside, if it is really true what r.j. reynolds is saying, people just smoking because they want to smoke and nicotine addiction does not got nothing to do with 3189 it and it is just your behavior, it is just your fault, if that is true, why would sonny ellis need to go to the doctor to stop doing something that he just was voluntarily doing? why would he need to go to the doctor. it kind of gives you a window into his thought process. why would he need to go to the doctor if it is just, hey, i'll just change my behavior? but i keep failing. and i do not like failing in front of my family. i do not like failing in front of my wife. 10, 15 times betty said he tried to quit, over and over and over again. and you know now why it is he could not do it. now, the concealment instruction, the instruction that goes with this question number 2, is a long instruction, but it is that important thing again. it has to be a legal cause if it directly and in a natural and continuous sequence produces or contributes substantially to producing mr. ellis's lung cancer and death. and then there is that instruction again that i told you about before where the law recognizes the complexities of life and how more than one thing works together to create an outcome. the law recognizes that. in order to be regarded as a 3190 legal cause of cancer and death, the fraud by concealment or omission need not be the only cause. it can be a legal cause even though it operates in combination with the act of another or some other cause. here the addiction combines with the defendant's concealment of the truth. and then with their conspiracy with the other companies to conceal the truth and to create the tobacco institute to go out and lie to people and put stuff in the newspaper. and council for tobacco research. research that does not have nothing to do with cigarette smoking. you get to question number 3 on the verdict form, which is similar to the concealment question, except this time it is the conspiracy to conceal. "was r.j. reynolds' agreement with the other cigarette manufacturers and corporations to conceal or omit information regarding the health effects of cigarettes or their addictive nature a legal cause of clarence c. ellis's death?" similar to concealment except this time they are all conspiring to do it. so they get to borrow everything their co-conspirators did bringing in here with you. and that is why we show 3191 you philip morris documents, lorillard documents, documents of other companies, because they were all in this together. and the issue here is not whether information on the harms of smoking was available. we know that. we know that the information was out there. you did not hear the plaintiffs say -- we brought the people that tried to get the information out there, their whole career, that is who our expert witnesses were. the issue is not whether sonny ellis ever saw a warning on a pack of cigarettes. the issue is whether reynolds's false controversy was a substantial contributing factor, one cause among many causes. and that gets us to those articles on the refrigerator. betty ellis said her husband would try to quit smoking and he failed. and then he would not be ready right now because he would just failed, and that can be a shattering experience. and it is in those times that addicted people, like sonny ellis, latch onto things, like a psychological crutch. here is a philip morris document, right, in 1964, when the surgeon general's report is going to come out, the first big one in 1964 that says cigarette smoking causes 3192 lung cancer in men, and they are all trying to figure out what are we going to do, and here we go, "we must in the near future provide some answers which will give smokers a psychological crutch and self-rationale to continue smoking." then when somebody actually does what they want, they come in here and say, well, it is your fault, should not do this. do they get it both ways? are y'all going to tolerate that? they continued his whole life. what was the testimony on it? he repetitively brought home cuttings out of the newspaper articles, he put them on the refrigerator door. when they said you ought to quit, he would bring them over and say, here, it had not been proven, the evidence is not there. betty ellis, "he started gathering articles on smoking and health. numerous times he would put it on the refrigerator with a magnet. they would reference not being harmful. he wanted people to know he was not doing anything wrong." the defendants admit that it was reasonable for sonny ellis to rely on what they said, not just back in the '60s, but in the '70s and '80s and '90s. robert heimann was the ceo of american 3193 tobacco company at one point. "our advertising is truthful. we anticipate they would rely on it if they chose. "it is a promise as to what the consumer can expect from their product? "yes, it is." and then what does he say? "would you put the warning on there if congress did not require it? "no. we believe our product is not injurious to health." he says, "the surgeon general is misguided in telling them they got to put warnings on there. "not being polite about it, in your opinion, the surgeon general is wrong?" he says, "dead wrong." that was their message and they wanted people to rely on it. it was reasonable to rely. look at james johnston, the ceo of r.j. reynolds tobacco, 1992 testimony. "we expect our customers to take in all available information and make their own judgments about the risks versus the benefits." it is reasonable. "specifically you think it was reasonable for 3194 your customers, the smokers of your cigarettes, to believe what you said and rely upon what you publicly said in these advertisements?" and that is a 1984 tallahassee democrat, full page ad, "can we have an open debate about smoking?" and he said, "that would be reasonable, that is why they put them out." this program of deceit made a difference with a lot of americans, and sonny ellis was one of them. where else would mr. ellis have gotten the message that it was not proven that cigarettes cause disease? what evidence did you see that someone else was saying that other than the defendant and its co-conspirators? nothing. you know now where that message came from. they brought you nothing to show it was somebody else. that industry message capitalized on this american tradition, fairness that we have. you do not just level accusations at people unless you are darn sure that you are right and you can prove it. and they made it seem like the proof was lacking. and they tried to make a controversy here that somehow mr. ellis, whose only exposure was 3195 smoking cigarettes, somehow got cancer from something else. but they brought you nothing on what it was. they made it seem unfair to blame cigarettes for something that was not proven, and it started when sonny ellis was a child. r.j. reynolds, "let us look at the growing importance of the young adult in the cigarette market. in 1960, this young adult market, this 14 to 24 age group, represented 21 percent of the population." that was sonny ellis's age group. "they represent tomorrow's cigarette business. as this group matures, they will account for a key share of the total cigarette volume for at least the next 25 years." that is why they use ammoniated reconstituted tobacco and levulinic acid and monkey with the ph, because these people represent their business for the next 25 years and they want to keep them. "ammonia is the key to competing in smoke quality with philip morris worldwide. the us cigarette industry uses about 10 million pounds of it a year. 10 milligrams of ammonia compounds per cigarette produced." that is how much they go through. 3196 "smoke ph and free nicotine." dr. teague. "a cigarette is a system for delivery for nicotine to the smoker in an attractive, useful form. at normal smoke ph, below 6. all the smoked nicotine is chemically combined with acidic substances and it is non-volitive and slowly absorbed. as the smoke ph increases above 6, an increasing proportion of the smoke occurs in free form, which is volatile, rapidly absorbed by the smoker and believed to be instantly perceived as nicotine kick." they made it so people freebased nicotine, not just smoking a cigarette, they were freebasing nicotine. "in addition to enhancing nicotine kick, increasing the ph of the smoke above 6 causes other changes, particularly when the increase in smoke ph is achieved by adding ammonia to the blend." "recent investigations indicate that natural or added ammonia and its salts in tobacco and smoke play an important role in determining the acidity or alkalinity, the ph, of the smoke. this in turn determines the amounts of free and combined nicotine present in smoke, which strongly influences the way in which the nicotine is perceived by the smoker." 3197 "recent experience in smoking cigarettes known to deliver abnormally high concentrations of ammonia or ammonium salts indicates that a significant stimulation occurs. increased rate and force of heartbeat, tremor, and sweating, similar to that caused by increased adrenaline." "if, as suggested, ammonia and its salts in smoke are found to make desirable contributions to the physiological satisfactions derived from smoking, we will want to optimize this effect in existing and slash or new products." and what was in sonny ellis's products? ammoniated reconstituted tobacco. and what do they put in their cigarettes today on their website? ammonium hydroxide. ethyl levulinate, which you have learned was levulinic acid. but you know how it began because in 1953, you see that dip on the blue line, 1953 there is a drop in sales because the new information is coming out that smoking cigarettes causes lung cancer. now, they say everybody had known for hundreds of years. but when it hits the newspaper, people stop buying cigarettes. so they hire a public relations firm, and they go to the plaza hotel and they come 3198 up with their plan. the pr firm finds out what it was the companies knew. you will find some interesting opinions. one of the men said, "it is fortunate for us that cigarettes are a habit that they cannot break. would not it be wonderful if our company was the first to produce a cancer-free cigarette." they needed to keep this knowledge to themselves while making others think they were being honest so they come out with the frank statement. we accept an interest in people's health. our products are not injurious. this has been going on for 300 years and every one of those claims that tobacco causes disease has been abandoned for lack of evidence. they are going to accept responsibility for the health of their customers. they knew they were lying. they reflected on how they were lying. "our basic position in the cigarette controversy is subject to the charge that we are making false or misleading statements to promote the sale of cigarettes." they knew someday they were going to get caught. chickens do come home. 1968, they attack the surgeon general with 3199 their report on "it is a shockingly intemperate defamation of an industry which led the way in research." they were withholding research. they were withholding what they knew to be true about cigarettes causing cancer and being addictive. they called the surgeon general a liar in 1972. "the extent to which the public health officials may knowingly mislead the american public." how did this work for them? you saw all those newspaper articles, and i ain't going to go through all that again, but you saw it, they had tv time, they had newspaper time, they got their say too. how did it work? they tell us how it worked. they tell us for nearly 20 years, we employed a single strategy to defend ourself on three major fronts: litigation, politics, and public opinion. it was brilliantly conceived and executed over the years helping us win important battles. we want to create doubt about the health charge. we learned that the industry outspent public health authorities in the us government by several hundred times. "the national commission on smoking and public policy reported in 1978 that the tobacco industry spent more on advertising cigarettes in 3200 one day than the national clearinghouse on smoking and health, the government's primary agency working in this area, spent in one year." they spent more in a day than the government spent in a year. they agreed to conceal what they knew. that their customers had physiological requirements for nicotine. that they applied nicotine to cigarettes to meet that requirement. they agreed to conceal cigarettes were addictive, caused cancer. they agreed to conceal that they experimented with freebasing nicotine. they likened their customers to rats in a lab cage, where the rat pushes the lever for food. it continued into the '80s. nationwide media campaign in 1984. "can we have an open debate about smoking?" this is published by r.j. reynolds. "over the years, you have heard so many negative reports about smoking and health and so little to challenge these reports, you may assume the case against smoking is closed. but this is far from the truth." and it continued into the '90s. they lied to congress. (video clip played as follows:) speaker: i would like you to rise and those 3201 who will be testifying as well with you to rise. would you raise your right hand? do you swear that the testimony you are about to give is the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth? the witnesses: i do. speaker: please consider yourself to be under oath. representative wyden: let me begin my questioning on the matter of whether or not nicotine is addictive. let me ask you first, and i would like to just go down the row, whether each of you believes that nicotine is not addictive. i heard virtually all of you touch on it and just yes or no, do you believe nicotine is not addictive? mr. campbell: i believe nicotine is not addictive, yes. mr. wyden: mr. johnston. mr. james johnston: congressman, cigarettes and nicotine clearly do not meet the classic definitions of addiction. there is no intoxication. representative wyden: we will take that as a no. and again, time is short if you can just -- i think each of you believe nicotine is not addictive, and we just would like to have this for 3202 the record. mr. taddeo: i do not believe that nicotine or our products are addictive. mr. tisch: i believe nicotine is not addictive. mr. horrigan: i believe that nicotine is not addictive. mr. sandefur: i believe that nicotine is not addictive. mr. donald johnston: and i too believe that nicotine is not addictive. representative waxman: mr. campbell, you were also deposed, and you said, quote, to my knowledge, it has not been proven that cigarette smoking causes cancer. this is a rather passive and puzzling approach especially in light of the consensus, not by some but all of the scientific community. will you ever be convinced? and what evidence are you waiting for? and let us have the microphone passed over, please. mr. campbell: yes, i may be convinced. we do not know what causes cancer in general right now, so i think that we may find out what causes cancer and we may find out some relationship, which is yet 3203 to be proven. (video clip stopped.) mr. gustafson: the evidence in this case is that from time to time, sonny ellis would take these kinds of statements and he would cut them out of the newspaper and put them on his refrigerator. there is not any evidence that he did not do that. everyone said he did that. his wife said it. his kids said it. he relied on what these people were saying. when you get to questions 2 and 3 on the verdict form, given the evidence in this case, the answers to those questions ought to be yes. and that brings us to question 4. as ms. ellis has said all along, her husband shares in the responsibility. the judge read to you what her position was in this case, is that he bears responsibility in combination with reynolds. she came here insisting on her husband sharing in that responsibility. now, the defendant tries to say that he is totally at fault. and what is he totally at fault for? because their -- their defense in this case, what they presented to you, was he is not addicted, he does not have lung cancer, and if he did have lung cancer, it was not caused by 3204 cigarette smoke. so how could it be that mr. ellis has any fault in this case if reynolds is taking those positions? how can they say that he is at fault if they are saying that cigarette smoking did not cause his lung cancer? what is he at fault for? if smoking did not do it, why is he at fault? listen carefully to what they say about that. because they do not get it both ways, see. so you -- you contrast ms. ellis taking responsibility. and even though the defendant promised in 1954 they accepted responsibility -- mr. persons: objection, your honor, and i have a -- the court: okay, let us go sidebar. (the following is at the bench.) mr. persons: object to the comment about the refusal to take responsibility. that was on the very tips of his lips when the objection was made. the preface to it was that even though they had promised back in 1954 before the frank statement, which had just been shown to the jury in the past few minutes, and then he was going to couple that with they still refuse to take responsibility. that is clearly improper, and i move for a 3205 mistrial on that basis. there is no requirement that the defendant in this case at this trial has an obligation to take responsibility for what happened to mr. ellis. mr. gustafson: i have not said that. he said i was fixing to say it, but i did not say it. and i ain't going to say it. i was going to say i'm allowed to comment on the evidence. the court: um-hum (affirmative). mr. gustafson: and the evidence is they promised to take responsibility, accept responsibility. mr. sales: in 1954. mr. gustafson: in 1954, and that is what i said, and then they did not take responsibility during his lifetime. i was not going to say that they ain't taking responsibility here, because i know there is an order in place where i'm not allowed to say that and i did not say that. so he is a little quick on the draw moving for a mistrial on something i did not say and was not going to say and ain't going to say. the court: what is your position if he says -- if his argument is they promised to take responsibility in 1954 and did not during mr. 3206 ellis's life, and he stops there, what is your position on that? mr. persons: i think he -- i think that is permissible. the court: okay. mr. persons: i think that is within the ambit of the order. the court: okay. here is what i think. actually, i think mr. persons' objecting quickly is a good thing, not a bad thing. so i think he -- i'm going to overrule the objection, deny the motion for a mistrial, with the notation that the statement was not completed by plaintiff's counsel, and i think we have an understanding on that topic what is permissible and what is not. mr. sales: okay. the court: so just leave it. mr. gustafson: i would appreciate it if i got to make my closing argument without people objecting to things i have not said. i'm entitled to make a closing argument, and any objection should come on things i say, if i say something wrong, not something they think i'm going to say. the court: well, okay. but that goes both ways. 3207 mr. gustafson: sure. the court: all right. i just think we ought to keep going. mr. persons: all right, sir. the court: okay. (in open court.) the court: you may proceed. mr. gustafson: please the court, your honor. as i was saying, ms. ellis takes responsibility for her husband's role in this. but even though the defendant promised in 1954 that they accepted responsibility for the health of their customers and they were going to look after their customers, they never did that in sonny ellis's lifetime. they never did that. sonny ellis relied on them. now, the hearing, the congressional hearing where the executives testified to congress, that occurred the year after sonny ellis died. they continued the same program long after sonny ellis died, for years after he died. but he relied on the things that they said. so when you get to the comparative negligence question, you are going to have an instruction on it. the plaintiff has admitted that her husband 3208 bears partial fault here in combination with the acts of reynolds and that you should determine the extent to which mr. ellis's negligence was itself a contributing legal cause of his cancer and death and then you should write on the verdict form the percentage of fault chargeable. now, reynolds can deny that their program of deceit contributed to causing sonny ellis's addiction and death. they can say that. and none of my comments are ever made about reynolds's lawyers. this has nothing to do with their lawyers. this has to do with r.j. reynolds tobacco company. this is what i'm talking about. you know, behind closed doors in their board rooms and in their science labs, they celebrated how successful their lies and deceit were in keeping people smoking because what they say is very different from what they do. their own documents tell you that. they design these cigarettes to be as addictive as possible. you heard testimony about those additives and how they take the nicotine out in the process and put it back in, and the ammonia, making the smoke easier to inhale. all of that was to make cigarettes more addictive and keep smokers smoking, 3209 making quitting as hard as they could, take away someone's choice. and so if you compare the parties, sonny ellis was someone who was honest and loyal and trustworthy, and meanwhile r.j. reynolds is engineering cigarettes to be addictive, putting additives in them, celebrating how successful their plan was in keeping people smoking, you are going to have to have a decision to make about how it is you are going to divvy up the fault for that on that claim. and so you know that the companies recognize, you know, internally, that they "cannot defend continued smoking as free choice if the person was addicted." but they are going to tell you that he had an unfettered free choice to stop smoking here and that addiction had nothing to do with it. because to these companies, they are so accustomed to knowing one thing and saying another. to them, it did not matter what sonny ellis did as long as he went to the store and bought another pack. if he quit, he should have quit sooner. if he did not quit, he chose to smoke. heads, they win, tails, everyone else loses. and you need to keep in mind this jury 3210 instruction tells you that r.j. reynolds is legally responsible for the american tobacco company and brown & williamson tobacco corporation, because they all merged. those three companies are now r.j. reynolds. and so it is three of them and it is one of mr. ellis. and ask yourself, who knew more? who knew more about addiction? who knew more about monkeying with cigarettes? who knew more about causing lung cancer and copd and other diseases? was it sonny ellis or was it those guys? this decision is yours and yours alone when you get to this. as all these answers to all these questions are. these are your decisions. i'm going to make a suggestion to you that you put 20 percent on sonny ellis and you put eighty percent on reynolds. look at the documents. look at what happened here. the defendant is going to tell you to put a hundred percent of fault on mr. ellis. and if you do that, mrs. ellis loses and r.j. reynolds wins. i want you to think about this. the defendant says that mr. ellis did not die from lung cancer despite the evidence from all his treating doctors that lung cancer is what he had and what killed 3211 him. the defendant says that mr. ellis died from something that had nothing to do with smoking. and then the defendant tells you it is all sonny ellis's fault because he chose to smoke. now, if he did not die from smoking, how is it all sonny ellis's fault choosing to smoke if you take their position? how can it possibly be both? it cannot. it cannot. it is neither. so you get to question 5 on the verdict form, "what is the total amount of damages sustained by plaintiff betty jean ellis for the loss of clarence c. ellis's companionship and protection and for her pain and suffering as a result of clarence c. ellis's injury and death?" this is always the hard part because the instruction which you need to follow when you answer this question -- you know, the instruction tells you there is no standard way of measuring this. so what happens when your best friend, person you grew up with, person you had children with, person you raised a family with and spent your life with, what happens when you learn that they are dying and there is not much time left? you hang onto every day, you try to make the 3212 most of every day, and you try not to think that this is really happening and the end is really coming and you watch the love of your life waste away in front of you. sonny ellis died a relentless, painful, frightening death. you heard dr. sheedy say he was in a wheelchair when he started seeing him in january. he had spine surgery and radiation and all. what happens when your spouse dies at 56 years old? betty ellis lost everything. she is been alone for 21 years. 21 years two days ago. that house she loved that sonny bought her that day, she could not live there anymore. she is lived alone for 21 years, she has not dated, she did not want to, she is never been interested in anybody else, and you know you would have heard about it if she was. she spent 15 years trying to figure out what he was trying to say to her from his deathbed. and the fact that he died at 56, a really young age, 21 years ago, really only magnifies the enormity of that loss that she has experienced for 21 years. he was supposed to live another 22 years. 3213 the mortality tables we published to you say that. they are not binding on you, as the jury instruction says, but that is the best we have got to go on. he had a 22-year life expectancy at the time of his death. 21 years two days ago. he is supposed to still be here with her. and the decision of what you put on question 5 again is yours and yours alone. i'm not going to suggest a number to you. i've got three things to say to you about answering this question. the first one is, y'all need to follow the jury instruction. you need to do what the judge tells you to do if you are going to answer this question. follow that instruction. the second thing that you do, and i'm not suggesting a number to you, but i'm asking you, please, whatever you do, do not you award more than $10 million. that would be too much. we do not want you to do that. whatever number you are going to put on question number 5 should not be more than $10 million. the other thing, the third thing i want to tell you about answering question number 5 is if you choose to answer that question, the number that you put there needs to be respectful of betty 3214 ellis's loss. i'm not going to suggest a number to you. y'all have more life experience than me. if you get to question number 6, "under the circumstances of this case, state whether you find by clear and convincing evidence that punitive damages are warranted against r.j. reynolds tobacco company." the entire time that sonny ellis smoked, from the time he drew on his first cigarette as a boy to the last one he smoked, this defendant knew that cigarettes were highly, powerfully addictive and caused lung cancer, and they lied about it. and behind closed doors, when the rest of us were not around to hear what they were saying and see what they were writing in their little documents to one another, they bragged to each other about how smart and successful they were in this whole program, how much money they were making. without even looking at their internal documents that tell us they knew their plan worked, you can see what a difference the truth makes today. in sonny ellis's generation, seventy percent of people in his age group smoked cigarettes. today, these companies are required to tell the truth. 3215 today, one in five americans smoke. one in five. it used to be one in two back when they were lying. see, the truth, the truth is powerful, and the truth makes a difference. and reynolds's deceit made them a whole lot of money. and they spent a lot pedaling the lives that we have been showing you. remember i showed you that interrogatory answer. the money that reynolds and american tobacco and brown & williamson tobacco corporation spent just on the tobacco institute from 1958 till they went out of business in 1998 or '99 was $330 million. they do not have a problem spending money on stuff that works for them. and it does not matter to them how many people die, it does not matter how they die, as long as they make money. do you think they would have spent $330 million on that program if it was not working? these are publicly held corporations, they have to report to people. they have to report when they spend that kind of money. you think they would have done it if it was not working? 330 million. and we are talking about money not 330 million in today's dollars, we are just talking about the numbers that they spent way back then and adding 3216 them up, that is how we get to 330. the result, as you heard, was 20 million americans dead. 443,000 americans die each year from smoking-related diseases. now, we have never had anything in the history of this country quite like that. and i do not know if r.j. reynolds is going to tell you that the united states of america suddenly, in 1913, had a rash of people that did not want to live very long, and everybody decided to run over the cliff and all smoke cigarettes and kill themselves, because that is essentially what amounts to their argument to you. people all knew they were doing it to themselves and they did not care, they just did not care about living, they liked their cigarettes more than their wives and their children and husbands and everyone else. it happened because of addiction. it happened because they could not go without it. you could fill this room, and you could ask them to raise your hand if you lost someone you loved to a smoking-related disease, and most of that room would raise their hand. and you could do that in every room across the united states of 3217 america, and the same thing would happen. that is how many people they killed. the jury instruction on this is long, but it is important. i want to show you something about this. the first one is that "punitive damages are warranted if you find by clear and convincing evidence," and i tell you there had not been any evidence otherwise, it is the only evidence. "the conduct causing injury to clarence ellis was so gross and flagrant as to show a reckless disregard of human life or of the safety of persons exposed to the effects of such conduct; or the conduct showed an entire lack of care that reynolds must have been consciously indifferent to the consequences; or the conduct showed such an entire lack of care that r.j. reynolds must have wantonly or recklessly disregarded the safety and welfare of the public; or the conduct showed such reckless indifference to the rights of others as to be equivalent to an intentional violation of those rights." the reason i emphasize "or" is any one of those things will work, and they did all four. you wrap a blindfold around you and give you a dart, you could throw it at that screen and no matter 3218 which one it hit, they did it. the law recognizes that any one of those things is reprehensible. any one of them is reprehensible. you have only got to do one of the four, you do not have to do all of the four, just one subjects somebody to punitive damages, whether it is a corporation or a person like you and me. they did all four. there is only one way to answer question 7, and that is yes. mr. sales: 6. mr. gustafson: i'm sorry, question 6, i'm sorry. this is not a situation where they did not mean it or it happened by accident and they did not know that their conduct was going to cause people to die. they knew. they knew. they lied. they conspired to make more money. they did not care that people were going to die, they did not care how many. i'm not going to describe that conduct to you. you know what that is. they want you to give them a pass. those 20 million people who died were real people, those ones who died. they were real people. they had children. they had spouses. the 3219 law says you get to take that into account when you decide how to answer this question. you get to take that into account, should they be punished. sonny ellis was one of those people. there is unrebutted, undisputed evidence in this case that this conduct was exactly what you know it to be. i'm not even going to describe it. the evidence is clear and convincing that the only truly acceptable answer to that last question on this verdict form is yes. i hope i did not miss anything. i hope i did not go too long. this is my last chance to say anything to you in this trial. i'm not going to do the rebuttal argument. i want to tell you thank you. i've never seen a jury ask so many questions. i've never seen a jury so attentive. i've never seen a jury so engaged in the case. so i do not get to say anything else when i leave this podium. y'all need to do what is right. follow those instructions and do what is right. thank you. mr. sales: thank you, good afternoon, everyone. i want to say first of all in talking about the time, i am known to be, as the court has reminded me a few times, loquacious, and talk a little bit too much. and it is likely that i will use the entire hour that remains and probably could, to the distress of all, stand at this lectern and talk about sonny ellis and all of these matters until it was far too late to do so. i have a lot to cover, and i apologize, madam 3316 court reporter, because my words may come out a little bit quickly. i want to begin, if i could, please, by thanking you, like everyone else, on behalf of ms. ellis. so let us get after it. i want to start also by talking a little bit about the things where mr. persons just left off because one of the things he asked you, and we will be showing some of these, and when you look at them and see the remarks stretched across "for exchange purposes only," that is perfectly fine, we traded things before we got started, but that is what they showed you just a few moment ago. and the question that you were asked was in this slide "should rjr be punished?" and i submit to you that this defendant in this case, standing toe to toe for decades with its co-conspirators, what it wants is credit in this lawsuit about sonny ellis, that is what he told you, for things that have nothing to do with them. because cigarettes have carried warning labels, as you heard from robert heimann, the former chairman of american tobacco, only because congress made them do it. and they want credit for that and to escape punishment for that. 3317 you have been told that they have reported their ingredients. and you will recall from the testimony of dr. cummings, that is since 1985, but only because they were forced by law to do so. and it was just suggested to you that the information that is available today for cigarettes since 1985, because congress has made them post these long lists of ingredients that are not specific to cigarettes, you can get that today if you go on their website, but is it like when you open your carton of eggs where it tells you what the cholesterol is? it is not like that. and yet they want credit to suggest to you that they are just like the beer companies who even now in our more enlightened era will tell you to drink responsibly, will suggest to you to have a designated driver. where was the television ad, where was the print ad, where was the anything from this company or any of its co-conspirators for a period of four decades providing that same kind of information? because mr. persons says to you "we do not listen to the manufacturer to know anything about our product. we listen to everybody else." i submit to you that, yes, of course it is true 3318 that we care what our loved ones tell us, but sometimes when people are addicted to a highly addictive drug, the messages from others, and i'm pointing to counsel? no, i'm pointing to r.j. reynolds. the message from others interferes. so what do we know? we know also that the posting on their website that they want credit for has only been in the last several years and after mr. ellis died. they want credit for that. "reynolds has disputed -- not disputed the dangers or addictiveness of tobacco for more than a decade." we will give them credit for 1999 because that is when it happened, 15 years ago. they want credit for something that happened in this case after mr. ellis died. "punitive damages are not necessary," this is very important, "to prevent reynolds from concealing the dangers of tobacco." i've written "says who?" where is the evidence in this case, in this trial, that they are doing anything today to help contribute to those matters? they brought you, as mr. gustafson likes to say, nothing. you heard a little bit about premier and eclipse, these cigarettes that if you wander the streets of tallahassee, everywhere where cigarettes 3319 can be bought, for days, you would not be able to find one. they want credit for selling a cigarette product that supposedly is healthier, that no one can buy. but this last one is very important for another reason, because, as you have heard from the court, and you already have heard -- had these read to you, this is the law, these are the things that you are obliged to consider as the principle of law when you decide your verdict whether or not they deserve to be punished in this case. and if you go back to what i just showed you, they say do not punish us because you do not have to do anything to prevent reynolds from concealing the dangers of tobacco? well, you know what, the instruction actually says that your award, excuse me, verdict, if you award punitive damages, if you find them to be deserving by the -- by clear and convincing evidence, that that is for punishment to reynolds for what they have already done and as a deterrent not to reynolds, but to others. so the suggestion, just to get started on this, that they do not need to be assessed punitive damages because they do not need to be prevented 3320 from doing anything, that is not the law in this case, that will not be part of the instructions. more on that in a few moments. finishing also, starting, rather, where mr. persons sort of finished in this, the wind-up to the punitive damage argument was, before he started talking about them, you know, what we did was stupid. we would submit to you that there is nothing stupid about the evidence in this case. the documents that you were shown in the plaintiff's case reveal calculated, coldness, design, and every effort possible not only to hide the addictive effects of nicotine, which remained disputed in the public eye at least until 1988, long after you just heard it was too late for mr. ellis, not only for those purposes, but also meanwhile, 20 million souls perished from this product. you are told it was stupid when they wrote in their own documents that this is what we are all about, we have got to protect our turf, we have got to figure out a way to keep people from quitting and get more people to start, hook young people and keep them smoking. and you are told that that was stupid. 3321 well, in fact, the evidence in this case, we would submit to you, by clear and convincing evidence, is that that was calculated and purposeful. and i wrote some adjectives down that i thought, most respectfully, fit what you have seen in this case. outrageous, depraved, and greedy. this was not stupid, conduct which resulted in more than 400,000 people dying every year. this is a slide that was provided. you know. and one of the things about this quitting business, those quitting statistics do not explain how many people relapse. and you have heard that this is a relapsing brain disease, addiction to nicotine. so they want to count everybody in there who quits, quits for a while, stays off cigarettes, the way it is reported, goes back to smoking cigarettes, quits for a while, goes back to smoking cigarettes, quits for a while. and some of those same quitters actually are in those same 20 million people who died. and they want credit for the people even though they did nothing for a period of 50 years to help people quit smoking, they want credit for that. and, in fact, i would submit to you that that would not fill doak that many times, but even if it 3322 did, you have, by clear and convincing evidence, heard in this case, they brought you nothing, the fact that 20 million people have perished as a result of what they have done. that would fill the same stadium 243 times. now, before mr. persons started talking about those matters, he was talking to you about the issue of the fault allocations. and one of the things you have heard, may not remember it, you will hear it again or you will be able to read it certainly with the jury instructions that you have, is that the court, after your verdict, if there is a verdict for the plaintiff, will look at the percentages of fault and make adjustments in the amount of the recovery that the plaintiff makes in accordance with the law that is applicable to each claim. we are not allowed to discuss that with you right now, but that is part of your instruction. the court: sidebar. mr. persons: thank you. the court: you are not allowed to discuss it. you should not be discussing it. mr. sales: it is in the instruction, your honor. 3323 the court: let us go sidebar. (the following is at the bench.) mr. sales: that was my intent. yeah, right here, judge. the court: just a second. that does not say "adjust" anywhere. mr. persons: no. mr. sales: is that the word i used? the court: yes. you said "i will adjust." i'm going to instruct the jury not to consider that. mr. sales: and i'll correct it afterwards, enter a judgment. the court: that is what we spent an hour on last night making sure we did not convey. mr. sales: i'm going to put that right up on the board so everybody can see it, judge. the court: okay. (in open court.) mr. sales: i'm going to put the -- the court: wait, wait. mr. sales: i'm going to put the exact language up there. the court: hold on a second. mr. sales: sorry. 3324 the court: so the objection is sustained. you are instructed to disregard that last remark about what i'm going to do after the trial. i'm going to read you what the law is. "in determining the total amount of damages, you should not make any reduction because of the comparative fault of clarence c. ellis. the court will enter a judgment based on your verdict and the law applicable to each claim." period. that is it. disregard, do not consider any other comment other than that on that topic. you may proceed. mr. sales: thank you, your honor. and for the record, that instruction that the court just read is displayed in front of you now and i want to repeat that. "the court will enter a judgment based upon your verdict and the law applicable to each claim." and that relates to the issue of the comparative fault allocations that are on the verdict form. so counsel discussed with you all, and they had this sort of metered thing going up and down. and we would just indicate to you that when those matters are considered, when the comparative fault allocation is made by you in assigning percentages, 3325 that there are other matters -- mr. persons: objection, your honor. may we -- the court: let us go sidebar. (the following is at the bench.) the court: you are very, very close to getting a mistrial. mr. persons: yes. mr. sales: what is the issue, judge? mr. persons: the grounds for the objection is that those things have to be tied to a legal cause of the death of mr. ellis. and what i'm hearing is an argument on punitive damages. it is as though you are assuming that they have checked yes on entitlement, and you are going into a punitive damages counterpart. the court: here is what i took, that we were on the verge of talking about adjusting anything. we are not going to talk about adjusting damages. so i'm going to -- i'm going to give you-all latitude in arguing. i'm going to overrule mr. persons' at this time on that point. just be very, very careful about any indication that anything is going to be adjusted. we do not know what i'm going to do. 3326 mr. sales: may i just make a brief record? i was referring to counsel's slide 104, which is the comparative fault allegations, i was not discussing any adjustment of a judgment. the court: i know, but i was concerned that is where we were headed. mr. sales: no, your honor. the court: okay. mr. sales: your honor, may i put this back up and continue this comparative fault. the court: yes, you may. mr. sales: thank you. (in open court.) the court: all right, the objection is overruled. you may proceed under the guidelines that i indicated. mr. sales: yes, your honor. thank you. members of the jury, when you go to consider the issue of comparative fault, my suggestion to you is that there are more things to consider than that were on the slide that was shown to you by counsel. among the things to consider are the things that you heard about in this case, the way in which the design of cigarettes affects smoking behavior, 3327 the way in which cigarettes are engineered, and importantly, from the perspective of the plaintiff, the motivations behind the defendant's conduct and that of their co-conspirators with respect to addicting smokers and causing their death. you have been told that if you find for the plaintiff on the issue of class membership, that you will be bound by the engle findings. i think everyone recalls that. one of those findings, if you recall from the instructions, are that, let me make sure i get it right, "if you find for the plaintiff on the issue of class membership that cigarettes produced by r.j. reynolds were defective and unreasonably dangerous." and counsel indicated that there was nothing r.j. reynolds could have done that would have prevented mr. ellis's death. that is what was argued to you. well, we would submit to you that there are choices in this case on the part of the plaintiff, which has been argued extensively by mr. persons, but there were also choices on the part of the manufacturer. you have heard evidence in this case that going back very early in the 20th century that all of the major manufacturers of tobacco products 3328 had the ability to remove nicotine. and you have also heard evidence that they did not do it because it would have impaired their ability to sell tobacco products. but clearly the evidence in this case is that it was within the power of r.j. reynolds tobacco company to make cigarettes that are not defective and unreasonably dangerous. and, in fact, mr. persons concluded his argument by suggesting to you that r.j. reynolds has done just that with its products premier and eclipse. the argument of the defense counsel as i was listening to it occurred to me to sort of be divided into four parts. there was a part of it that talked about mr. ellis's addiction, but before that, the first part, counsel indicated that everybody knew that cigarettes were addictive all this time, despite what the evidence has shown with respect to what they and their co-conspirators concealed from the public. so there were two parts to this. there was a part that suggested that mr. ellis knew all along, but even if he knew, he was not addicted. and there was a part of it that suggested, argued directly, in fact, that mr. ellis did not have lung cancer, 3329 primary lung cancer, bronchogenic cancer, whatever we are going to call it because we know that those things are all the same as dr. okun explained to us yesterday. so there were two parts to that as well. one, there is no proof that cancer was caused in this case, but even if there was, it was all mr. ellis's fault because he knew that that could happen all along. i'm going to talk in a few minutes about how it was that the defendants were able to do what they did not only in relation to the public and all those people who suffered as a result of what the defendant and its co-conspirators did, but i want to suggest to you for a moment that we go right back to the beginning of counsel's argument and talk about what he said the case was about, which was mr. ellis and lucky strike cigarettes. can you switch over? the picture with the lucky strike and mr. ellis. sorry. there may be some others in evidence, i'm not quite sure about that, that actually show mr. ellis with his lucky strike cigarettes, but this one clearly does. and you will recall that there was 3330 some testimony in the case, i think it was from dr. jaffe, about this period of time and assessment of even then whether mr. ellis was addicted to nicotine. so here is a picture of mr. ellis at the end of his life suffering from lung cancer. that is the plaintiff's position, certainly. and you can take that down. so from the notes that i took, in thinking about that photograph, this is what i wrote with respect to the defense argument in the case if one were, during mr. ellis's life, trying to explain the defense position, this is what might be explained to mr. ellis. if you did have cancer in your lung, r.j. reynolds is not going to say that it started there, so it was not lung cancer. if it was lung cancer, it was caused by smoking. but if it was caused by smoking, it was not because you, mr. ellis, were addicted to nicotine. but if you were addicted to nicotine, it is still all your fault because you chose to smoke, you failed to quit using our products, exactly the way we wanted you to, lighting them, smoking them, and inhaling the smoke. and there was very little said about the 3331 things that r.j. reynolds actually did in this case in closing by the defense, but the comments might continue that it is true that we lied, but you should have known better, and you should have not believed anything that was put out by us or any of the tobacco companies, tobacco institute. but even if you did believe those things, even if you were putting them on the refrigerator because you were really sincerely, which was consistent with your character, trying to demonstrate your belief to your friends and family who were trying to help you, you should have tried harder to quit. but even if you did try and quit, and the evidence in this case is that there were at least 10 to 15 quit attempts, and we believe that, counsel just said, he believes, unlike dr. jaffe, that those quit attempts actually took place, that mr. ellis -- it would not have mattered because you smoked, smoked, smoked our cigarettes until you were dead. and i would submit to you that that is actually what the defense case is here. and one of the ways it is demonstrated in a trial with the development of all the technology, it is of great benefit, one 3332 of the things the court instructed you on before we started with closing arguments, was a reminder that what the lawyers say is not evidence. so when the lawyers, and they do it together, we all do it, get together with the witnesses, put together these slides, it is the lawyers' perspective as to what the case has been all about. and i mention that to you because we had a witness in the case who -- will you switch back, please? -- who said something, it was dr. jaffe, and you may remember that he was talking about in redirect from mr. kreiner, as we went over with him quite a bit about some of the things that were different from the long summaries of the testimony that he gave. he talked about the part that he wanted to talk about, and he did so extensively. and then we showed some of the things that did not fit with what he was saying. and when mr. kreiner asked him some questions about that on redirect, what he told you, members of the jury, is that "my job is to resolve the discrepancies, and that is what i did." and i would submit to you, members of the jury, that the instructions that you are going to 3333 get are actually a little bit different. as his honor has told you, i've got this underlined, that was part of what you heard already "i am now," the court speaking, "going to tell you about the rules of law that you must use in reaching your verdict." one of them is what the lawyers say is not evidence. but also, there was not any instruction in there to suggest to you that the experts tell you the way that it is. in fact, contrary to what dr. jaffe says, some of those things are your decision. "you decide the issues that are submitted for your determination." and then the court told you what the evidence in the case is. and then the court told you one of the ways in which you do that. you measure people's believability. counsel mentioned some of those things. the demeanor. the frankness. the intelligence. interests they may have in the outcome. the means and opportunity the witness had to know the facts about which the witness testified. the ability of the witness to remember. and the reasonableness of what they have to say in light of your own -- i think it says common sense and experience. 3334 and then below that, it says for experts, you can accept or reject that. and that is up to you. so when you are in a case where you have two types of testimony, one type of testimony is sworn testimony from folks who were there, and one type of testimony is testimony from people who are summarizing all of that, counsel just mentioned that, we would suggest to you that if it is a question about evaluating all of the evidence, the evidence that is submitted for your consideration, that you should rely on your recollection best of what the witnesses said and not what witnesses who came into court said that they said. one more point about that. and your honor, respectfully, that is also an instruction that was given earlier in the case, because some of the testimony that you heard was in the form of depositions. and as the court indicated at that time, "the deposition testimony is sworn testimony of a witness that is given before trial, and that is going to be read to you. and you should consider and weigh this testimony -- deposition testimony as you would any other evidence in the case. it is as if that person 3335 is actually here, but you are going to hear the sworn testimony read to you by the parties." and so as you have heard, in advance of trial, one of the things that we all do is get together and lawyers, sometimes they are subpoenaed, sometimes they show up, and sworn statements, depositions, you have seen these transcripts, the lawyers use to help the witnesses or sometimes challenge them, that is the record in the case. and when those depositions have been read to you, they are to be considered by you as though the witnesses had come live. now, a couple more things about dr. jaffe, because as you remember, we were sort of, i guess, criticized or mocked for going through all the things that people who knew mr. ellis, that they swore to before trial, had said before trial and revealing those instances in which they did not fit with what dr. jaffe had to say. and his answer to that was, as you just heard on redirect, "i resolved the discrepancies." no, sir. members of the jury, that is up to you. so what do you do when you get some of these things that do not fit in the case? because i want to stay, if i can, and pick just a little bit more 3336 on dr. jaffe. mr. persons told you about how he was the -- you know, the only person with substance abuse training, and he is the witness that you ought to rely upon most when you get to that very first and essential question in the case about addiction, was mr. ellis addicted, we are going to talk a little bit more about that. and he kind of cast aspersions on the fagerstrom test, and you have just heard about it again in closing argument by counsel for r.j. reynolds. well, what do we know about that? it was not discussed during the trial, but mr. gustafson mentioned this to you. i do not remember the exhibit number, it is ans-00 -- mr. gustafson: 1324-a. mr. sales: -- 1324. and this is in evidence. that is one of those documents that the court instructed you when you go back to deliberate you are going to get a chance to look at. mr. gustafson mentioned it briefly, but since counsel mentioned the fagerstrom test, i would like to talk about it a little bit more. and what it is, is a document that describes a 3337 program to figure out if another product of r.j. reynolds, which is called snus, that is an oral tobacco, a pouch you put under your tongue, is helpful in clinical trials and can they use it possibly as a product as a means to move people from oral tobacco -- excuse me, from smoking to oral tobaccos. and so one of the things that they did is they had 600 people in this study. and the issue in the case for them was whether or not there was nicotine dependence. and you know from dr. jaffe and all the other witnesses -- well, for everybody prior to nine months ago, dependence and addiction meant the same thing. for dr. jaffe and i guess some psychologists now, they are two different things. but anyway, for the purposes of this study, and you had to be male or female, 21 to 65, and the protocol in the study, it was not to use the dsm-iv, which would have existed five years ago, still exists, it was to use the ftnd cigarette. and if you look further in the document, you figure out what that means, because they tell you. in order to assess dependence, they measure it for their own study internally, not with one of these, that one or this one, they use it, the same 3338 one, as one of the ones this guy talked about. oh, and by the way, and just going back to what we were talking about a few minutes ago, we are talking about, you know, use your own memory of what the testimony is and that the slides are not actually the evidence? you see how it looks like this comes from this transcript? the question's in there, "now he never -- your husband, mr. brown, just so i'm clear, mr. brown never said anything to you about any specific cigarette." this is from -- and i'm not fussing with counsel over it, but this particular transcript that you were shown obviously has nothing to do with the testimony that was described to you. and that is one of those instances where you-all need to rely on your recollection about whether or not the witnesses have said what is represented in the closing arguments of the lawyers. but anyway, getting back to this thing, what do we know? we talk about the fagerstrom score and the impacts of it. and what they did was they used the same questions that you saw dr. cummings go over and mr. gustafson mentioned and mr. persons mentioned. 3339 and that is the test that r.j. reynolds, they do not invite dr. jaffe, they do not invite psychologists or psychiatrists who are using these things, they do what people, real scientists do in the real world when they want to find out if tobacco products are addictive and how people get off of them, that is what they use. so that is one of those instances in which, yeah, it is true that there is a discrepancy in the evidence, and you-all have to make a decision. does it matter what r.j. reynolds says and does outside the context of the courtroom? and we submit that it does. we submit that it is a verification of the reliability of this. and these measures are not the touchy, feely things that dr. jaffe talked about. these are facts. and you know what, because mr. ellis is not with us, we cannot even ask him about two of these questions. these are objective facts, and what did they bring you, as mr. gustafson would say? they brought you nothing to challenge any of these things. it does not involve those things that they say are in dispute. and so what the folks participating in r.j. 3340 reynolds' studies would hear when they are being assessed to see if they are a good candidate to go to another moneymaking product for r.j. reynolds, they would say if they had an 8 like sonny ellis, "your level of dependence is high. you are not in control of your smoking, it is in control of you. when you make the decision to quit, you may want to talk with your doctor about nicotine replacement therapy or other medications." and that is one of those discrepancies in the evidence, that is one of those disputed issues of fact which we suggest that you should resolve in favor of the plaintiff, because that is a very reliable test that you-all do not need help with to do that. talk a little bit about these, though. and certainly, if i contributed to making this confusing, i apologize to everyone, but i think just to review this very briefly, this dsm-iv, they used to use that, and it was a measure for nicotine dependence, and it was a measure of nicotine dependence that psychologists and psychiatrists, according to dr. jaffe, used and he used in lawsuits until nine months ago. it is a synonym for addiction. 3341 this (indicating) is a measure of what he calls, the book calls tobacco use disorder. it is not a measure of addiction or dependence. and do you recall his testimony, which was "i know it says you need two, but you really need six to work up to addiction, because without that, it is not severe." and one of the explanations for that was, you know, addiction changes. science changes. and i want to be up to date and keep up with things. and certainly that is true. but what you know from mr. gustafson's presentation is that the thing, contrary to what dr. jaffe tells us that is changed the most is what we know about what they do, and that is why the content of public health messages today, like that 2010 booklet that tells you that they used design features, they may be using those to hijack the brains and bodies of smokers, that is what is changed. human bodies have not changed. brains have not changed. and in the last nine months, i would submit to you that there is not anything different about whether or not someone is or is not addicted to nicotine. and certainly just five years ago, reynolds thinks fagerstrom is the way to go. 3342 but i do want to spend just a minute talking to you about that, because one of the interesting things about this is that, you know, if you went with the old book, and this is interesting, you only needed three to be addicted or dependent. now, they have this little thing they do with the "as manifested by." remember what dr. jaffe told you, you know, we can all read some of these things. and i would submit to you that some of these things do not require a phd in psychology. mr. persons: your honor, may we approach? the court: okay. (the following is at the bench.) mr. guest: your honor, the objection is dsm-iv is not in evidence and he is showing a document that is not in evidence. the court: i actually thought about that, but i believe that page was displayed to the jury, i recall -- mr. persons: i could not recall. the court: i recall seeing it. so i'm going to overrule. it is not in evidence, but i do recall seeing that page displayed -- mr. sales: right. the court: -- to the jury when 3343 cross-examining dr. jaffe. mr. sales: right. i used it. mr. gustafson: i have a question. do we get charged for the sidebars on our time? the court: i charged him on his time, yeah. mr. gustafson: i was not sure what the court was doing, that is all i was asking. he has got about 20 minutes left, 30 minutes. the court: 72 minutes and it started i think at 3:31 so that is 60 minutes so you have 12 past that. mr. sales: 20, 25, like that? the court: yeah. now, again, it is up to y'all whether you want to use it. mr. sales: i need to keep zipping. i'm ready to go. the court: this is y'all. i'm not going to require you to use it, but if you want to use it, you have got it. okay? (in open court.) mr. sales: all right. and this would have been equivalent with the diagnosis of addiction. and this language "as manifested by." now, they tell you that you do not even get to these criteria unless someone already is getting 3344 fired or breaking up with their wife or not being able to go to every event or something like that. but actually, those are the things that define whether or not there is a clinically-significant impairment. i would submit to you that as manifested by three or more of the following occurring within a 12-month period is if any -- three or more of those are there, that means you are dependent. that means you are addicted. and you could go over those, because 1(b) he gave the plaintiff, tolerance, and there is a suggestion, mr. ellis never had withdrawal. i would submit to you you know that that is not so because when he got up in the morning, he chain smoked. that was undisputed evidence. he needed to fill his brain, as mr. gustafson explained. often taken in larger amounts or over a longer period of time than was intended. dr. jaffe's thing on that is he never reported it so we do not know. i submit to use your common sense on that. does anybody who does this to themselves, because they are addicted and because they believe the lies of this defendant and its co-conspirators start out smoking two to three packs a day? nobody 3345 does. a great deal of time chain smoking. he says that ain't chain smoking because he did not do it all day. mr. gustafson has disputed and explained that. and then 6, it is important things like social, occupational, rec, that are given up or reduced. so you know from the portion of tammy ellis's deposition that was read to dr. jaffe yesterday, confronted him with it that it was not a one-time thing, it was every time they went out he had those problems. so those are just the ones that are self-evident in this record, one, two, three, four, five. even if you use this psychologist's text or book, that is what you get. but you know what, because they say that this is a mental disorder and this is another thing that i asked dr. jaffe about nicotine dependence used to be addiction -- mr. persons: objection, your honor. mr. sales: that was displayed to the jury, your honor. the court: was this page displayed -- mr. sales: this very page was and questions were asked of dr. jaffe on it. 3346 the court: hold on. is that the basis of the objection? mr. persons: yes, your honor. the court: i'm going to take counsel at his word that it was displayed to the jury, and it will be up to the jury to make a determination as to whether they recall actually seeing this. mr. persons: all right, sir. the court: okay. mr. sales: because they say that our case is subjective. well, certain things in the dsm, even if you get past the touchy, feely part of it, they are not subjective, they are objective just like -- remember that stuff about facts and opinions? facts, physical exams, and doctors did that in this case. nobody is saying that he did not have tobacco odor. he and his family complained about it. there is evidence of cough. they say it is not enough. you rely on your memory about that. evidence of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. well, he had it. it appears that he did not know that he had it, but he had it. and it is documented, no dispute about it. and it was caused by smoking. tobacco stains on finger, that is rare, 3347 but he had that too. so we submit to you no matter what measure that you use, plaintiff has proved addiction. let us talk a little bit about lung cancer. because their position in this case is it is not proven, and that this entire medical community, i do not know how many physicians it is, but it is lots of them, that every single one of them who saw this guy, mr. ellis, got it wrong, that their language is imprecise -- mr. persons: objection, your honor, not supported by the evidence. mr. sales: that is what dr. jaffe said and dr. okun said, they were wrong. the court: dr. okun said that dr. bilek was correct. mr. sales: oh. the court: so i think that is not totally accurate. mr. sales: okay. we are going to clear that up right now. it is true dr. okun said dr. bilek was wrong some of the time and right some of the time. more on that in a moment. but i would like to urge you, and, you know, 3348 i'm famous for being a poor artist, and i apologize to ms. ellis for suggesting that that is a representation of her husband. let us think about this a little bit. because what we know in this case and you are urged in the jury instructions to use your common sense about whether or not this man had lung cancer. and even dr. okun admits that a primary lesion found in the lung is atypical for metastasis, that means coming from somewhere else, that would be unusual, all right? and he also told us that there was cancer in the head, skull, brain, orbit, also the scalp, he also told us that it was in the thoracic spine in many places, it was in the shoulder, and it was in the lung. he told us that it cannot go from the head to the lung. it cannot go from the t spine to the lung. it cannot go from the shoulder to the lung, but it can go from the lung to the shoulder, the lung to the t spine and from the lung to the -- the court: you are talking so fast i'm not sure the court reporter is getting this down. i'm trying to follow the real time. are you doing okay? the court reporter: yes, sir. 3349 the court: okay. mr. sales: and we heard from dr. mccoy, he said i did everything. i did the blood work, i ordered the scans, this man's entire body, not including his arms and legs, i guess, the skin. and we know all those places that dr. okun said the cancer could have come from, the genitals, the bladder, the other places in the abdomen, the stomach, the colon, all of those were scanned. and so their answer to that is, well, you know, cancer can be so small when it starts that you might have missed it. and by the way, and this is a trick, i would submit to you, we did not have the technology that we now have to have provided us with the information that we need to make this diagnosis. so we would submit to you that there is no question about it. and do you remember that dr. bilek was asked, you know, what is the last record that dr. -- excuse me, dr. okun was asked what is the last record that has information from dr. bilek? and when you go back and look at the medical records, see if you cannot identify the signatures, see if you cannot identify the handwriting. 3350 and what does he call it as late as february of 1993, ca lung. and you know from the examination that we did of dr. okun what that means. more evidence. dr. bilek ordered on january 29th, 1993, a test. he ordered a test that was a ct scan of the brain and the orbits. and it was reviewed by the radiologist, dr. ostrov. so dr. ostrov gets an order from dr. bilek to clear all this up about the stuff that was in the middle when he was putting a question mark by things, because the last two records that we have from this man, what do they tell us? he orders the test from dr. ostrov who reviews it and tells us "history of cancer of the lung with a known mass in the region of the left orbit." and if this were not enough, dr. bilek, why did he say that? because earlier, he knew this, he knew that it was a primary -- excuse me, biopsy-proven bronchogenic carcinoma of the left lung. the greater weight of the evidence on that matter should be clear. i want to talk a little bit about whether or not these matters made a difference. and when i discuss those things with you, i want you to 3351 remember something, which is that these matters were not matters of stupidity for the defense, which was the suggestion and final argument by mr. persons. these were not the matters of stupidity. these were matters of design, not only the product and hijacking the brains and bodies of smokers, but also in the way in which they communicated with the public. one of the things that is in evidence, because it reflects something from the time, what people back then believed, what smokers believed and nonsmokers believed, we reviewed it extensively, is chapter 3 of the 1981 ftc report, there is chapter 2 and there is chapter 3, this is from chapter 2, which relates to advertising. chapter 3 relates to public attitudes and knowledge and information about smoking and the health risks of smoking. and what it tells you is that a majority of smokers did not know that cigarettes were addictive. more on that in a moment. and what it also tells you about advertising is that they were outspending the public health community by i guess about more than 300 to 1, or 3352 at least the government, in trying to get out some of these messages that you have seen. well, how did they do it? you know, for every one of those articles, and they are all in evidence, you can take a look at them from the moultrie observer, there are highlighted quotes here, but mr. gustafson showed some of them to you previously when he put dr. burns on, it was over and over and over again and it was all with an eye toward this. remember who this was from? this was from george weissman to the head of -- mr. cullman. he is that same guy who went on meet the press or one of those sunday shows, i think it was meet the press, and said it is not been proven, and by the way, people like smaller babies, suggesting that even the most vulnerable of the population are not harmed by cigarette smoke, do not worry about it, everybody? why were they doing those things? they were doing it because smokers needed to believe. it is never been the position of the plaintiff in this case that people did not know that cigarettes could cause disease. if you remember back to the forwarding memo 3353 back in 1953, the industry was not trying to persuade people that cigarettes did not cause disease, they were just trying to give them enough doubt to pick up the next cigarette. and, in fact, they told you things like, through their own words, that "what is truth to one is false to another." they told you, and this is in evidence, that "doubt was their real product." they told you, and these are all in evidence, that their position was that they could be subject to a finding that they were making false statements. you saw documents relating to the lawyers. you heard about how the lawyers controlled the messages. you heard about how the lawyers were responsible for the 6,000 articles. they brought you one. and if you go to the end of it, 1963, it confirms the plaintiff's case that smokers are true addicts. out of 6,000 pieces of science, one apparently escaped the review and the attention of the lawyers sufficient that it could be brought to you in this case to suggest that they were never really lying about it. and, you know, we showed you documents that reflected that they predicted in monetary terms how much money they would have to spend to counter the 3354 public health messages about the risks of smoking. and how were they doing, how did they do it? you know, in this day and time it seems almost quaint and difficult to believe that someone could pull this off. and yet here we have a case, and we know, because if counsel's position and r.j. reynolds' position about this case is true, all of these people who continued to smoke were just smoke, smoke, smoking themselves to death. so in this day and age, like counsel himself said, with the internet and everything else, it seems a little bit difficult to believe, okay? they put out all this scientific work. this was the real product of ctr and all of those projects. they reported that there was progress, that the statistics did not prove it, that papers challenged lung cancer, that your constitution was the issue, that the mobile home -- risk among mobile people and white collar workers was higher. they had books that they published. they did animal studies. they talk -- they told people it was viruses. they told people it was whether or not you were extroverted or introverted. they told people it had to do with whether you were married, if that is not ironic in 3355 this case. as we told you in opening statement these are all in evidence. they told people it had something to do with whether people were bald or not. and this one. you know, it may seem incredible to believe, but in 19 -- in the 1960s, they were telling people that it was not only a issue of personality but these things always were coming from britain, you can look in there, some foreign country, you know what, "carcinogens do not cause lung cancer." now, it may seem, you know, somewhat preposterous to suggest to you that these things matter. that here we have an undisputed record that sonny ellis was posting things on his refrigerator into the 1990s and the parties in this case to try to pull together these things and say, well, he must have seen this, he must have seen that, but what do we know? and counsel himself just reminded you this was a florida newspaperman. and remember something he said about the fold of the paper? well, i guess it is true that this is below the fold, but front page news in 1979, on the cover of a florida paper, it is true it was in gainesville, please do not hold 3356 that against the plaintiff, horace kornegay, former congressman, he is front page news saying the surgeon general is all wet. those kinds of stories, these are in evidence, you can take a look at them, continued well into the 1970s, the 1980s. and by the way, it was not just company say-so. mr. ellis was not the only person, this is in evidence as well, who was reading about, thinking about these things, and believing them. this is from the orlando sentinel, in 1985. you will be able to see that when you have it. it is an editorial on the op ed page. and this writer tells his readers, among other things, "the claim that cigarette smoking causes lung cancer is a good example. it may or may not, but no scientific study has yet established a causal relationship. the only thing researchers have done is establish a correlation, association, based on epidemiological studies, which are not scientific experiments, but merely sociological studies." so when you get to that, and when you are told in a case where you would have to be a fool, sonny ellis would have had to have been a fool to believe an industry that could outspend the government 365 3357 to 1 in trying to get its message and its word out through the most devious of means, because that is the defense in this case. and, you know, we have not talked much about it in rebuttal but i want to spend a little bit talking about addiction, because what you will see when you look at the instructions in the case, when you get a chance to look at them again, the verdict form too, there are two parts to this case. one part is about the risks, the health risks of smoking, and the other part is the part about the addictiveness of nicotine. and it was not just that the industry was trying to create a controversy about whether or not cigarettes caused disease just like this editorial writer said even into the 1980s when according to counsel it was already too late for mr. ellis, they absolutely did not want people to believe that this was an addictive drug. and the undisputed evidence in this case in that 1981 ftc study is that the majority of americans did not think it was. can you put up the horn slide, please? your honor, are you going to cut me off right at 4:30? 3358 the court: well, hold on a second. at 4:31 you will have 12 minutes left. mr. sales: oh, sorry. the court: so you have about 15 minutes, approximately. mr. sales: you may remember -- sorry, judge. the court: that is all right. mr. sales: you may remember that when dr. burns was here and after counsel talked about dr. daniel horn, he said, you know, those matters really need to be put in context. he said when we are talking about shouting from the rooftops, the important part of the message was, you know, we are trying to inform people, but something's missing. do you have that slide about the cigarette consumption? go back just a moment. so in 1978, when, according to counsel, it was already too late for mr. ellis, -- mr. persons: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. that is not actually what he said. mr. sales: according to counsel, dr. burns's opinion suggests that by 1978, it was already too late for mr. ellis -- mr. persons: same objection. 3359 the court: sustained. that is not what he said. the argument was if he had stopped smoking by 1978, he would not -- he would have had a good chance to survive. mr. sales: well, let us just take a look -- thank you, your honor, i'm sorry. thank you for the correction. in 1978, that is still relatively speaking at the peak level of consumption in the country, and it is consistent with, a hundred percent consistent with that chapter 3 of the 1981 ftc report, and it is only really after that point in time when there is a steep decline in the rate of smoking in this country. and what is the reason for that? go back, if you would, please, to dr. horn. "it is crucial for a person to know why he smokes if he is to quit. if you do not have any understanding of why you do it, the problem's more serious." in this case, in that declining consumption of cigarettes is proof of that very fact. because this was in 1965. and as you heard, dr. horn was a leading public health official. it was not until 23 years later when dr. koop, who was the surgeon general then, first issued the report that is in 3360 evidence indicating that nicotine is an addictive drug. and that, we suggest to you, is an important part of understanding not only the decline in consumption rapidly after that point in time, because what do we know from the record in this case that happened? you have heard in the evidence in this case that it was at that point in time and thereafter that people, doctors, scientists, researchers, began to address the issue of smoking as one of addiction. and that meant the development of therapies that had not existed during the overwhelming majority of sonny ellis's lifetime. but importantly, and it could not have been said any better by the same fellow that you have seen in slide after slide during this trial by dr. horn. he was not saying why people are smoking. he was saying it is important to understand why they do. and in that respect, we would ask that when you go back into the jury room, you take the opportunity to review document after document after document or at least on behalf of mrs. ellis some of them. dr. jaffe told you that smoking -- the 3361 nicotine in the smoke is not a big deal. that is not right. it is the only thing that matters. you have in evidence not only the 1988 surgeon general's report, but this was mentioned yesterday, but you have portions of the 2010 surgeon general's report as well. and what they teach us is that nicotine is the reason that people smoke. not a plaintiff's lawyer, not a plaintiff's expert, not a defense lawyer, not a defense expert. a neutral scientist studying the consensus of all the scientific evidence in the community. and what they tell us, as you recall, i think it was raised even yesterday in dr. jaffe's cross-examination, is that nicotine is the reason that people smoke. but there is more to it than that. because when you get to the question of cause, the but-for issue in this case, and i would ask you to consider the question, the same question that mr. persons asked you when he was asking you to compare mr. ellis to all of those folks who quit, some of whom quit over and over again, as i've suggested to you, but i would ask you to compare mr. ellis to some of those folks who did not, some of those folks who continued to smoke in those decades prior to 1988, and with the other curve that you saw from 3362 lung cancer, how many of them passed away. and why do we ask you to do it that way? because, members of the jury, just as the industry acknowledged and mr. gustafson touched on some of that, i'm not going to repeat these points, they believed what they were doing worked. is there any party, is there anybody, is there a major corporation that spends untold millions of dollars outspending the united states government in the way that they did, even with the urgency of the lung cancer epidemic, is there any party that spends that kind of money for no reason at all, and the executives for american tobacco, predecessor to r.j. reynolds, r.j. reynolds, they told you the answer to that, and the answer is no. so when you get to the issue of causation on the fraud claims, the fraud by concealment and the conspiracy to conceal, i urge you to consider these questions. did not sonny ellis have the right to know that whether it was 1972 to '78 and now and then, but did not he have the right to know? and there are american tobacco documents in evidence, not all of them were gone over with you. what they were doing with what they called compound w? it is in evidence. did not he have the 3363 right to know about the removal of the nicotine? there was not any label on these products explaining these things. and how they put it back in? did not he have the right to know that reconstituted tobacco actually makes cigarettes more addictive? did not he have the right to know that cigarettes with ammonia compounds changes the way that the nicotine enters your brain? and ask yourself if, during the 1960s and '70s and '80s, when the defendants' co-conspirator was comparing mr. ellis and all of his fellow smokers to lab rats motivated to push a lever for another reward of nicotine, if he had known that is the way that he was being treated as a customer of this company, ask yourself whether or not it would have made a difference to him. you have the information, because they have taken extraordinary measures to tell you how smart sonny ellis was and what he did when he needed to do something when he was armed with the right information. i want to say one thing about motivation and then i want to say one thing about money. this case does not paint a picture of a man who stubbornly refused to quit smoking. that is 3364 their case. this case paints a picture of a man who believed, at least to some extent, and just enough to grab the next cigarette, that these things maybe just were not causing him the harm that he was hearing about. and there is no evidence in this case that he ever knew, contrary to what counsel says, this was not reported at the time of king james, what they do to their cigarettes. there is no evidence that he knew those things. and we ask you to consider whether he or any person armed with the information that we have today, when you look at the 2010 surgeon general's booklet for consumers and you see what is reported now, cigarettes are designed for addiction. and what is the prevalence of smoking in this country today? twenty percent. and they want to tell you in every instance, whether it is the lung cancer, whether it is the addiction, whether it is the lung cancer causation on every one of these things, sonny ellis is an outlier. he is an aberration. he is in that tiny minority of folks who do not get addicted. he is in that tiny minority. 3365 i think dr. okun said it was 3 percent of people whose cancer is a mystery. he is in that 3 percent. he is in that tiny minority of people. look at what happened in the population when the defendants' co-conspirators lies unraveled over time. and just lastly a couple things about money and about punitive damages. mr. gustafson did not tell you to award a particular amount of money. what he told you instead was to do what you think is right, but he asked you to place a ceiling on what you might consider as a fair and just award based on the instructions and the law that his honor has given you, and that is our request. our request is that you do that and that you by your verdict speak not only to the loss that mrs. ellis has experienced in these 20-plus years on her own, and the nature of her loss in what she had to observe as her husband literally, the way they would argue it to you, smoke, smoke, smoked that cigarette. and finally, on comparative fault and punitive damages, this case is not a case that suggests zero responsibility for this defendant. the measure 3366 that mr. gustafson suggested to you, eighty percent fault on this defendant, in light of their superior knowledge, because dr. jaffe said, you know, mr. ellis knew as much as anybody else. and you know that to be false. you know that they knew so much more about their products and what they were doing to sonny ellis than he ever could, unless he had lived to see all of the things that you have seen in this courtroom. finally, punitive damages. have we proven by the clear and convincing evidence, because it is a different standard, that these -- this defendant deserves to be punished for the things that they did, not stupid things, but outrageous things. and your decision in that regard should speak in accordance with the court's instructions, not to deter reynolds from doing something which is now out in the light. members of the jury, no, that would be an unjust verdict. to punish them for what they did and to deter, as the law says, others from ever doing something like that again. i think, your honor, i hit it about on the head, did i? the court: yeah, you have got four -- well, you have actually got three and a half minutes if you 3367 want to use them. mr. sales: it would be the first time that a rebuttal argument has concluded with time left over, hopefully i will not be criticized by my colleagues for that, but thank you very much everyone. and on behalf of ms. ellis and mr. norton, miss stark, mr. scott, mr. norton, last but not least certainly, mr. telofski, thank you very much. mr. norton: you forgot mr. gustafson. mr. sales: oh, sorry. mr. norton: but you gave me twice. mr. sales: oh.