11 mr. persons: counsel, mrs. ellis, ladies and gentlemen, good afternoon. jurors: good afternoon. mr. persons: this case is about clarence ellis and unfiltered lucky strikes. when i came before you for opening statement, that is what i said, and that is still true, and that is what i plan to spend my time before you talking about. before i get into the meat of my argument, i would be remiss if i did not say thank you for the time that you have devoted to this case, taking time out of your lives for the past two weeks and one day, and on behalf of i think everyone associated with this process, i simply want to say thank you for that. 3230 now, on to the case at hand. and -- put up a board. i think that the information that you need in order to answer the questions on the verdict form are contained in this list. and the evidence in this case has shown that mr. ellis did not start smoking or continue smoking because of anything that the tobacco companies said or did. for one thing, he grew up on a tobacco -- a farm that raised tobacco and raised it commercially. he grew up around it. his father smoked roll-your-own cigarettes. he began smoking when he was 18. we will get into that in a minute. that is going to be what the overwhelming evidence demonstrates. and there was not anything in advertising that caused him to start smoking or to continue to smoke. he was warned about the dangers of smoking throughout his life, ever since he was a small child, because his father urged him not to smoke. and we will talk about that. despite knowing that smoking was dangerous, he continued to smoke. there is no dispute about that. mr. ellis did not have primary lung cancer. you heard dr. okun testify about how the workup was such that you could not conclude that it was, in 3231 fact, a cancer that started in his lung, and that is what a primary lung cancer means, that it started there. mr. ellis had the ability to quit smoking and, thereby, to prevent his death. lots of evidence about that, including what dr. jaffe shared with you, but also some other evidence that came from mrs. ellis. now, you heard a lot about the engle findings. the court: is everybody able to see the screen? okay. mr. persons: and if you cannot -- thank you, judge. the court: okay. mr. persons: but it was not necessary to reprove the engle findings, because as i mentioned before in opening, engle findings have already been proven, they were considered by another jury. they do not come into play in this case until there is a determination that mr. ellis is a member of the engle class. that has to be done. that is the first thing that has to be done before the engle findings come into play at all. now, let me talk about some of the things that this case is not about but you heard some things 3232 about. you heard about filters, when dr. cummings was testifying he talked about filtered cigarettes. well, mr. ellis primarily smoked unfiltered lucky strike cigarettes. if he bummed a filtered cigarette, he would tear the filter off. he smoked less than two cartons of any other cigarette, including winston. it was a filtered cigarette. so it was all unfiltered lucky strike that he smoked. so evidence on filters has nothing to do with the case. addiction design. it is been known that cigarettes are inhalable since the 1800s when they were invented in turkey back in the 1860s. and from there they went to england and then to the united states. reynolds did not make its first commercial cigarette until 1913. cigarettes are by definition inhalable. there is no such thing as a cigarette that is not inhalable, as opposed to other forms of tobacco. chewing tobacco or smoking cigars. most cigar smokers do not inhale because it is too harsh. cigarettes with or without additives are equally dangerous. we heard that concession from dr. cummings when he was on the stand. whether 3233 they have got additives or they do not have additives, they are equally dangerous because there is no such thing as a safe cigarette. and while we are talking about additives, lucky strike between 1974 and 19 -- and for the rest of the time that mr. ellis smoked lucky strike, they did not have ammonia. and you can look at that list of ingredients that is in the interrogatory answer that will be in evidence and you will not find for lucky strike anything about levulinic acid. it simply is not there. so those are red herrings. they have nothing to do with mr. ellis or with unfiltered lucky strikes. roll-your-own cigarettes are more dangerous and addictive than commercial cigarettes. it took some doing to get that from dr. cummings and to confront him with several transcripts from prior testimony but he conceded that, that roll-your-own cigarettes are more dangerous and more addictive than commercial cigarettes. no surgeon general in the history of the united states has said that a no-nicotine cigarette is somehow safer than a cigarette containing nicotine. it is just never been said. surgeon 3234 general said a lot of things, but he is never said that. smokers today are no more addicted than prior generations. that is just a simple fact. and bottom line, cigarettes cannot be made safe. cigarettes are a dangerous product, they are an addictive product. there is no such thing as a safe cigarette. now, dr. cummings on cross-examination testified, i asked him, in fact, dr. cummings, you do not know whether it is even possible to achieve a concentration of levulinic acid in tobacco that is low enough to result in increased binding of nicotine to the nicotinic receptors in the brain, do you, sir? and he said, "no." because you see the more levulinic acids you have, the less binding effect it has on the nicotine to the acetylcholine receptors, and the lower it is, the inverse is true, the greater the binding effect. and he simply did not know that. he does not know at what level the levulinic acid has to be to result in an increase of the binding effect. and that is very important. you heard a lot about marketing to youth, 3235 marketing to people between the ages of 14 and 24. well, mr. ellis started smoking at age 18 or after. mrs. ellis tells us that, that it was after he graduated from high school. i think she is in a position to know. they started dating when they were 16. she was a smoker before he was. if he was smoking or was attempting to smoke, he could have bummed a cigarette from her. but she never saw him smoke until after he graduated at 18. barbara dixon, longtime friend, who grew up with the ellises said it was after he graduated from high school. martha dukes, sister, said she first saw him with a cigarette in his hand after he got married. he got married in 1956. martha jean martin, who met them in the '60s, that is the first time she saw him smoke. the only person who has him smoking at the age of 17, was richard harvey, who was in the first grade at the time, and he is recounting something that happened 60 years ago because the man is now 67 years old and said that he saw him smoke a cigarette when he was in the first grade. that is the only evidence there is of him smoking prior to 3236 the time that he was 18 years old. so to claim that he was smoking as a 12 or 13-year-old, as a teenager as opposed to as an adult at the age of 18, is simply not supported in the evidence. we have heard a lot about advertising. and there is nothing illegal about advertising. it is legal to advertise cigarettes just like it is to advertise other products. there are other products that are dangerous that were advertised. there is no evidence that mr. ellis began smoking because of advertising, none whatsoever. dr. cummings testified that the most influential factor to start smoking is family and friends who smoke. if you have got a girlfriend or a boyfriend or you have got some other friend or you have got a parent who smokes, that is a much greater predictor of who will begin smoking than advertising. dr. cummings testified to that effect. that is the most influential factor. there is no evidence that he continued smoking because of cigarette advertising. none. none whatsoever. mrs. ellis testified it was his decision to start smoking, even though she was a smoker before 3237 he was, she said she did not do anything to influence him to start smoking, that the decision to start smoking was his decision. now let us get back to mr. ellis and the issues that you have to decide in this case. and our position is that the plaintiff failed to meet her burden of proof. and remember the plaintiff has the burden of proof on each and every one of these issues. plaintiff has to prove class membership. and in order to do that, plaintiff has to prove medical causation, addiction, and addiction causation. then the next issue, concealment, agreement to conceal, the plaintiff has to prove that there was something that was concealed from mr. ellis that but for that information, he would not have died of what the plaintiff contends is a smoking-related disease. that is the plaintiff's burden. and i'm going to walk through each of those things right now. the first question that you will have on the verdict form, "do you find that clarence c. ellis was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine and that mr. ellis had lung cancer," that is a cancer that started in the lung, "and if so, that his 3238 addiction was a legal cause of his lung cancer and his death?" in order to demonstrate that, the plaintiff has to prove medical causation. number one, the plaintiff has to prove that clarence ellis died from lung cancer and it was caused by smoking. number two, the plaintiff has to prove that clarence ellis was addicted to nicotine. and then number three, even if he was addicted, even if clarence ellis was addicted, plaintiff must prove addiction was a legal cause of clarence ellis's death. we are going to walk through the evidence on each and every one of those issues. let us talk about medical causation. plaintiff failed to prove that mr. ellis died from a primary lung cancer caused by smoking. it is not r.j. reynolds' burden to prove that he did not die of a primary lung cancer, it is plaintiff's burden to prove that he did. the only board certified medical oncologist specializing in the treatment of cancer, including lung cancer, and who sees cancer patients on a daily basis and has treated tens of thousands of cancer patients was dr. david okun. and dr. david 3239 okun said that the pathologic diagnosis was generic. to say that it is a large undifferentiated carcinoma is a generic diagnosis. it does not tell you anything about where the cancer started. he said the presentation and clinical course were inconsistent with primary lung cancer. and presentation is how the symptoms that the patient presented with to the doctor's office. mr. ellis did not have the signs or symptoms of a primary lung cancer. you remember dr. okun said that if that were the case, he would have had coughing, a certain kind and not the kind that you would call a -- associated with copd. said there would be a cough that he would have. he would have wheezing. he would have hemoptysis or coughing up blood. he would have those symptoms if, in fact, he had a primary lung cancer. he said if he had a primary lung cancer, it would have been larger than this singular 1 1/2 centimeter nodule in his chest. he said the information from the medical workup was insufficient to establish primary lung cancer, and he said it was not the quantity of the number of records, but the quality. and what he meant by that was looking at the 3240 pathology, because you have got to look at it under the microscope to determine what kind of cancer cell it is, and then determine where the cancer came from, and they were unable to do that based on the pathology. and let us look at some of the records. now, dr. okun, one other thing before we leave dr. okun, dr. okun said that you could not tell where the cancer started. and i believe plaintiff's counsel said, well, they did all of these scans in the abdominal region and the pelvic region and they did not see any masses. well, they did a bone scan and they missed the mass in his spine. dr. okun testified that these scans are not always accurate, that you can miss things on these scans, and probably the best evidence of that or illustration of it was when they missed the mass in his spine when they did the bone scan. it was only later that they made a -- did subsequent scans and found the mass in his back, at the cervical and thoracic regions of his spine. now, dr. bilek prepared and signed these records. there are some other records in here that have some inconsistent things on them that were 3241 prepared by other people that have dr. bilek signed off on them. but he prepared himself and signed these records and in each of these instances, he says "unknown primary, question, mark lung." now, this was the radiation oncologist who was treating this patient. not someone who saw him on one or two occasions but the person who was treating his cancer. and the radiation that he administered to him was to that mass in his back. at no time did he ever treat or administer radiation to the nodule in his lung. he treated the mass in mr. ellis's back. now, what did dr. sheedy and mccoy have to say? well, dr. sheedy, who is involved in palliative care, he saw mr. ellis two times, but there is only one note in the record, by dr. sheedy. he had no role in diagnosing mr. ellis's cancer. he decided whether mr. ellis should undergo chemo. and he is not certified in oncology, and then he did not pass the hematology exam. that is no knock on him, that is just a fact in terms of qualifications, and those are the kinds of things you are to take into account. in that expert witness jury instruction it 3242 says you are to take into account the witness's skill, knowledge, education, experience, and training. and so that goes to that in terms of whether you credit that testimony or discredit it, his qualifications have bearing on it. dr. mccoy involved in family practice handed off mr. ellis to the other doctors in september of 1992. he had ten-minute visits with him in september and october. there are no records of his beyond october of 1992, and there is no evidence about how he went about completing the death certificate. while we are talking about death certificates, let me say a thing or two. a death certificate is not conclusive proof of the cause of death. if that were the case, we would not have heard from all these doctors in this case. it is not conclusive. that is just his opinion, dr. mccoy, who is in family practice and is not involved in oncology. that is not his specialty. dr. sheedy did not prove the plaintiff's theory, he did no research on cancer causation in individual patients. he said i believe it was 80 percent of the people who have lung cancer are smokers, but while that applies to a population of 3243 people, it does not necessarily apply to an individual. you have to judge an individual on that individual -- on an individual basis. he does not know the generally-accepted scientific criteria for determining cancer causation in an individual patient. and this was an individual patient. we are talking about mr. ellis. this formula was a rather crude one, smoking history of 34 years at two packs a day or two to three packs a day plus lung cancer means that, well, the cigarettes must have caused the lung cancer. well, it is not that simple. it is a lot more complicated than that, as dr. okun testified, there are 140 different kinds of cancer, and you have to look at cells. all lung cancers are not the same kind of cell type. so it is a lot more complicated than just saying somebody smoked, they got lung cancer, so the smoking must have caused it. and dr. sheedy was asked this question, "what have you done to rule out the possibility that this is a case of unknown primary?" and his response was, "i have done nothing. i was not his treating physician. i was a consultant." and this was read 3244 back to him and he agreed that that was read correctly, that had been his testimony in a deposition. let us look at dr. mccoy. dr. mccoy testified that mr. ellis did not have any other risk factors for cancer, but then he turned around and he admitted that family history of cancer was relevant to an individual cancer incidence. and we know from the evidence that mr. ellis's mother died of uterine cancer at the age of 44 and that his sister had both colon cancer and she also had cervical cancer. so he had that particular risk factor. dr. burns offered contradictory opinions on the medical issue. dr. burns explained that the cancer in mr. ellis's lung spread when the tumor broke through the lining and entered the bloodstream. he did not mention anything about the lymph system, which, as dr. okun pointed out, it would go first to the hilar lymph nodes and the mediastinal lymph nodes before it would go to any other part of the body, and he did not have any signs of enlarged lymph nodes in those regions of his body. so that is a contraindication of a primary lung cancer. 3245 and then a second opinion on this, dr. burns, said that mr. ellis's tumor was isolated and it did not break through the lining of the lung. it cannot be both things, but he gave conflicting views on that. the bottom line, plaintiff failed to prove by a preponderance of the evidence, greater weight of the evidence, that mr. ellis had a primary lung cancer caused by smoking. now let us talk about addiction. in order to establish class membership, not only must plaintiff prove that mr. ellis had a primary lung cancer caused by smoking, it also has to prove that mr. ellis was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine. the only expert who came in this case to testify who has expertise in substance abuse was dr. jaffe. a psychologist who came down. he is treated smokers for nicotine addiction for 30 years. and while he has not published as much as some of the other experts, he is spent a lot of time treating patients, because that is how he spends his time, treating patients. he applied the american psychiatric association diagnostic criteria to mr. ellis and 3246 found no clinically-significant impairment. and that is what you have got to do, that is the threshold determination before you can get into those 11 factors that mr. -- that dr. jaffe discussed that are set out in the dsm-5. the threshold determination is did the substance cause the patient clinically-significant impairment or distress. and he did not find signs of it. we will talk about what did cause clinically-significant impairment or distress to mr. ellis. it was the alcohol, it was not the nicotine. his opinion was that mr. ellis was not addicted according to the diagnostic statistical manual of mental disorders, which is the reference that people in that field use to diagnose substance abuse in their patients in treating their patients. plaintiff's expert said he was addicted basically because he smoked a lot. dr. cummings said he smoked a lot and he smoked early in the morning, first cigarette within the first five minutes of getting up, and so, therefore, under the fagerstrom test that he was addicted. dr. burns said, well, he smoked a lot, he smoked two to three packs over 34 years then he 3247 must be addicted. dr. sheedy testified that he applied a subjective method. said the man had discoloration on his fingers and on his tongue and on his mouth, smoked two to three packs a day for 30-some years, therefore, he is addicted. well, it is not that simple, as dr. jaffe pointed out. it is a lot more complicated than that. therefore, plaintiff failed to prove that mr. ellis was addicted to cigarettes. next hurdle that plaintiff has to get over, proving that addiction was a legal cause of clarence ellis's death. and here is the jury instruction for class membership. "an addiction to smoking cigarettes containing nicotine is a legal cause of cancer and death if it directly and in a natural and continuous sequence produces or contributes substantially to producing such cancer and death so that it can be reasonably said that but for an addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine, the cancer and death would not have occurred." but for. that is what it means when something is a substantial contributing factor. it has to rise to that level. that but for the addiction, 3248 that he would not have died. and that is assuming addiction. so even if you found that he was addicted, plaintiff would have to demonstrate that but for the addiction, mr. ellis would not have died. and that assumes that he was unable to quit in time to save his own life. and we know that he was capable of quitting, because millions and millions of addicted, heavily-addicted smokers have quit, they do quit. dr. david burns, who has been involved in all these surgeon general's reports, came in here and testified, he said millions and millions of smokers who quit were heavily addicted to nicotine. dr. cummings said ninety percent of the people -- well, he and dr. burns said ninety percent of the people who quit were heavily addicted. and they both agree that millions of smokers quit cold turkey. in fact, ninety percent of them do. not only are ninety percent of them heavily addicted, but 90 percent of them quit cold turkey. but in order to do that, you have got to be motivated. now, you heard some statistics during the trial. and i want to recap some of that now. between 1955 and 1965, 17.6 million people 3249 quit smoking. between 1964, the surgeon general's report came out, and 1979, some 30 million people kicked the habit. and as of 2014, 60 million people have quit. there are more former smokers than current smokers. and just to illustrate the numbers, if you were to put all those 60 million smokers who quit, it would fill doak campbell stadium 729 times, that is how many people kicked the habit. and 90 percent of them did it without the benefit of any aids, cessation tools, they did it cold turkey. now, plaintiff has admitted that the acts of mr. ellis relating to the duration and frequency of his efforts to stop smoking were a partial legal cause of mr. ellis's cancer and his death. plaintiff has admitted that. that his acts relating to the duration of his smoking and the frequency of his efforts to stop smoking were a partial legal cause of mr. ellis's death. now, mrs. ellis testified during the course of the trial and when asked, "you believe it is his fault for not quitting sooner and for not starting to begin with, do not you?" and she said yes, that was his fault. it was not the fault of r.j. reynolds that he started smoking or that he did not 3250 quit sooner. it was his fault. now, what does this admission mean, when you break it down? that mr. ellis knew that smoking was dangerous, yet he continued to smoke. he was not confused about the dangers and addictiveness of smoking. mr. ellis had the ability to quit smoking earlier. and he could have tried harder to quit smoking. mr. ellis had the ability to quit smoking at a time that would have prevented his death. it comes down to this, did mr. ellis have the ability to quit but chose to continue smoking? evidently, he did, because if you are saying that he is partly at fault for not making a greater effort to quit sooner, then he had the ability to quit. mr. sales: object, your honor, that misstates the plaintiff's admission. the court: overruled. mr. persons: it means did he have the ability to quit but chose to continue smoking, or did nicotine control mr. ellis and leave him no choice no matter how hard he tried, but to continue smoking until his death? and even their experts, dr. cummings and dr. burns, said -- they used -- dr. cummings used 3251 the term "constrained choice". and i remember asking him, "well, does the surgeon general use that term?" he said, "no, it is something i made up." constrained choice. even he did not say that the smoker had no choice. he never said mr. ellis had no choice. mr. ellis would have to have no choice in order to be compelled to the point that addiction controlled him to the point that he smoked until he died. you cannot say on the one hand, that he had the ability to quit and was somewhat addicted but somehow the addiction controlled him to the point that he could not quit. dr. cummings said a smoker is fully responsible for making the choice to quit. that is plaintiff's expert. a smoker is fully responsible, not partly responsible, fully responsible for making the choice to quit. mr. ellis never made that choice. dr. burns also said that smokers, including addicted smokers, are responsible for their smoking behavior. addicted smokers do not lose control over their behavior. that was his testimony. and so what was it about mr. ellis that was different 3252 from those 60 million people who quit? why is he different than the 60 million who quit? were the cigarettes he was smoking more addictive than the other cigarettes that the other 60 million people were smoking? no. was mr. ellis's brain affected differently than the smokers who quit? no. was mr. ellis exposed to advertising that was different than the people who quit? no. was he exposed to tobacco company statements different than the smokers who quit? no. did mr. ellis smoke more or longer than the smokers who quit? no. was mr. ellis somehow different from mrs. ellis, who chose to quit and successfully quit? no. did mr. ellis choose to continue smoking because he liked it and did not want to quit? yes. he enjoyed smoking. there is nothing wrong with that. and we certainly do not impugn anything by his character or that he is somehow wrong to do that. of course not. this is a free country. if you want to enjoy something and you can go into the store and get it, that is your business. in fact, that was the view that mr. ellis took according to 3253 mrs. ellis. "you tend to your business and i'll tend to my business." and the evidence is any smoker can quit. there is nobody that is come into this courtroom and testified that a smoker cannot quit. none of these experts have come in here and said that, well, a smoker cannot quit. they say any smoker can quit. dr. cummings said, "anyone who wants to quit can quit." dr. burns said, "it is up to the smoker to continue smoking or to make the decision to quit." now, some smokers just want to smoke. dr. cummings, "some smokers enjoy smoking and they want to continue smoking." even some of the people who would come in or call in on the help line when he was working in new york, and he said, "some people would come in and they would say, well, yeah, i want to, i want to quit, but they did not want to quit, they enjoyed it." dr. sheedy said, "some smokers have no desire to stop smoking." dr. mccoy acknowledged that some smokers do not want to quit. and dr. jaffe, i think it was one of the last questions he answered yesterday afternoon said that even heavy smokers enjoy 3254 smoking. i believe the question was, "do you know anyone or have you had a patient who smoked for 34 years, two to three packs a day, who did not enjoy smoking?" and he took a moment to think about it and he said, "no, i've never had a patient who presented with that history who did not enjoy smoking. some smokers just want to smoke." we know that mr. ellis made his own decisions. an intelligent man, very determined man, extremely hard working, described as a workaholic, strong minded and strong-willed individual. in the words of i think it was martha dixon, either she or martha jean martin, said he had good old common horse sense, or as what some of the folks used to say just walking-around sense. he was independent. he would be more persistent if someone told him something would not work. if you told him -- you wanted to challenge him, you would tell him that something that he had proposed would not work, and he would work harder and demonstrate to you that it would work. i believe his nephew said that anything he put his mind to, he could do it. now, we know he did not want to quit smoking. 3255 we know that he enjoyed smoking. he told people that he did. mrs. ellis did not believe mr. ellis when he said he was going to quit. she quit smoking in the mid '70s for a year. and then in the early '80s, about 1981, she quit again. and at that point in time, she approached him and said, "well, you going to quit?" he said, "yeah." but she did not believe him. and then on another occasion, she approached him about quitting and he said, "i'm not ready to quit. i'm not ready to quit." he did not say "i cannot quit. it is too difficult to quit." he said, "i'm not ready to quit." now, mrs. ellis said that mr. ellis was aware of the health risks when he tried to quit. she testified that mr. ellis attempted to quit 10 to 15 times over the course of their married life together. some of these quit attempts would last two hours, some of them would last as long as two days. you heard a lot of evidence about people telling mr. ellis to quit smoking. when one of his sisters, i believe it was sally opal harrison, told him that if he continued to smoke cigarettes, he would get cancer, he shrugged his shoulders. 3256 when his daughters urged him to quit smoking, he ignored them. when others approached him about quitting, he would point to articles on the refrigerator, and basically tell them to leave him alone. mrs. ellis described it as to "stop messing with me." people would mess with him about his smoking, that is what he would do. all evidence of the fact that he did not want to quit. you know he did not want to quit. going back to mrs. ellis's testimony, "because smoking was his business, was not it? "that is correct. "and he felt that smoking was not their business; right?" answer was, "right." question: "he was the type of person who was of the opinion that you tend to your business and i'll tend to mine?" answer: "yes." he made his own smoking decisions. did not want people to bother him about it. and that was his prerogative, that was his prerogative. we know that he was not motivated to quit, and we know that that is an essential ingredient in 3257 order to quit. you have to be motivated to quit and you have to be persistent about it. dr. jaffe told us that "motivation is critically important to quitting. many smokers do not want to quit and try to quit only because their family members are bugging them." i think he called that external motivation. "motivated smokers seek help from others when they try to quit." and just because you are a quiet person does not mean that you do not seek help trying to quit. there is no evidence that mr. ellis ever sought any help trying to quit smoking. mr. ellis's behavior did not show a desire to quit. now, when mr. ellis was motivated to quit drinking, he did. his family members acknowledged that he was addicted to alcohol and it was a problem for his family and for his marriage. he had problems at work because of drinking. and when mrs. ellis -- when mrs. ellis gave him an ultimatum about his drinking and told him to quit drinking or she would leave him, at that point, mr. ellis had sufficient motivation to go into the detox facility for 30 days, and when he left there, he never took another drop of alcohol. 3258 that is motivation to quit. and when dr. jaffe was talking about substantial impairment or distress, he said it had to rise to the level of something that would affect your relationship with your family, affect your relationship with your job. and that is what alcohol did to mr. ellis. that is substantial impairment or distress, a clear illustration of substantial impairment or distress. so let us contrast and compare the two. motivated to quit smoking, question mark. motivated to quit drinking. the smoking, he recognized the risks. for the drinking, he recognized the impact on family and his work. smoking, he did not seek any assistance from anyone. for the drinking, he sought medical assistance. smoking, he quit from two hours to two days. for drinking, he went to a 30-day inpatient rehab facility. he was not motivated to quit smoking. once he got the ultimatum from mrs. ellis, he was motivated to quit drinking. he decided to continue smoking, and he decided to give up drinking. and so the bottom line is once he made a 3259 commitment to do something, he followed through on it and he did it. he never made a commitment to quit smoking, and he did not. and that is not because of addiction. that is because he made the decision he did not want to give up the pleasures of smoking. the plaintiff failed to prove that mr. ellis's addiction was the legal cause of his death, that he was somehow robbed of the ability to quit smoking because of addiction. all right, let us see here. can you help me with this? this is a little fuzzy. mr. smith: yes. mr. persons: okay. i hope everybody -- everybody cannot see it. all right. and the first question on the verdict form, "do you find that clarence c. ellis was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine and if mr. ellis had lung cancer, and if so, that his addiction was a legal cause of his lung cancer and death?" i submit to you the answer to that is no. before i turn to the next topic, let me say something. we do not dispute that mr. ellis told his wife that he wanted to quit smoking for health 3260 reasons and that he made an effort to, but he did not have the motivation to follow through and to quit. he was not motivated to quit. the next question, question number 2 on the verdict form, "was r.j. reynolds tobacco company's concealment or omission of material information about the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes, or both, a legal cause of clarence ellis's death?" number 3, "was r.j. reynolds tobacco company's agreement with other cigarette manufacturers and corporations to conceal or omit information regarding the health effects of cigarettes or their addictive nature a legal cause of clarence c. ellis's death?" the evidence demonstrates that nothing reynolds concealed from mr. ellis or agreed with others to conceal was a legal cause of mr. ellis's death. and i'll walk through that, we will turn to that now. in order to meet her burden of proof on this issue, the plaintiff has to prove that there was something that was concealed or that reynolds in concert with others agreed to conceal that was a legal cause of mr. ellis's death, that had 3261 mr. ellis known the -- but for this information, mr. ellis would not have died. and here is the jury instruction. "fraud by concealment or omission is a legal cause of cancer and death if it directly and in a natural and continuous sequence produces or contributes substantially to producing cancer and death so that it can reasonably be said that, but for such fraud by concealment or omission, the cancer and death would not have occurred." so let us look at it this way. because it cannot be both ways. starting in the 1970s, mr. ellis tried to quit smoking because he believed it was bad for his health. mrs. ellis tells us this. that was her testimony. it is either that or starting in the 1970s, mr. ellis put articles on the refrigerator because he believed smoking was safe. we know why he put the articles on the refrigerator, not because he believed smoking was safe. at the same time she is saying he is going 10 to 15 times trying to quit for health reasons, that is inconsistent. so how do you reconcile the inconsistency? he put the articles on the refrigerator so people would leave him alone and 3262 stop bothering him about smoking, that is why he put the articles up there. and we know very little about those articles. very little about the content of those articles. for one thing, we never saw one of them during the plaintiff's case. not that we would expect them to have those things around all these years, but you can locate old newspaper articles. they located some. but not one that mrs. ellis identified as having been on the refrigerator. we do not know when these articles were published. ms. ellis did not remember what they said. we do not know any details about those articles. and dr. jaffe said they were not a crutch but a shield, because he used them to get people off his back about smoking. we know some things about the dangers and addictiveness of tobacco. and we know that they were no secret. people have been saying for centuries that tobacco is harmful to your health. it is been known for centuries that once you start using tobacco, it can be difficult to give it up. and people have been talking about tobacco being addictive and causing cancer for over 150 3263 years. dr. burns told us these things. that was dr. burns's testimony, one of the plaintiff's experts in this case. you can go back to the counterblaste of tobacco back in the 1600s when king james, same king james associated with the king james version, is talking about the health hazards of smoking. dr. cummings admitted that studies about smoking and lung cancer received coverage in newspapers, magazines, and scientific journals by the early 1950s. so a lot of these confidential memos that were inside the companies about the scientific research, that scientific research that dr. rodgman was looking at, a lot of that scientific research was the same research that got covered in newspapers, magazines, and scientific journals. and, in fact, dr. cummings at one point said that sometimes the results of these research would be in the popular press before it was released to the scientific community because somebody would leak it. so it was in the information environment. it was not hidden from anybody. in the 1950s, the public health authorities began providing information about the dangers of 3264 smoking. about the dangers of smoking. that is dr. cummings' testimony. and we know as early as 1915, the surgeon general of the united states was saying that smoking is addictive. did not have to wait until 1988. that was not the first time the surgeon general had reached that conclusion. the first time was back in 1915 when they studied the garment workers in new york and they wanted to find out why they had a higher incidence of illness and disease, and they linked it to smoking, and that was what the surgeon general reported, smoking is addictive. and that is almost a hundred years ago. now, i want to go decade by decade and talk about mr. ellis. put it over here. let me move this out of the way. we know that he was born in 1936 in moultrie, georgia. started school in the '40s, and meets mrs. ellis in 1948. going to talk about the first 13 years of his life. we know that he had public warnings about cancer and addiction, that was in the public realm of knowledge. we talked about the reader's digest articles, we talked about time magazine articles, some of 3265 those newspaper articles. there was warnings in popular culture. one of the things was this song that came out in 1947 by tex williams. and we know that his parents forbid their children to smoke, so we know that was going on in the household. so let us look at some of what was going on prior to the '50s, media warnings about the dangers of smoking. reader's digest was the most popular magazine in the united states of america in the '40s, '50s, and '60s, and reader's digest was very anti-tobacco. they hated smoking. and they refused to accept any advertising from the tobacco companies, absolutely refused to. and they carried articles warning the public about the dangers of smoking. the scientific research that would find its way into the scientific journals, they took it and put it in form that laypeople could understand and put it in their magazine. and here are just a sampling of some of the articles. this is 1935, "on giving up smoking." 1940, "i quit smoking, cooper's last stand." 1924, november, "does tobacco injure the human body?" and here is an excerpt from that issue of reader's 3266 digest. "tobacco is injurious to the human body. its use sometimes induces cancer." "sometimes induces cancer." and then here is time magazine, march 7, 1938 "coffin nails", another name for cigarettes. and even though mrs. ellis did not remember receiving the reader's digest, information in the reader's digest would be in the realm of discussion that people would have because people talked to each other about things. it certainly was not a secret if it is in the reader's digest. here is an article in a magazine called reader's scope, 1946, "cigarettes cause cancer?" "some years ago roffo and the chemist luchetta isolated a substance called benzopyrene. benzopyrene, they report, is present in and can be isolated from tobacco tar, which is produced by the heat in the burning end of a cigarette, cigar or pipe, and benzopyrene has the lethal power to start cancer. it is a cancer-producing substance, a carcinogen." this is in 1946. so it is no secret that cigarettes and other forms of tobacco including pipes and cigars contain carcinogens, 3267 cancer-causing chemicals, and that is in the late -- that is in 1946 in reader's scope. no secret. there is no question that the information was pervasive throughout the country, information about the dangers and addictive nature of smoking and it made its way into the popular culture. when something gets into the popular culture, it is widespread, especially when something becomes a number one song in the whole united states of america, top of the charts, and stayed there for a long time. mr. ellis used to sing this song. (video clip played as follows:) singer: now, i'm a feller with a heart of gold, the ways of a gentleman i've been told, the kind of feller that would not even harm a flea. but if me and a certain character met, the guy that invented the cigarette, i'd murder that son of a gun in the first degree. now, it ain't cause that i do not smoke myself. i do not reckon they hinder your health. i've smoked them all my life and i ain't dead yet. 3268 but nicotine slaves are all the same, at a pettin' party or a poker game, everything's got to stop while they have that cigarette. smoke, smoke, smoke, that cigarette. puff, puff, puff and if you smoke yourself to death. tell saint peter at the golden gate that you hates to make him wait, but you have just gotta have another cigarette. (video clip stopped.) mr. persons: thank you. got the '50s? thank you, sir. all right. let us look at the 1950s. and we will look at what is going on with mr. ellis and what is going on in the united states. wynder graham studies 1953, that is where they painted the backs of the mice, they shaved the backs of the mice and painted the tar from smoke condensate on them and developed tumors. that was covered in life magazine. the first tobacco lawsuit was in 1954, so people had enough information about the hazards of smoking to start bringing suits. [#deleted onjection dialogue#] mr. persons: that is right. technology. so anyway, lawsuits and dr. cummings testified about special projects that were conducted to defend lawsuits. and at least special projects that were funded by the tobacco industry research committee. mr. ellis graduates from high school in 1954, starts smoking after the age of 18, after he turned 18, he gets married in 1956. so what is going on in the united states with respect to smoking and health at that time? we know that between 1954, after the mouse skin painting studies came out in '53, people started to quit smoking. and they started quitting by the millions. between 1954 and 1964, 17 million americans quit smoking. we know that there were public warnings about cancer and addiction during this era. i'm going to talk about some of it. we know there were warnings in the popular culture, in music, and in literature, about the dangers of smoking. yet during this time, we know that mr. ellis made no effort to quit smoking, at a time when millions of people were giving it up, beginning in 3274 1954, he was taking it up. we know this. that is the 1950s era. we know in the 1950s, reader's digest continued its mantra against smoking and warning the public about the dangers of smoking. january 1950 reader's digest, "how harmful are cigarettes?" december 1952, "the growing horror of lung cancer." in fact, the article is entitled "cancer by the carton." nothing could be more graphic, nothing could be more explicit about the dangers, the deadly nature of cigarette smoking than cancer by the carton. in other words, you buy a carton of cigarettes, you are buying a carton of cancer risk. that is what it says, "cancer by the carton." it is no secret. "the growing horror of lung cancer," reader's digest march 1959. time magazine, december 22nd, 1952, "smoking and cancer." time magazine 1965, "smoking and cancer." remind you, this is at a time when there were -- you did not have any internet. people tended to read a lot of print media. that is how you got your news. there were only three networks, abc, nbc, and cbc. people read papers. most major cities had a morning paper 3275 and an evening paper. and people read magazines, because most folks did not have a color television, and the only way you would see something in color would be to look in a magazine to see it. and that is how you kept abreast of events. and by the time it reaches the magazines and newspapers, it is widely disseminated. it is certainly no secret. we talked about this, i will not belabor it, but this big magazine with these graphic images of these mice with tumors on their backs after being painted with the tar from cigarette smoke. mr. ellis and mrs. ellis are living in moultrie in the 1950s. and so we went to the moultrie observer to see what kinds of information was given to the citizens of colquitt county, georgia, in the 1950s, and this is what we find. these are headlines, it is not something buried somewhere in the paper from some unidentified source about taking a contrary position to what is in the headline. this is a headline. and there was a thing at a time in this country called newspaper boxes. i think they have become obsolete now. but there was a newspaper 3276 machine. and you would put a coin in it and you would get a newspaper out of it. and the newspapers would be folded, and you would see the headline, and hence the term above the fold, because you could walk by it and you would see the headline and make a decision about whether you wanted to buy the page or not. these are headlines. "cigarette smokers die sooner, the american cancer society says." "do cigarettes add to the cancer danger?" that is another article, december 1955, in the moultrie observer. atlanta paper, "bears report on cigarettes." they picked up something from the atlanta constitution in atlanta and they republished it in the moultrie paper about the link between cigarettes and cancer. "cancer group cites" -- i mean -- "cancer group cites cigarette hazards", that is 1954 {sic} in moultrie. here is dr. cummings, plaintiff's expert, "by 1954, virtually everyone knew that smoking could cause disease, did not they, sir?" answer: "knew and heard i think are the same. they knew it by 1954." that is his testimony. it is no secret. the 3277 public health leaders, the surgeon general at the time was leroy burney, testified before congress, and so did john heller, the director of the national cancer institute. dr. leroy burney said, "our position is that we have informed the public through the excellent coverage of the press, radio, and tv." dr. john heller said, "newspapers, radio, tv, and other media have done an excellent job covering this problem, and a very objective job. this is an exceedingly valuable way of informing the public." these were people who were there in real time, not looking back, not with the benefit of 20/20 hindsight or doing a retrospective of people who were there on the ground. people whose job it was, the responsibility it was to protect the public health and get out this message and this is what they are saying at that time in 1957 in testimony before congress. reverend billy graham had a column in the moultrie observer called my answer. and here's what he said in 1959 in october in the moultrie paper. "the medical profession has done an excellent job in alerting the american public to the dangers 3278 of smoking. a multitude of magazine articles and medical reports have established the relationship of the habit with the occurrence of lung cancer." he made in abundantly clear that the american public had been duly alerted to the dangers of smoking. thank you, sir. that brings us to the 1960s. 1960, the ellises are still living in moultrie. their first child is born in 1960 and that would be tammy. their daughter pamela is born in 1963. we know that in 1964, the surgeon general's report on smoking caused -- the link between smoking and lung cancer in men came out, and that was widely covered. that was the most widely covered health news in the history of the country. it was huge, huge news? it made the front page of all the major newspapers. it was covered on all three of the television networks. it was on the radio. it was widely covered in the press, in the media. we know that by 1964, 17 million americans had quit smoking. the first warning label went on a pack of cigarettes in 1966. president johnson signed the legislation in the summer of 1965. 3279 their daughter kimberly was born in 1966. and beginning in the late '60s, his daughters pamela and tammy started to get on mr. ellis about his smoking. between 1966, after the warning label went on, to 1970, 13 million smokers quit. that is the most, that is the highest number of quitters in a four-year period in the history of our country. it had not happened before nor since, that many people quit. now, when dr. cummings was on the stand and dr. burns, they want to say it was a caution label as opposed to a warning label. but it had the effect of warning people about the dangers of smoking, because so many of them quit. so if there was a mixed message, it was not very effective, because people were quitting in huge, huge numbers. during the '60s, the public warnings about smoking and cancer continued. there were continued warnings in the popular press. yet during this era, there was no effort to quit smoking by mr. ellis. and significant development in 1962, even though he is living in moultrie, he goes to work for the florida publishing company. and so access to 3280 news, delivering the news. he started working at florida publishing company in 1962. we know that he was an avid reader of newspapers and magazines. he watched the nightly news on television. we talked about the surgeon general's report, which concluded that "cigarette smoking is causally related to lung cancer in men." that was the conclusion. that is 1964. 1964, mr. ellis was 28 years old. he is fully grown. father of two daughters. and here is what the -- harry reasoner had to say about the surgeon general's report. (video clip played as follows:) mr. reasoner: in this kind of a country, it comes down to you, whether you like it or not. no one is going to forbid an adult to smoke, and it is now quite clear that no one is going to tell him it is good for him, either. the decision is his, the decision and the health that may depend on it. this is harry reasoner, good night. (video clip stopped.) mr. persons: here is the coverage in the moultrie observer. "government panel sees smoking-disease danger." and in that article, 3281 "smoking cigarettes is a health hazard that calls for corrective action and is a major cause of lung cancer and other death-dealing disease." it is no secret. and here is the 1966 warning: "cigarette smoking may be hazardous to your health." and mrs. ellis testified that she was sure mr. ellis saw this warning and was not surprised by it. she is in the best position to know that it did not come as any surprise to him. show the public service announcement. (video clip played as follows:) speaker: we receive many warnings in our life, and sometimes they can save our life. this message is brought to you by the american cancer society. (video clip stopped.) mr. persons: these public service announcements were rampant during this era informing the public about the dangers of smoking and particularly the link between cigarette smoking and cancer. some more warnings from the local media. moultrie observer, where he lived. the florida times-union paper that he worked for. 3282 "smoking-related diseases killing at a higher rate, public health service reports." "government panel sees smoking-disease danger," that is in 1964. "cancer toll rise blamed on smoking." that is the florida times-union 1969. "cigarette smoking held grave hazard to health in the united states. one pack a day doubles your chances of death, expert says." "'64 report on hazards of smoking backed up." then you have got dr. daniel horn who said that "you could stand on a rooftop and shout 'smoking is dangerous' at the top of your lungs and you would not be telling anyone anything they did not already know." and this is something he said in november of 1968. "you would not be telling anyone anything they did not already know." so the word was out there. and these public service announcements were very personal. some of them were extremely personal, accounts from people who had developed smoking-related disease, who were dying, warning others to give up smoking. (video clip played as follows:) mr. talman: this is the house we live in. 3283 this is billy. he is pretty handy to have around. steve, home from college. barbie, looking after her brother timmy. debbie, who will soon graduate from high school. susan, our youngest. and my wife, peggy, who looks after all of us. and that is me, bill talman, with a friend of mine you might recognize. you know, i did not really mind losing those courtroom battles, but i'm in a battle right now i do not want to lose at all, because if i lose it, it means losing my wife and those kids you just met. i've got lung cancer. so take some advice about smoking and losing from someone who has been doing both for years. if you do not smoke, do not start. if you do smoke, quit. do not be a loser. (video clip stopped.) mr. persons: pretty powerful message from bill talman, and that was a very, very popular television show, perry mason, back in that era. we will turn now to the '70s. thank you, mr. smith. all right, we know in 1970, the second warning label goes on. also in 1970, 38 percent of us male smokers have kicked the habit. 1971, television 3284 advertising for tobacco ads banned on tv and on radio. 1971, that is when the ellises first moved to florida. 1972, there were warnings put in the billboard advertisements and the magazine advertisements, newspaper ads for cigarettes. in the mid '70s, mrs. ellis quit smoking for one year. in 1977, we know they had the great american smokeout which was a nationwide effort, campaign to get people to quit smoking for a day in hopes that they would continue refraining from smoking and kick the habit. in 1978, the ellises had moved to tallahassee. and in 1978, '79, mr. ellis catches his daughter pamela smoking and sets her straight. now, between 1965 and 1979, 30 million people quit smoking. the surgeon general's report comes out in '64, beginning of '75, to '79, 30 million quit. public warnings about cancer and addiction continue. mr. ellis gets warnings from his family about smoking. and there is a question about just how motivated he was to quit. and so now we will look at some of the information that was coming out there in the '70s. this warning, "the surgeon general has 3285 determined that cigarette smoking is dangerous to your health" came out in -- this was in the '70s. and we know that mr. ellis saw this warning because his daughter tammy made sure that mr. ellis was aware of this warning. and here is a -- another public service announcement, with a father and daughter, and the daughter is warning the father about the dangers of smoking. (video clip played as follows:) daughter: my father smoked so much he smelled of it, i mean his face, his hair, his clothes. everything had that yucky smell. and he was always coughing. father: sorry, but that is the way it was. daughter: i worried about him, because in school we learned about what cigarettes could do to your lungs. father: she sure let me and my lungs know. daughter: so one day i wrote to the lung association for help, and they sent me this free information about how to quit smoking. father: i did not think it would help, but i promised to try. daughter: it was not easy. 3286 father: the understatement of the year. daughter: but he quit. father: i really did. daughter: and if he can. father: you can. but remember, it was tough. daughter: lung disease is tougher. so if you know someone who smokes, write to your lung association for help. whether it is smoking, air pollution, or any lung problem, your lung association cares about every breath you take. father: take it from me, they really do. (video clip stopped.) mr. persons: again, just one of many public service announcements that were shown on television during that time. and the media, print media continued to cover this subject. and publicizing the research. here is dr. ochsner stressing the perils of tobacco. the florida times-union, "cancer, a disease of terror and hope." tallahassee democrat, "ten commandments to prevent cancer. number one, do not smoke." surgeon general warns "we are killing ourselves" with smoking. tallahassee democrat, 1979. florida times-union, 1970, "stop smoking clinic set by 3287 cancer unit." they felt they would done a good job of informing the public about the dangers of smoking. and so the public health officials started moving toward efforts to get people to quit, and so that became the focus, how do we get people to quit smoking? now we have told them, we broadcast the dangers of smoking, now let us focus on how to get people to quit and directing them to resources to stop smoking. "cancer unit sets clinic on smoking." that is the florida times-union. "quit smoking clinic to tell you how and why to quit." "no-smoking class begins monday." that is the tallahassee democrat, that is march of 1979. mr. ellis is living in tallahassee at the time. but there is no evidence that he attended any of these no-smoking classes or other smoking cessation sessions. forums here to show how to quit smoking. if you have any sincere desire to quit or you are motivated to quit, you can go and avail yourself of that. here we have the florida times-union. we have got the lung association launching a new 3288 antismoking campaign. and "jacksonville firms," including the florida times-union, "cooperating with the lung association and promoting the program among their employees to get them to stop smoking." so his employers urging him and his coworkers to stop, employees of the florida times-union were urged to quit smoking, they had an antismoking campaign they were conducting. now we look at the decade of the '80s. all right, let us look at the 1980s. 1980 to 1993. mr. ellis is continuing to work at the florida publishing company. in 1985, rotating warnings go on the packs of cigarettes. by 1985 also, 42 million smokers have quit smoking. we know that the public warnings about cancer and addiction continue. mr. ellis gets warnings from his family members. there is still a question about motivation to quit. in 1992, he is diagnosed with cancer. so we will be discussing those items at this time. here are the rotating warnings. and they would appear an equal number of times on each cigarette product in the course of a year. and so you have got "smoking causes lung cancer, 3289 heart disease, emphysema, and may complicate pregnancy. smoking by pregnant women may result in fetal injury, premature birth and low birth weight. cigarette smoke contains carbon monoxide. quitting smoking now greatly reduces serious risks to your health." so the benefits of quitting are set out on that warning, one of the four that appeared in 1985. dr. burns testified that the anti-smoking campaign that began with the release of the 1964 surgeon general's report has been a major success, one of the most profound health accomplishments in the last century. he said that by 1989, the public health community had achieved more success with tobacco addiction than with addictions to alcohol and hard drugs. by 1985, almost half of all living men who had ever smoked had quit. and so in the words of dr. burns, the campaign had been a major success. the anti-smoking campaign he described as a major success. and we can just look at the numbers. by 1954, everyone knew that smoking causes disease, according to -- and that is according to dr. cummings, he testified to that effect. 1957, the surgeon general, the public was informed 3290 through excellent coverage of press and radio and tv about the dangers of smoking. 1964, when the surgeon general's report comes out, and between '55 and '65, 17.6 million people quit. by 1965, 31 percent of male smokers had quit. warning label goes on in 1966. and 1968, this is -- dr. heller says, "you could stand on a rooftop and shout 'smoking is dangerous'" -- daniel horn, i'm sorry, "you could stand on a rooftop and shout 'smoking is dangerous' at the top of your lungs and you would not be telling anyone anything they did not already know." warning label is changed in 1970 to say "smoking is hazardous to your health." warnings in all the advertising in 1972. and in 1975, more americans knew smoking was dangerous than knew the name of the president of the united states of america. so the psychological crutch did not stop millions of people from quitting smoking. dr. cummings was asked this question during the course of this trial, said, "perhaps it was unclear." i said: "notwithstanding that psychological crutch," that he had been talking about, "for a 15-year period, an average of 5,000 3291 to 6,000 people quit a day; right?" and he admitted that, yes, that was true, that notwithstanding the psychological crutch that he had been testifying about, people continued to quit, and they quit in huge numbers. so warnings, very specific warnings, back to mr. ellis in particular, we know that he got warnings, word of mouth warnings. we know that he was described as being someone with common sense. we know he got warnings from family members. we. know he was -- he read newspapers and magazines and watched the tv news so he got warnings from the mass media. we know he got warnings from the popular culture. we know he got warnings from the federal and state government and regulatory agencies, the public health groups. we know he got warnings from the american lung association and cancer society, we know because we have seen these public service announcements and pieces in the newspapers. your honor, do you want to take a break? the court: yes. why do not we take a 20-minute break, and then defense can complete its close and then we will have the last rebuttal close of the plaintiff, and then we will go to the jury. 3292 why do not we make it a 15-minute break. mr. persons: okay. the court: we will be back about five till. mr. persons: thank you. the court: okay. (the jury left the courtroom.) (recess taken from 2:42 p.m. to 2:51 p.m.) the bailiff: all rise, court is back in session. the court: everybody have a seat. (off the record from 2:52 p.m. to 2:52 p.m.) the court: we ready to go. mr. persons: yes, your honor. the court: if the jury's ready. let us see if they are ready. if they are, deputy rudd, we will bring them back in. the bailiff: all right. the court: mr. persons, you have almost another 40 minutes or so to go. mr. persons: i thought i had more time than that. the court: you started at 1:08. the clerk: yeah. mr. persons: okay. mr. kreiner: we broke at 2:40, that is an hour 3293 and a half. the court: i will not charge the 15 minutes against you, but you started at 1:08. mr. persons: okay. thanks for that, letting me know. the court: now, that is how much time you have. now, you are not required to use it. mr. persons: i probably will not use that much. i would be surprised if i do. the court: all right. because we are going to go to the jury today. mr. persons: okay. the court: also, i'm going to -- once they do go in there, i'm going to have the bailiff let them know about ordering supper and we can get that process started, too. mr. persons: okay. the court: so. mr. persons: okay. the court: by the time they want something to eat, they should have something here. mr. persons: excellent. then that will give us time to look at the -- the court: right. we will do that. the clerk: do you have like a set time that 3294 you are going to let them go to or is it going to be up to them? the court: it is going to be up to them. we are going to go tonight until they either get finished or they tell me they are too tired to go on. the bailiff: all rise for the jury. (the jury entered the courtroom.) the court: all right, everybody have a seat. i'll note the jury has returned, the lawyers are here, ms. ellis is here. you may continue, sir. mr. persons: thank you, your honor. the court: okay. mr. persons: all right. when we broke, we were talking about mr. ellis's knowledge of the dangers of smoking. and in mrs. ellis's words, she said that he knew that smoking could lead to his demise. mr. ellis's daughters continually told mr. ellis that smoking was bad for his health and encouraged him to quit smoking. his sisters got on him about smoking and encouraged him to quit. sally harrison told mr. ellis that smoking causes cancer and that he should not smoke. mr. ellis told martha jean martin that smoking was a nasty habit meaning it 3295 was addictive and dangerous. barbara dixon told mr. ellis that smoking might be harmful to him. so lots of personal warnings from people close to him, people who care about him, about the dangers of smoking and the need to quit smoking. mrs. ellis believed -- mr. ellis believed the risks of smoking. mrs. ellis testified that mr. ellis knew that smoking could lead to his demise. martha jean martin testified mr. ellis knew that smoking was hazardous to his health. dr. mccoy testified that mr. ellis was already aware of the risks of smoking before he sought treatment with dr. mccoy. now, let us talk about concealment. because that is a question on the verdict form that you are going to have to deal with. and it involves a material fact. the omission or concealment of a material fact. and what is a material fact? a material fact is one that is of such importance that mr. ellis would not have acted as he did but for the concealment or omission of that fact. in other words, it could have -- it would have affected the outcome, that he would have acted in a different way had he been aware of a material fact. 3296 a material fact is one that would have changed his behavior. that would be a material fact. and so what does this mean in terms of the concealment case that you have to decide? and remember, i told you earlier about the requirement that it is a but for, that for something to be a legal cause, a substantial cause, a substantially-contributing cause, it has to be a but-for cause, that but for this particular thing, then mr. ellis would not have died. there is no evidence of any concealment, that the concealment led mr. ellis to start smoking. there is no evidence that anything, that any concealment caused him to continue to smoke. there is no evidence that mr. ellis was in the dark about information related to the dangers and addictiveness of smoking. as he told his daughter tammy, "i've heard it all before," when she would, in her words, nag him about smoking and say "i've heard it all before." that is the evidence in the case. what the plaintiff was trying to convince you is that somehow the tobacco company messages confused mr. ellis and tricked him into smoking. that somehow the internal information the tobacco 3297 companies had would have led mr. ellis to quit smoking if only he had known about it. and here is the most important admission on the issue of concealment. mrs. ellis told us, she told you that she did not think there was anything that anyone could have told mr. ellis, said to him to make him quit smoking before he became ill. nothing anyone could have told him that would have caused him to quit smoking before he became ill. think about that for a moment. nothing the tobacco industry research committee, nothing r.j. reynolds ever said, nothing that brown & williamson or liggett or lorillard said, nothing philip morris could have said, nothing the council for tobacco research could have said, nothing anyone could have said to make mr. ellis quit smoking before he became ill. that was her testimony from that witness stand in this trial after days of evidence had come in about secret documents and things that were allegedly concealed and withheld in the way of scientific information in discovery about the link between smoking and cancer, testimony about ammoniated tobacco, testimony about levulinic acid, testimony about nicotinic receptors and 3298 upregulation in the brain, nothing anyone could have said to make mr. ellis quit smoking before he became ill. that is the testimony, and it is the testimony from someone who knew him better than anyone who is testified in this case. and i venture to say knew him better than anybody in the world. nothing anyone could have said could have caused him to quit smoking. there is absolutely no way the plaintiff can meet the burden of proving that concealment of information or an agreement to conceal information somehow would have convinced mr. ellis to quit smoking in time to avoid illness. did i do something wrong? mr. smith: no. mr. persons: oh. thought i had messed up. now, if your question -- your answer to question number 1 is no, and i submit to you it should be, then that would be the end of the process and you should proceed no further except to sign and date the verdict form and return it to the courtroom. if you answer yes, only then would you proceed to the next question that appears on the form, 3299 question number 2. "was r.j. reynolds tobacco company's concealment or omission of material information about the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes, or both, a legal cause of clarence c. ellis's death?" and the answer should be no. number 3, "was r.j. reynolds tobacco company's agreement with other cigarette manufacturers and corporations to conceal or omit information regarding the health effects of cigarettes or their addictive nature a legal cause of clarence ellis's death?" answer, no. thank you, sir. now, the next question on the verdict form will be question number 4. "please state the percentage of any fault that was a legal cause of clarence c. ellis's death that you charge to r.j. reynolds tobacco company, clarence c. ellis," and it has to add up to a hundred percent. let us talk about allocation of fault. and it is only if you find for the plaintiff on this class membership question against reynolds do you even get down to answering these other questions, including this one. i mentioned to you earlier and i showed you on where mrs. ellis submitted that 3300 mr. ellis would bear fault for his illness and death. the evidence will show or has shown that it is mr. ellis who was at fault in his death and not r.j. reynolds. r.j. reynolds, assignment of fault relates only to actions that were a legal cause of his death. r.j. reynolds cannot be assigned fault for actions that were not a legal cause of his death. so that the secret documents, the stupid comments, denials by the tobacco executives, if they were not a legal cause of his death, then fault cannot be assigned r.j. reynolds for those things. however inappropriate, no matter how offensive, no matter how stupid those things were, there has to be a causal nexus between those things and the death of mr. ellis. and you know the evidence. you know that mr. ellis made the choice to start smoking because mrs. ellis told us so. you know that he made the choice to continue smoking because mrs. ellis told us so. you know that mr. ellis made the decision not to try to quit smoking because the evidence tells us so. you know that the choice to stop smoking is 3301 one hundred percent in the control of the smoker because dr. burns, their expert, told us so. mr. ellis's choices were the only cause of his death. let us look at them. plaintiff admits that mr. ellis's actions were a cause of his death. mr. ellis chose to smoke after his parents told the children not to smoke. mr. ellis considered smoking to be his business. and please do not overlook that. that is very significant. that is very, very significant. and i'm going to urge you to do the right thing, too, but i know that you will. it is very telling. "it is my business. you tend to your business and i'll tend to mine." in other words, you leave me alone. mr. ellis responded to warnings with indifference, whether it was a shrug of the shoulders when sally opal harrison, his sister, his big sister, one of the people who raised him after he lost his mother, told him that if he kept smoking, he could get cancer. they are living in moultrie at the time. he shrugged his shoulders. mr. ellis chose to smoke despite the package warnings. we know that mr. ellis was aware of the warnings, we have got direct evidence of it. 3302 mr. ellis chose to continue smoking when millions and millions of other smokers were quitting. he chose to ignore the constant warnings from the media and the public health community. there is nothing anyone could have said that would have made mr. ellis quit. tammy and kimberly, his daughters, continuously begged mr. ellis to quit, and then he chose to keep smoking. mr. ellis was at fault for choosing to start and continuing to smoke. the decision to try to quit was a hundred percent in his control. plaintiff admits that he had the ability to quit sooner. that is part of their partial admission of fault, that he had the ability to quit sooner. mr. ellis chose to continue smoking after mrs. ellis quit smoking. mr. ellis refused to seek help to quit. mr. ellis said "i'm not ready to quit." plaintiff admits that he could have prevented his own death and he could have done it by quitting sooner. dr. burns testified that had mr. ellis quit smoking as late as 1978, his chances of dying of lung cancer would have been those of someone who 3303 had never smoked. he could have essentially avoided the disease. now, that is assuming that he did have a primary lung cancer. that is assuming he had a primary lung cancer. so even if you assume he had a primary lung cancer, he could have avoided that eventuality, he could have avoided his demise had he quit smoking as late as 1978. mrs. ellis quit in 1977 using information from the american heart association, a pamphlet. no chantix, it did not exist at the time. no gum. no patch. but delaying each day that first cigarette to the point that she quit, and she stayed quit for a whole year. so that is how the fault stacks up. and here is dr. burns' testimony. "the bottom line, sir, would you agree that if mr. ellis would have quit smoking as late as 1978, 15 years before his death, in your opinion, it is more medically likely than not he would have avoided his lung cancer; is that true?" answer: "that is correct. looking backwards from his having the lung cancer, yes." we know some things about mr. ellis's relationship with his smoking, mrs. ellis shared with us. "after he became sick, mr. ellis never 3304 said that he was sorry that he smoked, did he? "no. "he never said that if he would known what was going to happen, he would not have smoked? "no. "and he never expressed any regret for having smoked? "no, he did not verbalize it." that is consistent with the things we have heard about the kind of person mr. ellis was, because smoking was his business. his choices are the only legal cause of his death. there is nothing r.j. reynolds could have done that would have prevented mr. ellis from dying. only mr. ellis had the ability to prevent his death, and he is one hundred percent responsible for the choices that he made. and when you get to question number 4, "please state the percentage of any fault that was a legal cause of clarence c. ellis's death," that you charge a hundred percent to clarence ellis. the next question has to do with damages. and i suggest you will not get there, but if you do, i have to talk about it, because if i do not, that will be one of the first things somebody says is, 3305 well, he did not even talk about damages. just because i talk about damages does not mean that they ought to be awarded. but if you do award damages, they have to be just and reasonable in light of the evidence. that is what the judge will charge you. let us see what the plaintiff -- any damages must be fair and just in light of the evidence. plaintiff's claim for $10 million defies common sense. they are not asking for damages related to medical expenses or funeral expenses, economic damages for mrs. ellis, lost services for mrs. ellis, copd, or mrs. ellis's pain and suffering. they are asking damages for loss of support and pain and suffering to mrs. ellis. mrs. ellis. not mr. ellis's pain and suffering. i submit to you plaintiff is attempting to inflate her damage award by asking you for a huge amount of money that has no basis in the evidence. so to be fair and do the right thing and to do the right thing to them means $10 million. no one should be awarded millions of dollars because their spouse chose to smoke cigarettes for decades knowing they were dangerous. just ask that you use common sense. 3306 i apologize, there was something i thought i had and yet i did not have it. when we examined dr. cummings, he talked about a pamphlet that he had prepared for the american cancer society that he used in instructing people on how to quit smoking, and telling them that they could quit smoking. he said that, "any smoker can quit if they are willing to put up with some uneasy moments after stopping." is it worth putting up with some uneasy moments to save your life? and should someone receive millions of dollars because someone, a loved one was unwilling to put up with some uneasy moments? uneasy moments that could have saved their life and avoided their demise. question number 5, "what is the amount, total amount, one hundred percent, of any damages sustained by plaintiff betty jean ellis for the loss of clarence c. ellis's companionship and protection and for her pain and suffering as a result of clarence ellis's injury and death?" i'm not going to put a number in there. if you get to that part of the verdict form, you will use your own judgment about what is fair and just in light of the evidence. and in light of the 3307 testimony of dr. cummings about someone's willingness to put up with a few uneasy moment after they stopped smoking. mr. sales: excuse me, your honor, objection, there is no damage to be awarded for the decedent. the court: true, but i'm not sure i heard that, but overruled. overruled. hold on, let me look at the -- overruled. mr. persons: all right. let us talk about punitive damages. the sixth question on the verdict form, "under the circumstances of this case, state whether you find by clear and convincing evidence that punitive damages are warranted against r.j. reynolds tobacco company." punitive damages can only be awarded -- can be awarded only for any concealment or agreement to conceal that was a legal cause of mr. ellis's death. punitive damages can be awarded only to mrs. ellis. and punitive damages are in addition to damages that fully compensate mrs. ellis. let us talk about clear and convincing evidence. "clear and convincing evidence differs from the greater weight of the evidence in that it is more compelling and persuasive." 3308 the judge will instruct you. "greater weight of the evidence means the more persuasive and convincing force and effect of the entire evidence in the case. in contrast, clear and convincing evidence is evidence that is precise, explicit, lacking in confusion, and of such weight that it produces a firm belief or conviction without hesitation about the matter in issue." "evidence that is precise, explicit, lacking in confusion, and of such weight that it produces a firm belief or conviction without hesitation about the matter in issue." so if there is any hesitation whatsoever about whether punitive damages should be awarded, i submit to you there is not clear and convincing evidence. clear and convincing evidence, that is a heavier burden than the greater weight of the evidence. well, i submit to you r.j. reynolds should not be punished. the council for tobacco research funded more than $500 million worth of research. they funded 6,000 published articles, many of them in prestigious journals. we talked about that with dr. cummings. the new england journal of medicine 3309 was one of them. the journal of the american medical association was another. more than 600 of these articles were cited in the surgeon general's reports. they funded nobel prize winners, scientists of that caliber. they funded research in universities across the country. dr. cummings shared this with you. "and when those scientists received grants from the council for tobacco research and they conducted their research, they were given complete independence as to whether or not they published articles, were not they? "yes." they had complete independence from the source of the funding, the tobacco companies. here is one such article. some of that money went to fund articles like this one. when it said nicotine -- this is 1963, american journal of psychiatry. "nicotine is an active agent; it appears to have certain addictive qualities. heavy cigarette smokers thus appear to be true addicts." "our subjects also showed a compulsion to continue to smoke in increasing amounts." and then they gave credit to the ctr. "supported in part by grants from the council for tobacco research." 3310 that is in 1963, that is 25 years before the 1988 surgeon general's report that was dedicated to or focused on the addictive nature of nicotine. reynolds developed a less mutagenic cigarette. mutagenic meaning cancer causing. question, i put this to dr. cummings, "you told the jury that it would be a good thing to develop cigarettes that were less mutagenic?" answer: "yes." "you said such a product could cause less cancer; correct? "yes." reynolds developed such a cigarette. it developed premier and eclipse. they used a heating, not burn, technology. because when you burn tobacco or any organic material, you generate these compounds, many of which are cancer causing. they spent over a billion dollars developing this product. and premier was released in the late 1980s. eclipse was a second generation of that product, but failed commercially because people refused to buy it. they did not like the way it tasted. they did not like the way it smelled. they refused to buy it. you cannot force people to buy something. 3311 you put it on the market, you cannot make them buy it. it is still a free country. you heard during dr. burns' testimony, and he showed you the reynolds website. reynolds tells consumers, it says, "rely on the surgeon general, the centers for disease control, and other public, health, and medical officials when making decisions regarding smoking." that is what they are told to do. punitive damages are not warranted in this case. cigarettes have carried warning labels since 1966 about being hazardous to your health. reynolds has reported the ingredients in cigarettes since 1985 and has displayed the ingredients on its website for years. reynolds has not disputed the dangers or addictiveness of tobacco for more than a decade. and punitive damages are not necessary to prevent reynolds from concealing the dangers of tobacco. that is well known. and this business about, well, we looked to reynolds for information about the health effects of tobacco. i do not think anybody enjoys a nice, cold beer more than i do. mr. sales: objection, your honor. counsel's 3312 enjoyment is irrelevant, it is argumentative. the court: okay. mr. persons: it is argument. the court: he can talk about cold beer but not that he enjoys it. mr. persons: okay, i will not say that i enjoy it. mr. sales: although i believe you. mr. persons: but you do not look -- you do not look to anheuser-busch to give you advice about the dangers of alcohol consumption, no more than you would look to johnny walker or jack daniels for such advice. i do not know whether they still run the commercial, but the beef association used to run a commercial called "what is for dinner?" but i did not see anything in those commercials about red meat and how bad it is for you and all of that. i mean, you run a business and advertising a product, you are trying to encourage people to buy it, that is the whole idea, not to discourage them from buying it. and common sense tells us and life experience tells us that we do not go to the egg counsel, egg producers for health information about the 3313 cholesterol content of eggs or go to the beef counsel for information about the cholesterol content of beef. and we do things that we are told may be bad for us. it is like harry reasoner said, "in a country such as this, nobody is going to prevent an adult to smoke," because people choose to do certain activities, there is nothing wrong with that, but oftentimes there are consequences associated with those activities that can be adverse to one's health. sometimes it is a hard choice between having that key lime pie for desert or not having that hamburger or driving by popeyes and not stopping for some popeyes chicken, knowing that it is not the healthiest choice. but no one is to be faulted for it in a free country. and so i want to leave you with this. so 1955. and this is dr. cuyler hammond, one of the leading research -- medical researchers in the country. he is talking about the dangers of smoking. (video clip played as follows:) dr. hammond: it is now established, in my opinion, beyond a reasonable doubt that cigarette 3314 smoking greatly increases the probability of developing lung cancer. in my opinion, people should be warned of the dangers, and they are being warned. what they then want to do, whether they wish to smoke or not, is their own business. (video clip stopped.) mr. persons: so i submit to you a verdict for the plaintiff in this case will say that it is okay to knowingly engage in a risky behavior and then to blame others for your demise. i submit to you that the only just verdict in this case would be one in favor of the r.j. reynolds tobacco company. i thank you for your kind attention.