mr. walker: good morning, ladies and gentlemen. it is so nice to finally be able to talk to you again. i guess it is been about three weeks or a month or a long time since i was able to actually speak to you. and now that i have the chance, the first thing i want to do is just thank you for your service as jurors. this case has been a long haul for us all and i know it is been a tremendous sacrifice by each and every one of you to be here. and we try not to stare, but we have all been looking over at you. and we could tell day after day, week after week how you-all were paying close attention and taking a lot of notes and just really being model jurors. and for those of us who are counting on you to resolve these issues in this case, it is really good to see that. and one of the days the judge said that the system of justice that we have in america that counts on jurors like you to resolve our disputes is the best in the world, and he is right about that. during opening, i mentioned that everything that we do in this trial, from the testimony to the documents that we put in, to any other type of evidence that you saw, whether it was videos or music, anything, it is all designed to lead up kind of to where we are right now, to the verdict form that you will all get that you saw a little bit about from mr. trentalange and the questions that ultimately you have to answer to help us resolve the dispute in this case. and what i want to do is take some time today -- obviously, it would take me days or longer to go through everything that you saw. what i want to do is try to highlight for you the things that i think are important and that i think will be most useful to help you do your job to decide this case. and where i want to start is with the burden of proof. mr. trentalange talked a little bit about that. i said in opening that the plaintiff has the burden of proof. and while mr. trentalange is right that there is not going to be an instruction that uses those words, "burden of proof," when you look at the instructions, you will see where it says that plaintiffs must prove x, plaintiffs must prove y. if the greater weight of the evidence does not support plaintiff's claims, then you must find for the defendant. and that is where you will see that. and that is something that you probably noticed i came back to a lot during trial, is this issue of the burden of proof and whether the plaintiff met their burden of proof on all of their claims. and these are some examples what you heard during trial of how i did that. i asked every witness whether they were relying on a lung biopsy. and you know by now there was no lung biopsy. this is a lung case. the case is about lung cancer, and it is about lung conditions like asthma and copd. but the plaintiff did not bring you any lung evidence, no evidence from the lung, whether it was by an biopsy or by an autopsy. there was no evidence of pre-1990 quit attempts. we are going to talk a little bit more about that. the closest they tried to come to that was to say that at some point when mrs. loyd was pregnant and she was pretty sick with morning sickness, she stopped smoking. that was not because she was trying to quit smoking, because she had made up her mind to stop; she was just too sick to smoke and she stopped. the plaintiffs did not bring you any proof that explain the ck20 position result. we will talk more about that. they did not bring any evidence that explains mrs. loyd's normal lung decline between 1991 and 2006. we will talk about that. and in this concealment case, they did not bring you any evidence that mrs. loyd did not know the risks. and they certainly did not bring you any evidence that mrs. loyd was misled by anything that either of these defendants or any so-called co-conspirators did or said. now, before i move into the meat of the evidence, i want to talk with you about credibility, because you are going to have to make credibility determinations about all of the witnesses and all of the evidence that you saw in the case. and sometimes we think credibility is just about honesty. is somebody knowingly saying something that is false or not? but there is actually more to credibility than just honesty. and a big part of that is taking into account all of the evidence. and i brought this drawing with the elephant, because that was something that dr. bennett mentioned. when i asked him, why is it important to him as a witness in this case to look at all of the evidence and to take into account all of the evidence? and he gave me this example that i actually had never heard before, about six blind men who were looking at an elephant. and because they were wearing blinders and they are only seeing different parts of the elephant, they are all accurately reporting what they are seeing and touching, but they are really not getting to the right answer because they are not looking at the whole picture. and that is going to be important when you look back and you think back on the witnesses in the case, especially when you are thinking about the plaintiff's witnesses. for example, the plaintiff brought you dr. villa. you saw his picture on one of the slides earlier. he was the pathologist who looked at some of the pathology but did not look at all of the pathology. and the pathology slides that he did not look at are some of the most important ones in the case. he told you that he did not look at the special stained slides, the ones that showed the ck20 focally positive result. he never even looked at those. and by the way, on one of the slides -- i'm not sure why -- but it was -- dr. villa's name was listed as raul villa. and if some of you were keeping careful notes, you will know that his name is actually doctor luis villa. another example is dr. sider. that is the radiologist that the plaintiffs brought. radiologists are the people who look at and interpret radiology films, chest x-rays, and cts. but the radiologist they brought did not look at all the radiology. he looked at some of the films from 2006, one or two things from 2004. and that is it. it was not until dr. cole came in our case that you actually got to see and be talked through all of the different films that were available. why would you call a radiologist and not have them look at all of the radiology, particularly when if you hire an expert to help you review this case, they should be at an advantage compared to the people who were looking at the case when they were treating mrs. loyd, because if you are treating a patient, all you know is the information that you have in front of you right then. you do not know what is going to -- what information is going to come later, and you may not have even seen the information that came before. but if you are an expert witness, you have the ability to look at all of the available information, and there is no reason not to do that if you are trying to get to the right answer. and then there was dr. cummings. he was the guy who was here for basically a week. he was on the stand for five days. and he is the public health witness who decided that mrs. loyd was addicted after he read two of her depositions, and that was enough for him to see that mrs. loyd was a daily smoker. and for dr. cummings, that was really all he needed to know. and we are going to talk -- talk more about that. another issue about credibility is whether the testimony that you heard is reliable. is it testimony that you can trust, that you can take to the bank? well, the plaintiff brought you dr. mannino. dr. mannino was the pulmonologist that mr. trentalange said was kind of uncomfortable testifying in court. remember that dr. mannino did not actually show you all of the pulmonary function test results. it was not until mr. seiden stood up and started asking questions on cross-examination that you actually got to see the underlying data that he was kind of summarizing with his opinions. and then once we got into the data, you saw dr. mannino admitted that some of the demonstratives that he used that did not give the data, that just had like the one with the arrow that were looked at, was wrong. they brought you dr. tan. he was the witness who was a treating physician. he is the guy who testified under oath in his deposition, just about two months ago or so, that mrs. loyd did not have adenocarcinoma. and then he came into court and testified exactly the opposite from the witness stand. and the plaintiff said, well, he did not understand the question when he first testified that it was not adenocarcinoma, because he did not know what all the classifications were for lung cancer. he did not know that adenocarcinoma is nonsmall cell lung cancer. really? he is an oncologist. of course he knew what adenocarcinoma was when he gave the answer two months ago that she did not have it. then there was dr. sider. i have to come back to him. you might remember that when i asked him point-blank -- we were talking about bacs. and i said, is not it true that bacs, after they metastasize, can resemble other types of lung cancers? and he said, well, i'm not so sure about that. where are you getting that from? i said, well, you are an expert. just tell me. when bacs metastasize, can they resemble other types of lung cancers? no, i disagree with that. and then i showed him the article that he himself wrote back in 1990. and remember what he said? he kind of leaned back in the chair and said, oh, my god, i'm the author of this. he said, now that i know where you got it from, i totally agree with it. is that reliable testimony when you have people coming in who testified to the exact opposite two months ago or will not agree with something until you show them that they said it? remember all the time that we spent with that teco bill from 1995, that electric company bill that had mrs. loyd's former name on it? it had jacqueline rivers, and it had amber's address on there, crosswinds drive? and there was some questions of mrs. loyd about that until finally she just had to admit, before mr. trentalange showed me that teco bill, i never saw it before, and, yes, that is amber's address. and then dr. cummings -- i'll give him credit for this -- dr. cummings was very clear that he is biased. we asked him. he told you straight up, i'm a biased witness. i said, is not it true that you have described yourself as a mercenary in a war against the tobacco companies? he said, yep, that is me. i'm a mercenary who is biased. he testified from the witness stand that he is rooting for mrs. evers to win because he roots for all plaintiffs to win. that is not the kind of reliable testimony that takes into account all of the evidence that you -- you are entitled to have as jurors in a case like this. and credibility also means you should have the source. and i want to give you an example. when we were talking that early 1990s period when we all know by now mrs. loyd finally quit smoking, mrs. evers testified that she was not really that close with mrs. loyd during that period, because she had some things going on in her own life. she only got to see mrs. loyd a few times a month, and she did not know that she had quit smoking until sometime in 1994. but then kind of near the end of their case -- it was a friday, and i'm not even sure which friday it was -- but ellis loyd actually came in and he took the stand. and his testimony actually addressed a lot of the issues that you are going to have to decide in this case. and he knows what he was talking about with what i am going to go through because he was living with mrs. loyd. remember, he took the stand and mr. trentalange asked him how he was doing? and he said, i'm doing good. and then he talked in his testimony about all of these things. he said that when he met mrs. loyd in 1991, she did not say that she wanted to quit smoking. she did not smoke in bed. she did not get up in the middle of the night to smoke cigarettes. she never said she was addicted. he never heard her say that a doctor -- he never heard a doctor say she was addicted. she never mentioned cigarette ads, and she never bought cigarettes because of an ad that she saw. they did not subscribe to newspapers. remember, there was testimony back and forth about whether they subscribed, whether they read. that was clear in mr. loyd's mind that they did not. he said that mrs. loyd never said that anything was misrepresented to her about smoking. and i said, well, what was different about that 1993 quit when she was successful? he said, well, the difference was she just made up her mind that time. and when she did, she never went back to smoking. she never said she missed smoking. and this is a quote from what mr. loyd said, that there was nothing stopping her from quitting earlier. that is testimony from somebody who knew mrs. loyd perhaps better than anyone, and it supports everything that i am going to be talking about today. now, you heard so much evidence, i tried to find a way to kind of organize it for you so that i would not just ramble on the way i sometimes do. and what i want to do is boil the case down to what i believe are the seven simple truths in this case, the facts that really, i think, are beyond any legitimate dispute and the facts that are going to be most helpful to you in answering the questions on the verdict form that you have to answer. and this is the first one. now, mr. trentalange correctly predicted that i would be the one telling you that this case is only about one smoker. and that one smoker is jacqueline loyd. it is not about anybody else. there are people out there in this world -- and there always have been -- who smoked heavily, got addicted to cigarette smoking, tried to stop, and struggled with it. i'm not denying that. none of our witnesses have denied that. how could we? there are people out there who smoke because of their addiction and got illnesses that are caused by cigarette smoking, illnesses like small cell lung cancer that we heard about in this case. those people are out there, and you heard about them. there are people out there who smoked marlboros. there are people out there who read the journal of the american medical association. there are smokers out there who read ebony magazine, which you saw. there are smokers out there who did not know the risk and made every smoking decision based on something they saw in an advertisement. i'm not here to tell you that people like that do not exist. what i'm here to tell you is that that was not jacqueline loyd. and this case is only about jacqueline loyd and no one else. it is only about her smoking decision, what caused her illnesses, what she did to quit smoking or did not do, and what her reasons were for smoking when she was not trying to quit. now, in opening i showed you the slide about what the case is not about. and since you have seen it already, i do not want to spend a lot of time on it, but i do want to just remind you of it. mr. trentalange and i agree that this case is not about sympathy. you are going to get an instruction from the judge that sympathy is not something you can base your decision on in this case. it is not about whether cigarette smoking should be legal or should be banned. and you should be glad for that, because with everything that you have seen, that is a difficult, controversial issue about whether or not cigarettes should be sold. and, fortunately, this trial is not an opportunity for you to try to resolve that. if it were, you would be here for another year. this case is not about whether smoking can cause disease. i admitted in voir dire when i first talked to you-all in jury selection that i'll admit, reynolds admits, the whole world admits that cigarette smoking causes serious, life-threatening illnesses, including many types of lung cancer and copd. but the question here is not whether cigarette smoking can cause disease. we know it can. the question is, did it cause mrs. loyd's illnesses? and this case is not about whether the nicotine in cigarettes is addictive. nicotine is addictive. cigarettes are addictive. i'm not mincing words about it. i'm not half-hearted. it is just a fact. there is going to be a finding about it when you see the instructions. but that is not what this case is about because it is already been decided. that is why there is a finding on it. what you have to decide is whether or not mrs. loyd was addicted and whether or not there was any effect from that addiction on her smoking. all right. this is the next simple truth in this case. you actually heard it very early on in this case from ron cahill, by somebody that we have heard a lot about in this case. the fact of the matter is mrs. loyd liked to smoke, and she did not want to quit. all the way from the fifties, the sixties, the seventies, the eighties, and part of the 1990s. ron cahill was the guy that took the stand that now you were kind of led to believe that he put some kind of ultimatum on mrs. loyd, that she had to choose between him and her cigarettes. but you saw him testify. he did not say anything like that. what he said was that maybe smoking played a part, but there were reasons that you heard about in this trial for why their marriage did not last, and it was a short marriage to begin with. now, when ron cahill told you what mrs. loyd said to him, that she did not want to quit because she liked to smoke, that was not just when she was married to ron cahill in the late 1980s. that is how she felt the first 40 years of her smoking history. other than mr. cahill, every man in mrs. loyd's life smoked cigarettes, and she smoked with them. no witness that came to this trial testified that mrs. loyd wanted to quit smoking before the early 1990s. witness after witness after witness, whether it was expert witnesses, like dr. barnett who we called, and even dr. cummings, fact witnesses like amber norris and vickie gilmore and ellis loyd, all of those people said that before the early 1990s, mrs. loyd never expressed any interest in quitting smoking and she did not try to quit smoking. i'm not saying that to criticize her; it is just a fact. it is not criticizing a smoker to say that a smoker likes to smoke and does not want to quit. ms. gilmore even went beyond that. that was mrs. loyd's daughter. she said that even into the 1990s, while she may have made some early attempts to quit in the 1990s, it was not exactly a concerted effort -- that is how she put it -- until 1993 when she succeeded. and that is consistent with what ellis loyd said, that right up until the end, she had not really made up her mind to quit smoking. now, why is this important? it is important because you have to ask yourselves, does this fit the profile of an addict? does mrs. loyd's behavior fit the profile of somebody who is tormented by their cigarette smoking, somebody who is struggling with it, trying to quit, and failing over and over again? it does not. even dr. cummings, who described himself as a mercenary, admitted that it takes motivation to quit smoking and you have to decide you are going to quit if you want to succeed. you have to be ready to make a quit attempt, and the individual smoker must decide for themselves whether or not to try to quit. you have to want to quit in order to succeed at quitting, and that should not come as a surprise to any of you. now, then, there is this question of, well, is there something about nicotine or cigarettes that prevents you from wanting to try to quit? you heard from two experts on addiction in this case. one was dr. cummings, the plaintiff's expert. he is the one that is a public health witness who has a lot of interest in addiction but is not a medical doctor. he does not diagnose addiction, and he cannot even prescribe quit smoking aids because he is not a doctor. and we brought you in our case dr. barnett, board certified in addiction psychiatry. she has treated thousands of people who are addicts, and she is a recent president of the florida psychiatric society. and they both talked to you about some of these issues. and dr. barnett explained that nicotine does not turn people into robots. nicotine does not hijack your brain and take over decisions that you make for yourself. it just does not act that way. other types of drugs that can intoxicate you, like cocaine or heroin, they can interfere with your judgment, but nicotine just plain does not do that. and that is why dr. cummings admitted that whether you are addicted or not, the individual smoker must decide for themselves whether or not to try to quit. that was a decision that mrs. loyd made every single time she lit up a cigarette. every time you light a cigarette, you are making a decision for yourself, as mrs. loyd did, whether to smoke that cigarette or to put it out and to try to quit. and that points up an important fact about cigarette smoking behavior in general. nicotine does not lead automatically to some kind of lung disease. there is always a cigarette smoker in the middle. in this case, it is a woman in the middle, and her name was jacqueline loyd. and she is the one that made the decisions about whether to smoke, whether to try to quit, and when to try to quit. and until that human being in the middle of that makes a committed decision to quit smoking, they will not quit. now, you may remember when mrs. evers was on the stand i asked her some questions about jacqueline loyd's choices. and i want to take a look at that -- take a look at those now. we talked about all of these. we talked about mrs. loyd's choice to start smoking, the choice to continue smoking, the choice of what brands to smoke, the choice to smoke for decades without trying to quit, the choice to switch brands, the choice about where she would go to smoke, how to quit, when to quit, and the choice to stay quit. and let us face it, only -- only mrs. loyd could make those choices. those choices could not be made by some corporation, and they certainly were not made by chemicals in her brain. those were choices that mrs. loyd made for herself. and if you look at the entire time that mrs. loyd was a cigarette smoker and you add up all of the days that we know from the medical records where she actually was trying to quit, you find out that she was only trying to quit 77 days out of the 15,609 days that she was a smoker. and when you do the math, that means that she was only actually trying to quit one half of one percent of the time. 99.5 percent of the time that she was a smoker, she was not trying to quit. i'm not criticizing mrs. loyd. the fact is she did not try to quit because she did not want to quit because she liked to smoke. now, mr. trentalange argued at least a couple of times that mrs. loyd was only 16 years old when she started and that is -- that is what the evidence was that you heard. dr. cummings said she may not actually have become a regular smoker until sometime later. but even if you assume that she was a full-time smoker by age 16, the reality in this case is that adulthood came early for mrs. loyd. the same year that they say she started smoking is the year that she got married and moved out of the house and started her adult life. but what is far more important than that is that mrs. loyd did not stay 16 forever. she grew up. and as a adult in her twenties and thirties and forties and even into her fifties, she made the same choices and decisions about her smoking that she made all along. you cannot explain mrs. loyd's smoking behavior by pretending that she was a 16-year-old girl forever, because she was not. and maybe that is why when mrs. evers was on the stand she admitted that mrs. loyd's acts relating to the frequency and duration of her efforts to quit smoking -mr. trentalange: excuse me. may we take that down? i have an objection. the court: yes. mr. trentalange: may we approach? the court: yes, sir. (at the bench) mr. trentalange: judge, he is got a transcript. that is improper to display written testimony during -mr. walker: i'll take it off and show another version. the court: you can tell the jury your recollection of the trial. i do not think you can publish the transcript. mr. walker: i will not do the transcript. the court: okay. mr. walker: i have another slide that summarizes it. the court: thank you. (in open court) mr. walker: all right. so mrs. loyd (sic) admitted from the witness stand that mrs. loyd bears responsibility for the frequency and duration of her quit attempts. and that is what that is talking about, the frequency. 99.5 percent of the time, she was not trying to quit. now, why is that important? can i have no. 11 please? it is important because this is the jury instruction you are going to get on this issue about addiction and copd. an addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine is a legal cause of copd if it directly and in a natural and continuous sequence produced or contributed substantially to producing such copd so that it can reasonably be said that but for -- but for the addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine, the copd would not have occurred. mr. trentalange: excuse me, your honor. i have another objection. may we approach? the court: okay. [#deleted sidebar#] mr. walker: i'm back, for better or for worse. can i have the slide again, please? all right. so i was going over the judge's instruction that you are going to hear on the very first question on the verdict form and how the plaintiff has to prove that, not just that she was addicted, but that her addiction to cigarettes was such that it can reasonably be said that but for the addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine, the copd would not have occurred. and the point that i wanted to make to you about this first simple truth is that if you do not want to quit smoking and you do not try to quit smoking, it does not matter whether you are addicted or not. your addiction is not what makes you smoke. if you do not want to quit and you do not try to quit, you are not smoking because you are addicted; you are smoking because you like to smoke and you are not ready to try to quit. and that is the truth about mrs. loyd, that you heard from mr. cahill and every other witness in this case. addiction was never the reason that mrs. loyd smoked cigarettes. i want to move on to the next one. when mrs. loyd was ready, she quit smoking and she stayed quit. the evidence that you heard is that when she was finally ready in 1993, she did the things that people do when they want to stop smoking. she asked for help. she went to the doctor. she talked to her family. she got other people involved. she made a plan. and when she did all of those things, that tells you both that she was motivated and committed to quitting, and it also explains how she succeeded. can i have the next slide, please? i'm not going to go through all of this again, but i wanted to show it to you to remind you of that time period when she quit. she is smoking one pack a day. she cuts down to a half pack a day and talks with a doctor about the patch. she gets a prescription for the patch on november 4th. and by five days later, she is reporting to her doctor that she stopped smoking, and after that she never smoked another cigarette again. remember, plaintiffs counsel was trying to compare addiction to smoking to that of heroin addicts and cocaine addicts. it may be so for some people, but not for mrs. loyd. and i'm not trying to trivialize mrs. loyd's quitting experience. i'm sure it was difficult for her, the way it would be difficult for anyone to give up something they have done for many years. but she quit. she succeeded. even when she had hard times in that 1994 to 2007 period, like in 1994 when she lost her son, that was, obviously, an incredibly difficult period of her life. she thought about smoking, but she did not go back to it. later in 2006 when she was diagnosed with lung cancer, the testimony was that she may have thought about smoking but she did not go back to it. mr. trentalange showed you a quote that said that addiction is a chronic relapsing disease. but mrs. loyd did not relapse. after she said she stopped smoking cigarettes, she never relapsed. she never went back to cigarette smoking. you heard about all of the different methods that she used to quit smoking, and you heard the evidence about how ninety percent of people quit smoking without any quit aids at all. and you heard about the 60 million americans who quit smoking even though many of them were addicted, people with the same brain changes and smoking the same inhalable cigarettes that dr. cummings talked about, quit smoking. and so one of the questions you are going to have to decide apart from whether she smoked because of an addiction, is whether she was even addicted at all. and the reason i say that is because a person who is truly addicted to a substance shows signs of clinically significant impairment or distress. dr. barnett talked about that. that means that you can tell in their personal life, things that they have given up that they otherwise would like to do but cannot do because they, instead, want to stay on the substance that they are on. and there was just no evidence of that with respect to mrs. loyd. when ellis loyd came to testify -- and he knew her in this time period when she was quitting -- he did not tell you anything about withdrawal symptoms. he did not say she was behaving like an addict. he did not say that she gave up going anyplace or doing anything because of her smoking. because that is just not the facts in this case. dr. cummings' testimony, as i mentioned earlier, was based entirely on the fact that she was a daily smoker. can i have the next exhibit, please? he showed you this heaviness of smoking index. but after we talked about it, we saw that it really boiled down to, how many cigarettes per day do you smoke? if we look at the next one, he also showed you this fagerstrom test for nicotine dependence. but when we actually talked through it with him, he said he could not apply a lot of those factors. one of them was based entirely on a two- or three-week period in the eighties. and in order for him to score her positive on no. 6, he had to cross out half that -- that question. because as we all heard, when mrs. loyd had morning sickness, she did not keep smoking; she stopped smoking. and so what that one boils down to, just like the other, is how many cigarettes per day do you smoke, because at the end of the day that is dr. cummings' opinion. if you are a daily smoker, you are addicted. by his definition, if you watch tv every day, you are addicted to tv. if you hop on the internet every day, if you are a daily internet user, you are addicted to the internet. if you jog every day and you are a persistent, daily jogger, then that would mean that you are addicted to jogging. and a lot of times we talk about addiction that way. but this is a court of law. and we brought you an addiction psychiatrist who is a medical doctor specializing in addiction. and she explained that addiction means more than just daily use; it means you have to look for clinically significant impairment and distress. and you did not see that. we also talked with her about whether mrs. loyd was not able to control her smoking. and we went over all of the places and times when she did control her smoking. she did not smoke in cars or in houses where the owners did not permit it, on long bike rides, 4-h meetings, and so on. and you are entitled to ask yourselves whether this fits the profile of an addict. does an addict control their substance use so they can do all of these things the way she did? and the evidence was no. but she was able to do that, because she was in control of her smoking and made individual decisions about what she wanted to do. all right. here is no. 4. mrs. loyd knew the risk the entire time she smoked. this is a concealment case, and that means that the plaintiff is alleging that mrs. loyd did not know something about cigarette smoking that would have made a difference to her. but the evidence is that she did know the risks, and she knew them the entire time that she was smoking. we showed you all of the different warnings that she got. you-all knew about them, because you had seen them i do not know how many times, the warnings that go on the packages. but on top of that, both before and after those warnings, we showed you all of these other warnings she got from family, at school, church, health groups, public health community, surgeon general, and 4-h. we brought you dr. hoffman, the ph.d. historian who served as juror on pulitzer prize committee for american history. and she showed you all of the research she did into mrs. loyd's awareness and into what was available to mrs. loyd from the people and places that were important to her. and i just want to review some of that with you now. can i have the next slide? she told you that mrs. loyd's mother did not smoke, that as a child mrs. loyd's parents did not allow smoking in their house, that her parents warned mrs. smith (sic) and her brother jack smith not to smoke. because she was born in michigan, dr. hoffman went back and researched what the law was in michigan for teachers and schools and school books. and she showed you how michigan teachers had to pass an exam so they could teach about the health effects, because michigan law required that that be taught at the time that mrs. loyd was living there. then we showed you the school books that warned students in michigan when mrs. loyd was there about the dangers. and this is -- these are some examples of what they said. people suffering from cancer of the lungs, ninety percent are smoking -- are smokers. tobacco has a narcotic effect. the smoker is likely to become a servant, servant to the tobacco and slave. that is the kind of information that mrs. loyd was getting. we showed you information about slang terms like cancer sticks, coffin nails, nicotine fit. and those go all the way back to the fifties, not just in the general public, but also in mrs. loyd's circle of family and friends. you heard evidence about how her family was avid -- were avid churchgoers and how the methodist church warned against the dangers. and we showed you -- did not just tell you -- we showed you what the methodist church was telling its congregation about this. heavy cigarette smokers die seven years before they would if they did not smoke. she got those same kinds of warnings from the baptist church, and she later went to those churches. and we showed you what they were saying about it too. cigarettes contain poisons that are harmful. cancer of the lung is a common disease increasing more than any other kind. the reason is smoking. we showed you all of that. we showed you the 1964 surgeon general's report and how it was one of the biggest stories of the year. remember, mr. trentalange was asking questions about whether you could know about the moon landing even if you were not reading the papers. the surgeon general's report in 1964 was that kind of news story. we showed you the 1965 physician's survey that said that 97 percent of doctors knew and understood about the risk and were warning their patients over ninety percent of the time. and then we are just now coming to the point in time where the 1966 warning comes into play. everything that we talked about before that predates the warning and gave mrs. loyd the information about the risks. after that, we showed you how mrs. loyd punished the plaintiff, mrs. evers, and a friend of hers for smoking. we showed you about how ms. norris and ms. evers urged mrs. loyd to quit smoking. we showed you evidence about mrs. loyd's involvement in 4-h. and with respect to 4-h we even showed you the pledge: i pledge my health to better living. you saw the photo where she was -can we go back to that last one? the photo where she is actually leading a 4-h group and how she had her children involved in that. and so dr. hoffman went back and showed you -- can i have the next one, please -- the actual documents about what the 4-h organization was teaching about. we showed you how mrs. loyd's mother asked her brother to quit smoking for health reasons and how after that he quit and then told her -- told mrs. loyd about that and encouraged mrs. loyd to quit smoking. and around that same time, the warning was changed to say, the surgeon general has determined that cigarette smoking is dangerous to your health. after that, we showed you how mrs. loyd's own father, who had been a longtime cigar smoker, was living with her and was on oxygen for long-term breathing problems caused by smoking. she knew the risk, and then her father passed away of emphysema that was believed to be caused by cigarette smoking, right before the warnings changed in 1984 to include warnings that smoking causes emphysema and that quitting now -- quitting smoking now greatly reduces serious risks to health. ron cahill quit smoking because of heart problems and encouraged mrs. loyd to, and so did mr. loyd when she was married to him. all of that adds up to a mountain of evidence that was available directly to mrs. loyd about the health risks of cigarette smoking, not some ad that a witness cannot tell you where it ran, not something in ebony magazine or something in the new york times. these were personal, direct warnings about the health risks that she had. and most of them were before the warnings even went on to the packs. that is why there was not a single witness in this case who ever told you that mrs. loyd did not know the risk, because she did know the risk. there was some testimony about whether more could have been written on the cigarette packages like ingredients. but mrs. evers testified that her mother was not reading the side of the packages. there are some people who look for that information on products, but mrs. evers testified that her mother just was not one of them. the bottom line is there is nothing that any tobacco company could have said or done that would have been a more powerful or more poignant warning to mrs. loyd than all of that. she knew the risks. and while she may have had her own reasons for smoking, some people are comfortable with the risk. some people think, it will not happen to me. whatever mrs. loyd's reasons were, she was not smoking because she did not know the risk or because she thought it was safe. now, so far, i have not talked about the medical issues. and i want to cover those with you, because they are important, because mrs. loyd did not have an illness that was caused by smoking. like i said earlier, many smokers get serious illnesses from their smoking. but it is actually only a minority of smokers that get the illnesses that we are talking about here. the evidence you heard was that only 10 to 15 percent of even heavy smokers will get lung cancer and only 15 to forty percent of smokers will get copd. nonsmokers get those illnesses too for reasons that have nothing to do with smoking. and smokers are not immune from the risk that nonsmokers face. even smokers and former smokers can develop illnesses for reasons apart from cigarette smoking. and that brings me to -- i think i need to move these -- truth no. 5. the court: mr. walker, can i see it? before you put it up, can i take a look at it -mr. walker: of course. the court: -- because i cannot see it? okay. thank you. mr. walker: yes, your honor. mrs. loyd's lung condition was variable, like asthma, and was not progressive like copd. you have learned in this trial that copd -- many of you already knew this -- is a permanent loss in lung function due to emphysema or chronic bronchitis. but the witness that they called to testify about copd, dr. mannino, he did not tell you that she met the criteria for emphysema or chronic bronchitis. plaintiff says that mrs. loyd had copd, but they did not prove it because they do not have the evidence. they do not -- when you have copd, there can be evidence of it in the lung tissue, or you can see evidence of it on radiology. they did not bring you either of those. and on the issue of the autopsy, by the way, you heard some very good reasons from mrs. evers why they did not do an autopsy. and i'm not here to criticize them for not doing it, but mrs. evers also admitted that she understands that because no autopsy was done, that is evidence they do not have and are not able to bring, even if it means losing this case. no pathologist, no medical doctor ever looked at mrs. loyd's lungs under a microscope either while she was alive from a biopsy or after she passed from an autopsy. and plaintiff did not bring you any radiologist to talk to you about the copd they say mrs. loyd had. they brought dr. sider -- he was a radiologist -- but they did not ask him a single question about copd. so what is next? then there is an issue about pulmonary function tests and medical records. and i want to talk with you about the medical records, because i want to level with you. the reality is about the medical records that each side has pointed to medical records that support their position. some of the records say that mrs. loyd had asthma and do not mention copd. other records say she had copd and do not mention asthma. still more records say she had asthma and copd. and then there is even a series of records where dr. vasquez sees mrs. loyd and tries to figure out whether she had copd versus asthma. remember, mr. trentalange said that was a false choice. it was not a false choice for dr. vasquez. he wrote in her records that he wanted to figure out whether it was copd versus asthma. and once he did that, he ordered some x-rays and other tests and every record after that, he only mentioned asthma. but the fact of the matter is, the truth is each side can show you medical records that support our position. there is records going both ways. the medical records at the end of the day are not going to help you decide whether she had copd or not. the same is true for some other aspects, because copd and asthma have a lot in common. they have a lot of similar symptoms. and dr. mannino testified that you cannot even tell the difference. it is impossible to tell the difference between exacerbation of asthma and exacerbation of copd. and i brought these two medical records as an example of what dr. mannino was talking about. april 21st, 1994, dr. shakoor writes in mrs. loyd's medical records that she is there because she is being seen for exacerbation of asthma. the very next day, the same doctor writes in her medical records that she is being seen for exacerbation of copd. it does not mean that he was wrong on either of those days. it just means that, like dr. mannino said, it is impossible to tell the difference, and you need to look for more than just medical records to answer this question. now what i want to do is focus on the evidence that will help you draw the distinction between whether she had copd or just asthma. copd is a progressive disease that gets worse over time and never gets better. all of the pulmonologists that testified agreed with that. in mrs. loyd's case, her lung function varied over time, and we are going to take a look at that. this is the slide that dr. farber showed you. you may remember he was the doctor who was board certified in pulmonology, who has interpreted 30-to 40,000 pulmonary function tests and has diagnosed 10- to 15,000 patients with copd, and these are the important differences. with copd, you expect a steady increased decline in lung function, but mrs. loyd showed a normal decline and function with variability. for copd, you expect an accelerated decline, 40 to 50 or 60 cc's per year. asthma is 25 to 30. for copd, you would expect to see gas diffusion abnormalities that are irreversible and fixed. asthma is fully reversible. copd, in general, not fully reversible. asthma is fully reversible. and this is important. copd has evidence of emphysema or chronic bronchitis on x-rays and ct scans. asthma, you would expect to see normal x-rays and ct scans or variability. now, mrs. loyd's lung -- problems were variable. and i just pulled some of the records to let you see that. and these -- on this date in 1997, she is having asthma problems. later that month, it cleared up. later in 1998, it is talking about how she has variation from month to month. after that, she is reporting an unbelievable response to the medications that she is on. that kind of variability in symptoms is what you see with asthma, not copd. for the radiology, same -- the same thing, the issue -- the features come and go. no acute cardiopulmonary process identified. later there is evidence of hyperinflation. that can be evidence of an obstruction, either asthma or copd. by '94 there is still hyperinflation. by 2005, no active pulmonary disease. when your symptoms come and go, when the evidence on the radiology comes and goes, it is not copd, but it can be asthma. that leaves us with the pulmonary function test. and you heard about six of them. they are all listed here. now, the question you are going to have to answer on the verdict form is whether she had copd before 1996. that means that those last four pulmonary function tests cannot support the plaintiff's claim in this case for pre-1996 copd. both experts, dr. mannino and dr. farber, said that that 1994 pulmonary function test was unusable, because that was the one when mrs. loyd only blew into that tube for a second or two. what does that mean? that means that the plaintiffs are relying entirely on this 1991 pulmonary function test that mr. trentalange talked about. but that pulmonary function test of 1991 was read as asthma, not copd, not just by dr. farber who came and talked to you about it, but also by the treating doctors at the time. dr. chandler read it as asthma. dr. patel read it as asthma. it is in the medical records. so three out of the four doctors who read that 1991 pft that they are relying on called it asthma. the only person on the planet that there is evidence from that that 1991 pulmonary function test was copd was dr. mannino. so what if he assumed that the 1991 pulmonary function test had been diagnosed as copd, even though it was not? then what you would expect to see is that the copd would be there from that point on. copd does not go away. but when dr. mannino was on the stand and mr. seiden went over the numbers with him, this was her number in 1991; this was her number in 2006, the last pft. and that is 450 cc's over 15 years. and, remember, mr. seiden who was standing somewhere in this area over here said, doctor, what is the answer? and he said, 50. and then mr. seiden said, try again. and they came up with the right answer, which is 30 cc's per year, exactly what you will expect to see in someone who does not have copd but has asthma. there is much more. dr. mannino showed you this chart with the arrow going down, and it is got some of the information on there. but then on cross-examination, he admitted that that chart is not right. he said it was inaccurate. and then mr. seiden said, well, let us make it accurate. can you draw on there and see how you have to fix it? and he kind of started down and he went off to the right, and then it looks like he changed his mind and went down below that and kind of off to the right. why is that important? it is not because i'm criticizing dr. mannino; it is important because dr. mannino had not done this analysis. this analysis requires you to look at all of the results, not just some of them. that is why he did not get the math right when they were doing the decline over time, because he had not done that analysis. he was doing it for the first time on cross-examination. so what does it show on cross-examination of dr. farber? mr. bigger was asking him about the post bronchodilator data. and look what it does? it goes down and then comes back up. that is not what copd does. that is not a progressive, accelerated decline in lung function. that is variability. this one is just starting from 1998 and going to 2006. when the arrows go up or go down and up, that is not copd; it can be asthma. that is why dr. mannino's chart wanted it to look like it was going down, but it was not accurate. for all of those reasons, we believe that the evidence is that mrs. loyd simply did not have copd. what she had was asthma, and that is why her symptoms, pulmonary function tests, and radiology showed features that came and went. that is what asthma does, not copd. all right. next, i want to talk with you about lung cancer. now, you have already all learned in this case that there are many types of cancers and many types of lung cancer. not every smoker gets lung cancer and not every lung cancer is caused by cigarette smoking. there are different types of lung cancer, and they each have their own association with cigarette smoking. small cell lung cancer is strongly associated with cigarette smoking, but mrs. loyd did not have that. in this case, the plaintiff is asserting that what mrs. loyd had was adenocarcinoma. and what you need to remember about that is that adenocarcinoma has the weakest association with cigarette smoking of all, and that that association gets weaker over time. adenocarcinoma is the most common type of lung cancer in nonsmoking women. and then on the other hand, there is bac, which is in red. and you are going to get an instruction from the judge that bac lung cancers are not caused by smoking. that means that whether you are a smoker or not, you can get a lung cancer that is not caused by smoking, because smokers and former smokers, like everybody else, are exposed to the same other risk factors for lung cancer as everyone else. and there is evidence in mrs. loyd's medical records where her doctors noted some of those risks. this one at the top, she used to work in a horse training area with exposure to a lot of environmental dust. and below, there are references to chronic fumes and toxic chemicals. that is what her doctors noted in the record. and dr. villa told you that those are risk factors for cancer. and when dr. tan was here, he agreed that he did not investigate those. now, when you are trying to decide between bac and adenocarcinoma, i'm going to tell you the same thing i did with copd. you heard a lot of evidence. and the reality is there is a lot of overlap between adenocarcinoma and bac. and while each side was showing you the evidence that we thought supports our position, because it is our job to do, a lot of that evidence is not going to help you do your job. that is because -- let me give an example. each side was telling you -- defense witnesses would say, well, there are no references to adenocarcinoma in the medical records. and then the plaintiffs' witnesses would say, well, there is no references to bac in the medical records. i'm going to level with you. there is no evidence of bac or adenocarcinoma spelled out in the medical records. if you go looking through the medical records for either, you are not going to find it. and there is more. there are other features of bacs and adenocarcinoma that overlap. both of them can be found in the periphery of the lungs. both of them can metastasize. both of them can grow aggressively once they are outside of the lung. so the question for you, trying to decide which it is, is, how does the plaintiff meet the burden of proving it was adeno and not bac? well, we brought dr. bennett. he was the board-certified forensic pathologist, and he told you that his entire job as a forensic pathologist and a medical examiner is not so much about treating people going forward as it is about looking at the whole picture and looking backwards to the cause of the cancer. dr. bennett's whole job is to answer the question of, why? what caused it? what was the cancer? dr. bennett told you the question you have to answer is, what did the cancer look like? what was it before it metastasized? because after it metastasized, it becomes poorly differentiated. and that means that it does not look the way it did when it first started. so how do you prove where a cancer started? you can do it with a lung biopsy. dr. villa talked about that. he said he wished there had been one to answer this question, but we do not have that. you can do it with an autopsy. dr. villa testified that he believes that autopsies should be required by law to be done. but you do not have that to work with either. but you do have something, because the moffitt pathologists who were working with mrs. loyd back in 2006 did something called the special stains that you-all heard about. and one of those special stains included the ck20 that you heard so much about. and what they did, they recorded in her medical records that she was positive for ck20, and they stained the slides and even preserved them at the hospital for anyone to go see. dr. bennett came down and looked at those specially stained slides and agreed with the pathologist that mrs. loyd was ck20 positive. dr. villa did not bother to look at it. now, this is really important. every single pathologist in this case, dr. villa and dr. bennett, told you that a ck20 positive result is core -- demonstrates bac. they all said that. if it is ck20 positive, that is consistent with bac. and then on the cross of dr. bennett, mr. trentalange showed him a document that he pulled off that had even more information about this, because dr. bennett could not remember the percentages right off the bat. but once he saw the document mr. trentalange pulled out, he agreed that bacs stained positive for ck20 64 percent of the time and that adenocarcinomas stained positive for ck20 only eight percent of the time. your job will be to figure out, was it more likely that she had bac or adenocarcinoma? and the numbers answer that question for you. but it is not just the ck20 result, although that is information you can use and should use and cannot ignore. there is more than just that bac fingerprint. dr. cole and dr. bennett told you that there are some features that you can see on radiology that do not overlap with both. one of those is this multinodular presentation. and you saw the demonstrative that showed mrs. loyd's three nodules, the big one at the top, the middle one more towards the bottom, and the smaller one kind of off to the left. that is evidence of bac. you heard from dr. bennett and dr. cole about the slow growth and doubling time. dr. cole was able to calculate that because he looked at all of the radiology. dr. sider could not do that because he did not have all the films or did not look at them. dr. cole, our expert, talked to you about ground-glass opacity. that is something you see with bac but do not see with adeno. and they talked about the growth along the pleura in areas of scarring. the court: counsel? mr. walker: all four of those are consistent with the ck20 positive result consistent with bac, and that means that mrs. loyd's cancer was not caused by cigarette smoking. and you will get an engle finding about that. the clerk: counselor, you are at the hour mark of your hour and 15. mr. walker: thank you very much. and let us face it, whatever caused mrs. loyd's cancer, whatever type of cancer she had, i mean, whether it is bac or adenocarcinoma, remember, she was not diagnosed with cancer until 13 years after she had stopped smoking. and all of the witnesses talked to you about how the longer you have quit smoking, your risk goes down for lung cancers from smoking. you can still get cancers from other things, but the risk from smoking goes down. and that is why doctors tell patients to quit. the plaintiff did not prove lung cancer caused by smoking because what mrs. loyd had was a bac. now, i have covered what i think are all of the key issues in the case, but i have not covered everything that you -- that is on the verdict form, and that is because i think that you should not even get to all of the issues on the verdict form. you-all know from the first day in this case that i was going to take the position and reynolds takes the position that there should be no liability in this case. the first time i said it, you did not know why. i have talked to you about some of the main reasons why. and because of that, i do not think you should even reach the other issues in the case. but it is my job to go over some of them with you because mr. trentalange did and because they are on the verdict form. at the very beginning, i told you that in this case you will hear some serious allegations against my client and against the industry. and i told you that you would hear some things that you would not like and that i would do my best to try to answer those allegations and keep the other side honest. and i think i have done that. but for the last -- next and final simple truth, the most important thing about those allegations is that plaintiff did not prove -plaintiff did not prove legal cause and reliance. and legal cause and reliance is the connection between the plaintiff's allegations and mrs. loyd. anyone can come into court and go digging through 16 million documents from a company and find some bad stuff. i bet all of you who have worked in your lives have worked with people that you would never want to represent the views of the company where you worked. and by golly, they came in and they showed you a lot of documents that never should have been written by people saying things that never should have been said. but this case is not about all those internal documents. every question on the verdict form is going to require a connection -mr. trentalange: excuse me, your honor. may we approach? i have an objection. the court: okay. (at the bench) mr. trentalange: i know these things go a long time. i hope you heard what he just said. he is attempting to nullify the engle findings by suggesting that they are just a tiny portion of 16 million pages of documents written by people who should not have written them and should not have said what they said. that is totally inconsistent with the findings in the case. and they actually did this stuff as a matter of law for him to suggest, golly gee, these are just some random people, is totally inappropriate. and so i would request that the court instruct the jury that -- i have got to be careful what i say -- the court instruct the jury that the engle findings are findings and they are not in dispute and you are not to disregard the engle findings. the court: okay. mr. walker: judge, i did not say anything about the engle findings. i'm talking about the documents that their expert chose to bring in to show them. there is no engle finding about documents, and i've not contradicted the findings. what i'm arguing is that the negligence question on the verdict form requires legal cause. the fraud question requires reasonable reliance. a connection between those allegations and those documents and even the findings and mrs. loyd. the court: well, you did say that, except that part of your statement was -- i cannot recall it exactly -- but that there was some -- there are a lot of people who work for these corporations, the cigarette manufacturers, who may have said some bad things. mr. walker: right. the court: okay. but there is an engle finding that says that there was some -- there was a conspiracy to defraud. mr. walker: i did not say there was not. he can come back on -- he can come back on rebuttal and say that my characterization of the documents somehow ignores the findings. the reality, judge, there is no finding about any individual document. all i've said was -- i did not even say it did not happen, all i said was they are parading a number of documents and there is not going to be a connection to mrs. loyd. i'm entitled to say that. mr. trentalange: you are not entitled to deliberately mislead the jury. if i say was he a german leader with a mustache who did some really bad things, i'm not saying he is hitler, but come on. the only reason to be saying these things is to get the jury to disregard the engle findings. it is deliberate, it is intentional, he thought about it for a long time, and he crafted an argument that he could -mr. walker: i showed you my board. the court: he did say at the end, he did say when your objection was raised, mr. trentalange, he did say something about there is no connection or lack of -- lack of evidence regarding a connection. mr. trentalange: that is fine. but the other stuff is not. and that is what i'm objecting to. the court: it is argument, but be careful, counselor. mr. walker: yes, your honor. the court: i'm not going to -- i'm not going to give any cautionary instruction or tell the jury to disregard counsel's last statement because it is -mr. trentalange: how about just telling them that the findings are findings and they cannot disregard them? the court: well, you can remind them about that. mr. trentalange: i do not carry the same weight that you do, judge. that is the problem. the court: well, there is an instruction on that. and i've given the instruction in terms of that they cannot dispute the engle findings. and you can remind them of the court's instruction on that. mr. trentalange: okay. (in open court) mr. walker: so the questions on the verdict form that talk about mrs. loyd and talk about legal cause and reliance are all the questions that are going to bring you to this question: what does this have to do with jacqueline loyd? all of the allegations that they have made have to be tied in some way to mrs. loyd. but what you are going to see is that their allegations really have nothing to do with mrs. loyd. so first i want to bring up the negligence issue. this is an instruction that you will get. the issue for your determination on plaintiff's claim of negligence is whether each defendant's negligence was a legal cause of jacqueline loyd's death. that requires a connection between negligence and jacqueline loyd. but you are not going to see that because they did not prove that, because their case was never really about mrs. loyd. the evidence they brought you was not really specific to winston or kent cigarettes. it was really an attack on all cigarettes. and i'm going to tell you exactly what i mean when i say that. that is why dr. cummings, who says he has 10,000 print ads to choose, from picked ads from time periods when mrs. loyd was not born. that is why he picked, out of all of those ads, to show you ads from the journal of the american medical association and ebony magazine and the new york times, the cincinnati inquirer. that is not evidence about jacqueline loyd. it is why they showed you all of these ads about marlboro, even though she never regularly smoked marlboro; ads for marlboro, something about product placement for marlboro even a document that talks about ph levels of marlboro cigarettes. that is not evidence about mrs. loyd. it is why they talked about the dangers of ph levels. remember they said the ph levels over six is an issue that makes them more dangerous. but the winston cigarettes she did smoke were under six. that is not evidence about how negligence affected mrs. loyd. this case that they put on was not about winston or kent or even camel. and, in fact, the only evidence that mrs. loyd smoked camel was from her brother jack, who said he sometimes borrowed camel from her. instead, their case has been about features that all cigarettes have. the fact that cigarettes are made to be inhaled. remember i asked ms. evers, when she was a smoker, did she expect the cigarettes she bought to be ones she could inhale. and she paused and said yeah. and i said if you bought cigarettes that you could not inhale, you would probably take them back to the store, would not you? and she said yeah. all of these allegations about filters and ph and manipulation, that was all to support their argument that cigarettes are a problem because they can be inhaled. they take issue with the fact that cigarettes are designed to taste good to the people that buy them; the fact that cigarettes contain tobacco which naturally has nicotine; the fact that cigarettes have only the package warnings that congress requires and not more. these are all true about all cigarettes, not just cigarettes that relate to mrs. loyd. and it is not about -their case has not been about establishing legal cause as to mrs. loyd. so if we get back to the burden of proof, what have they really proved to you about winston cigarettes? i just showed you the evidence that shows that winston cigarettes were below the six mark that dr. cummings said was dangerous. but he also gave me these admissions about winston. he did not know when winston cigarettes first had vent holes. he did not know the burn rate. the burn rate was something on a slide you saw earlier about the designs. dr. winston could not tell you the burn rate for winston. he did not know the particle size. he showed you some documents about levulinic acid, but he could not tell you when it was used. how is this case about jacqueline loyd and the winston cigarettes she smoked if the guy they brought to talk to you about her cigarettes did not do the research on the cigarettes that she smoked? and no witness in this case, not a single witness told you that mrs. loyd would still be here today if she had smoked unfiltered cigarettes or cigarettes with a different ph level. mr. trentalange: i'm sorry. objection, your honor. the court: okay. approach. [#deleted sidebar#] mr. walker: okay. so where i left off, i was saying that there was not a single witness in this case who testified that mrs. loyd would not have gotten sick or would not have gotten lung cancer if she had only smoked unfiltered cigarettes or cigarettes with a different ph level. there is just no evidence of that in this case at all. most of the internal company documents that you showed related to this issue of design, but we also showed you how the public health community was encouraging the cigarette companies to make filtered cigarettes and low tar cigarettes. dr. ernst wynder said that in 1970, dr. russell in '74 and '76, and five surgeon general's reports either recommended that the designs they are attacking be adopted or applauded the companies for having adopted those designs. and one of those documents, if you recall, even talked about how the availability of filtered and low tar cigarettes saved lives. how can it be that a cigarette company that is following the suggestions of the public health community has done something that can be called negligent or harmed mrs. loyd? the reality is most of the internal documents that they showed you were not really about conduct that could have injured mrs. loyd. they were proposals or something somebody was studying, but they never circled back to bring you documents that showed that conduct actually affected mrs. loyd. and dr. cummings tried to imply that somehow mrs. loyd's winston cigarettes were more dangerous than unfiltered cigarettes. but when i asked him, he agreed with me that there were no safer cigarettes available to her. and that included unfiltered cigarettes. that is just not legal cause. you heard a lot of evidence about marketing to youths. but when we actually looked at the documents, they were all talking about adult smokers, people who are 18 years and older. and one of the documents that they relied on actually said specifically that the research that was discussed in that memo was not to be used to market to youth. they did not show you a single youth marketing document from a time period when mrs. loyd was alive and was actually a youth. everything they showed you was from either before she was born or when she was 30, 40, or 50 years old. and the same is true for their allegations about additives. the evidence you heard about additives is that the companies submit to the federal government every year a list of the additives that are used in cigarette smoking. and the government has a responsibility to review that list and to let the companies know if they think something should stop being used. that is never happened. all right. i want to look at the next two issues. we have talked about legal cause. i also want to talk about reliance, because the questions for these are going to be whether mrs. loyd reasonably relied to her detriment on a concealment or omission and whether this agreement that you heard about to conceal was a legal cause of injury to mrs. loyd. and i want you to think about what their proof has really been about this issue of reliance. they are relying on polls and ftc reports and advertisements that do not have any connection to mrs. loyd. you heard testimony about a boyfriend that mrs. evers went out with and how he had something about winston on the back. it did not say it was safe, it just said winston. you heard about scrapbooks that did not have any cigarette ads in them. you heard about a paper route, a frank statement that came out when she was already smoking that they could not show you where it even ran, that she might have seen it. an open debate ad in the new york times and ads in jama and ebony. really? this is their proof. in the early 1980s there was a popular series of tv commercials that wendy's ran. and it had these three nice ladies who were at a restaurant, and there was a huge bun and a little tiny burger in the middle. and one of the ladies started saying, where is the beef? when it comes to reliance, that is what you should be asking yourselves. where is the beef? where is the proof that mrs. loyd relied on something from a tobacco company? we have been here for a month. this is the best they have? you are entitled to more than that. and if you are going to bring a lawsuit you should have more than that to rely on. dr. cummings showed you isolated clips from tv and ads for brands she did not smoke, including tv ads like the beverly hillbillies and the flintstones. but the evidence in this case is that mrs. loyd was not sitting around watching the beverly hillbillies. she was in 4-h. she was going to horse shows with her kids. she was on bike rides. she was doing all sorts of outdoor activities with her church and elsewhere. she was not the type of person who was sitting around watching ads on tv and reading life magazine. how is that supposed to help you decide the issues in this case? some smokers do watch those shows. some smokers did read those magazines. some smokers did see those ads. but there is no proof that mrs. loyd was one of them. and there has been no testimony in this case that mrs. loyd did not know the risks. now i, want to move to the verdict form and talk to you just about quickly some of the questions that are on the verdict form. can i have no. 64, please? these are some of the questions that you just saw. and we actually talked about these already. the first question, was jacqueline loyd addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, and if so, was this addiction a legal cause of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease in jacqueline loyd? the answer there should be no, because she did not have copd. and even if you think she is addicted, her addiction was not the reason that she smoked. remember the truth that we talked about earlier, that she liked to smoke and did not want to quit. that is why she smoked cigarettes, not because of an addiction. question 2. i do not even think you should get to this question, but if you do, if you find that she had copd, did it first manifest on or before november 21st, 1996? the only evidence -the clerk: counsel, two minutes left. mr. walker: thank you. the evidence that you have on that that you can consider, if you think she had copd, was from dr. mannino. dr. mannino testified that copd can only be diagnosed by pft, by pulmonary function tests. and dr. mannino said that that did not happen until 1998, after 1996. question 3. did mrs. loyd's copd first manifest itself at a time when she was a citizen or resident of florida? you were probably wondering why you heard all those questions and saw those documents about north carolina and florida. well, that is why. because the evidence that you heard is that mrs. loyd moved out of that crosswinds drive address in 1988, and in the 1990s she relocated to north carolina with mr. loyd. and we saw all those medical records that supported that. question 4. did jacqueline loyd have copd before may 1990, and if so, did she know or by use of reasonable care should she have known before may 5th, 1990, that she had copd and that there was a reasonable possibility that it was caused by smoking cigarettes? that is a mouthful. i'm going to boil it down for you. first of all, you all know that our position is she did not have copd to begin with. but if you get -- and if you agree with me and if that is your finding, you will never answer this question. if you disagree with me, you will answer this question, so i want to show you the three medical records that will be important to how you decide that. there are three -- if you decide that the breathing difficulties and lung condition that mrs. loyd had was copd and not just asthma, then you can look at these records about when it began. you heard evidence from jack smith that her breathing difficulties go back to even before 1985. but here's a medical record from 1991 that says she had a three-year history of asthma. here is one from '94 that says the difficulties with breathing that she is had have been going on for five years. that goes back to 1989, both of those do. and then there is a record from 1999 that mentions a 15-year history of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. that goes back to 1984, which is that same timeframe jack smith testified about. and dr. mannino testified that whatever lung condition she had, if she went to the doctor in the 1980s with breathing problems, the doctor would have told her you have got to stop smoking. the clerk: counsel, that is your reserve time. mr. walker: thank you. can i have the next question? question no. 5. was smoking cigarettes containing nicotine manufactured by the defendant a legal cause of jacqueline loyd's lung cancer and death? the answer to that question should be no because they did not prove adenocarcinoma, and all of the evidence points to bac. was negligence on the part of each defendant a legal cause? these are the legal cause and reasonable reliance questions we just finished talking about. the answer to those questions should be no. was defendant's agreement to conceal a legal cause? for the same reasons, the answer there should be no. question 9. again, i do not think you get this far into the verdict form, but if you do, you know what my position is on this because i have been saying it now for five or six weeks. our position is that reynolds has zero responsibility or fault for the decisions that mrs. loyd made. it is not -can we go back? the point here is not to criticize mrs. loyd, or -- but we also should not second guess the decisions that she made for herself. all right. the next one. then we get to the damages questions. and those are the questions about money damages that mr. trentalange spent the most time talking about. but you already know what my position is. there should be no damages awarded in this case. she did not have an illness caused by cigarette smoking, and she did not smoke because of an addiction. she smoked because she liked smoking and wanted to, and when she decided to quit, she quit. can i have the next one please? the last thing i want to talk about is the punitive damages question. this is the question where you have to decide whether you had clear and convincing evidence that punitive damages are warranted against the defendants in this case. and you can see there that we are asking that you check no. now if we can have the next one. there are a few important things you need to understand about that question. you can only award damages, punitive damages for conduct that was a legal cause of mrs. loyd's illness and death. and we talked about how they just have not proved that. punitive damages can only be awarded to mrs. evers. there is not going to be any space to award damages to like the american cancer society or any third party. and punitive damages are damages that are awarded in addition to. that means on top of damages that fully compensate mrs. evers. and so when you are looking at the question of whether ms. evers should receive more damages on top of those that compensate, you should look at the following. mr. trentalange: i'm sorry, your honor. may i approach? the court: all right. [#deleted sidebar#] the court: members of the jury, regarding the claim for punitive damages, i'm reminding to you -- that the instruction that i previously gave you, final instruction no. 17, is the instruction on the law regarding entitlement to punitive damages. thank you. mr. walker: so in talking about punitive damages, the thing you need to understand is that they are supposed to be there to punish and deter. and so i want to talk with you about the allegations of conduct for what they want to punish and deter and whether it has anything to do with mrs. loyd. can i have no. 74, please? these are some of evidence that you heard about, what they want to punish. they want to punish reynolds and other companies for using filters, even though the public health community called for it. the public health community called for lower tar and lower nicotine cigarettes. that the manipulation that mr. uiterwyk kept talking about when dr. cummings was on the stand, we showed you in cross that the public health community was asking the manufacturers to develop cigarettes that kept nicotine high or medium and lower the tar levels, because the public health community, doctors, people that worked in government, thought that might be safer. it is just not reprehensible conduct for a company to do what doctors and others in the public health community were suggesting. it is not reprehensible conduct to publish peer-reviewed articles about smoking and health to have those peer-reviewed articles cited in the surgeon general's reports. it is not reprehensible, punishable conduct to publish the green monster, that big compendium with 6,000 articles in it. it is not punishable conduct to fund scientists from prestigious intuitions, including ones here in florida. it is not reprehensible conduct to fund research by people who went on to win the nobel prize. we showed you who those -- who many of those people were. all of those people who went on to the win the nobel prize for their research were people who were funded by money that came from the tobacco companies and the tobacco industry research committee. if we can go back to the last one. these are all of the different people who agreed with the tobacco companies early on when they were saying we still have doubts about the connection between cigarette smoking and -- and lung cancer. it is not punishable conduct to have an opinion that later turns out to be not the best opinion. you cannot punish a company for its opinions. and all of these people that you just saw held opinions that were similar to what the tobacco companies were saying. it is not punishable conduct if you -- if you are not saying something that the public is already getting. you do not have to put a message out there if you think the public is already getting it. and this is what people were saying about the message about the health risks of cigarette smoking even before the packages went -the labels went on the packs. we have informed the public through excellent coverage of the risks. can i have the next one? newspapers, radio, tv and other media have done an excellent job of covering this problem and the next one. you could stand on a rooftop and shout smoking is dangerous at the top of your lungs, and you would not be telling anyone anything they did not already know. reynolds should not be punished for not publicizing risks that were already being publicized, especially when it had no effect on the smoker whose family is seeking money damages. now, i want to wrap up. and this is my only chance to talk with you about these issues. and when i sit down, mr. trentalange will have another chance to come back and respond to what i have said. and because i will not have another chance, i just want to say this to you. you all know me by now. you know me from jury selection, from opening statements, and i'm sure you have been watching all of us throughout the trial and probably know how we think. when mr. trentalange stands up and starts making his arguments, just think, what would mr. walker have said? how would he have responded to things that mr. trentalange is now arguing? and when you do that i would ask that you just pretend, even for a moment, that you grew up in missouri like i did, the show me state. and when you are listening to mr. trentalange, he should show you how mrs. loyd could have had copd when her symptoms and lung function came and went. he should show you proof that she had a permanent, progressive disease that got worse and did not get better. he should show you how they proved adenocarcinoma caused by smoking with no lung tissue evidence, no autopsy evidence, and no ck20 result that was consistent with adeno. he should show you proof that distinguishes between bac and adeno. he should show you how smoking could have caused her cancer when mrs. loyd quit 13 years before she was diagnosed. he should show you where any of the ads that they showed you actually ran in a periodical or newspaper or magazine that mrs. loyd might actually have seen. and if he cannot show you those things, your verdict should be for the defendants. i just want to finish by expressing my appreciation once again on my behalf, on behalf of the team, both the ones at the table and the ones behind it. and i have spent so many times giving you words and showing you evidence i was thinking this morning that it might help to just let you see what this case looks like by the numbers. if you strip away all of the words and all of the arguments and you just look at the numbers, this is where you end up. on the question of addiction, 99.5 percent of the time mrs. loyd was smoking, she was not trying to quit. on the question of copd versus asthma, mrs. loyd's annual decline was 30 cc's per year. that is consistent with asthma and not copd. on the question of lung cancer, that ck20 positive result is far more consistent with bac, because bac showed up 64 percent of the time, than just the 8 percent of adenocarcinomas that stain ck20 positive. and for all of those reasons, i ask that you return a verdict in favor of the defendants on all claims. thank you. mr. pedrosa: thank you, your honor. good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. well, we have been together now for four weeks, and during that period, there have been a lot of people talking to you from this part of the courtroom. a lot of lawyers talking. and the judge has been telling you that you guys cannot talk about this case. cannot talk about it to each other. cannot talk about it to anyone else. but that is about to change, because when we are all done -- this time i'm not the last one to speak to you; mr. trentalange gets another shot -- but when we are all done, you are going to go back into the jury room and you are going to have a chance to talk about this case with each other. and that talking is going to be probably the most important talking that happens here, because your job in this case is the most important job in the case. you-all are the only ones that get to decide. you heard from mr. trentalange and from mr. walker about the engle case and the findings that came out of that case. and those findings are, if you decide that mrs. loyd was a class member, they are binding on you. but they do not decide the things that you have to decide. if they did, you would not be here. you are the only jurors in the world that heard any evidence at all about mrs. loyd. and that is why you are the only jury anywhere that gets to decide this case. so i want to thank you for that. i want to thank you for the work you have put in. i know it is been a long four weeks. and i want to thank you for the rest of the work that you are going to be doing this afternoon. in thinking about what i wanted to say to you, i thought that the best place to start was where we started together. and that was back in jury selection. and if you remember, we started out with about 150 people back in that giant courtroom one floor above us. and eight of you were chosen because the eight of you were the ones that said you could do the things that are really, really hard to do -- to put aside whatever feelings you might have, to put aside the sympathy that you might feel for any of the witnesses, and in particular, for mr. loyd, who came and testified, and is obviously a nice man. you said you could put aside anything that you brought to this process from the outside and just decide this case based on two things: the law that judge silver was going to give you and that you now have in your packets, and the evidence that you heard in this courtroom. and just like then, i had to wait my turn to speak with you. and that is been true with all of the witnesses of this case. and for most of this case, mr. brock and i, we did not have a whole lot of questions for the witnesses. and by now i think the reason for that is probably pretty clear to you. it is because even though mrs. loyd smoked cigarettes for most of her life, around 40 years, she did not start smoking the brand of cigarettes made by my client, made by lorillard, until after she had already been a smoker for about 30 of those years. the evidence that you saw was that she smoked kent cigarettes, which is the brand made by my client, for a few years in the 1980s. and then after, she went back to smoking some other brands, including a brand called benson & hedges, which is made by a company that is not a defendant in this case. if you remember the witnesses who testified about the cigarettes that she smoked, the only two witnesses who talked about any of my client's cigarettes were mrs. evers, the plaintiff, and her youngest sister, amber norris. and you remember mrs. evers said, well, i remember she smoked kent. i do not remember exactly when it was. i do not remember exactly when it started. i do remember it was when my mom lived in the house on crosswinds drive. and then on his redirect mr. -- i think it was mr. trentalange, showed her a picture that she said had a pack of kents on it. it is hard to tell. but she said it had a pack of kents on it and she thought that was around 1984, 1985. and then ms. norris, her younger sister, she testified that she remembers that there was a specific occasion when she had just turned 18, when her mom asked her to go buy her a pack of cigarettes. and she turned 18 in 1987. so that is the time frame that we are talking about. the witnesses' memories are not perfect. like the plaintiff's counsel told you time and time again, nobody followed her around with a notebook. but those are about the years that we are talking about when it comes to lorillard. the middle of the 1980s, 1984 until late 1980s. and then we know, because mr. loyd came here and testified that by 1991, when he met her, she was not smoking kents anymore. he said her main brand was benson & hedges. now, mr. trentalange in his opening, and then again now in his closing, also talked to you about a second brand of cigarettes made by my client called true. and you did not hear any evidence from anyone that mrs. loyd actually smoked true cigarettes. mr. loyd did not testify about that. when he asked mrs. evers, the plaintiff, about it, she said, i did not really ever see that. and, look, people bum cigarettes. people get cigarettes from different sources. could she have smoked true cigarettes at some point in time? sure, she might have smoked some. but what we know is it was not her regular brand of cigarettes. so i do not know why they are talking about true. i'm going to focus what i talk about in this case on that period of time in the middle to late 1980s when mrs. loyd smoked kent cigarettes. when we started this case, i gave you my opening statement, and i talked to you about what i thought the evidence would show. and i told you that for my client i thought the evidence would show three things. and i showed you this board. would you like to see it, your honor? the court: thank you. mr. pedrosa: i told you that when it came to ms. loyd's decisions about what to do with my client's cigarettes, there were -- that the evidence would show you three things: that mrs. loyd was warned; that after she was warned is when she decided to smoke my client's products; and that like anyone else, she is someone who is responsible for her own decisions. and from my point of view, that is exactly what the evidence did show over the past four weeks. so let us talk about each of those. we spent a lot of time talking about warnings in this case, and mr. walker spent some time showing you and going back to some of the documents that you saw during the course of the evidence. and in my opening, i showed you the warnings that were on cigarette packs and on cigarette ads; in fact, on every single pack of cigarettes made by my client that mrs. loyd ever would have smoked. but you know from sitting through this case for the last four weeks that those are not the only warnings that she got in this case. those public warnings were just part of the environment that mrs. loyd grew up in and lived in. and you remember you saw this slide with dr. cobbs-hoffman showing you how over the course of her life, from the time she was a kid in school, mrs. loyd was literally surrounded by warnings. now, i will not go through all the documents and evidence that you already saw with respect to all of these. you will have the documents in evidence. you will have a big box full of all that material, and you can look at it yourself. and one of the things i want you to do when you do that is to look at the dates on all of those materials. think about the dates of the testimony that you heard in this case. and in thinking about that, think about where those dates are in relation to the period of time in her life that mrs. loyd smoked kent cigarettes. i went ahead and put together a time line for you. and if you look at the time line, you will see we have got ms. loyd 's date of birth there, 1935, and then different ages over the years. and here is the first time -- i said approximately 1984 based on that picture that mrs. evers showed you -- first time mrs. loyd smoked kent cigarettes. and then i went ahead and put all of the -- then i went ahead and put all the warnings that we have talked about from that other slide, all the warnings that you saw in the evidence in this case onto that time line. warnings going back to the 1940s when mrs. loyd was a kid. warnings that she got from her family. you remember, it was back in the 1940s that her father came down with emphysema and the family blamed that on smoking back then. warnings that she got from her teachers in school in the 1940s. you saw some of the textbooks that were in use in michigan back at the time. warnings that she got from her church. warnings that she would have gotten from friends, in slang, in the popular culture. warnings that she got from the 4-h organization, which she was very involved in. warnings that she got from her brother, jack smith, from her mother, from her husbands. and, yeah, warnings on cigarette packs. the warnings on the cigarette packs had been there for more than 15 years before mrs. loyd picked up a cigarette made by my client. warnings on the ads have been there for more than 10 years. and these other years, these personal warnings in her life have been in her life for 40 years before she ever smoked a brand of cigarettes made by lorillard. so having all these warnings, why did she decide to keep smoking in the 1980s? that is really the question when it comes to my client. why would she decide to keep smoking in the 1980s? was it because she was waiting to get more information from a tobacco company? well, you heard the answer to that question direct from mrs. evers. she sat in that witness chair, and when mr. walker cross-examined her, he asked her, is there any additional information that you think mrs. loyd did not have that would have made a difference to her in the decisions that she made? she said, no, not that i'm aware of. that is what this case comes down to. if there was no additional information that mrs. loyd needed and did not get, then when she made her decision, she had the information that she felt she needed. now, mr. trentalange got up here and told you that mrs. loyd did the things she did because of cigarette ads. and i do not know if he meant to imply that she smoked kent because of kent cigarette ads or not. but the only kent cigarette ads that they showed you that the plaintiff's lawyer put on in this case -- and you will have them in evidence -- they are from the 1950s and the 1960s, and they ran in magazines that mrs. loyd did not read like the journal of the american medical association. are you really supposed to believe that mrs. loyd smoked kent cigarettes in 1984 and 1985 because of an ad that ran in 1950 -- in 1953 or '55? an ad that she did not even see? of course not. your common sense tells you that that cannot be the case. your common sense tells you that those ads that they put in that little booklet from kent from 1953 and 1954 and 1964, those had nothing to do with the decisions that mrs. loyd made in the late eighties or in the middle of the 1980s. and the evidence that you heard, by the way, from the witnesses, is exactly consistent with what your common sense tells you. because mrs. evers, mr. smith, mr. gillespie, who was the one that we put on by videotape, mrs. norris, they all came in here and they were all asked the question: did your mother ever talk about or did mrs. loyd ever talk about cigarette ads? did she ever say that she saw a cigarette ad? did she ever say she did anything because of a cigarette ad? they said no, she never talked about that. she never paid any attention to that. so why did mrs. loyd keep smoking in the 1980s? it was not the cigarette ads. it was not because she did not have the information that she needed. why then? why did she do it? well, you heard the answer to that question. you heard it clear. you heard it direct from one of the very first witnesses who came to testify in this case, ron cahill. you remember mr. cahill? he was married to mrs. loyd in 1988. that is right around the same time that she is smoking my client's cigarettes, the kents. and remember at the very end of his testimony, as is often the case, i got up last, and i said to him, mr. cahill, i have two questions for you, just two. i asked him: did mrs. loyd tell you, when you told her that she should quit smoking, that she did not want to quit? and he said, yeah, that is correct. that is what she told me. and did she tell you that she enjoyed smoking? he said, yeah, that is correct. that is not argument. that is not a guess. that is not an assumption. that is what mrs. loyd said herself about her own decision at the time she was making that decision back in 1988, at the time she was smoking my client's products. and that answer really tells you everything you need to know about this case, because it tells you that mrs. loyd, when she made her decision, knew that she was responsible for that decision and that she was the only person that could make that decision. it was a decision that was hers to make. mr. cahill, he could give her advice, but he could not make that decision for her. mrs. evers, her daughter, she could give advice, but she could not make that decision. mr. smith, her brother, he could give advice but he could not make that decision. and lorillard certainly could not make that decision for her. like everyone in this -- everyone in this country, mrs. loyd had the freedom to decide to do things that she enjoyed doing even though there might be some risks that come with them. all of us make those decisions every day. do we smoke or not? do we drink alcohol or not? do we watch what we eat or not? this case is not about whether you think mrs. loyd made the right decision, whether you agree with that decision. it was her decision to make, and she is the only one that could make it. that idea, that people who make decisions are responsible for their decisions, that is not something that mrs. loyd would have ever shied away from. in fact, the 4-h organization that she was dedicated to for so many years, that she was a leader in and that she helped the kids to become leaders in, that is one of the principles that is deeply ingrained in the 4-h organization. we are going to put up one of the pamphlets that is in evidence. this is part of what dr. cobbs-hoffman showed you. and this is from the 4-h. this is in 1968. and it talks about smoking. it says, what about smoking? what about it? well, the decision will be yours. no one in the word can make you smoke. if you begin, it will be your own decision, no matter what the situation. you are responsible for improving and safeguarding your own health. tobacco is one enemy of physical fitness. no one in the world can make you smoke. you are responsible. those are the words that guided members of the 4-h organization, leaders in the 4-h organization like mrs. loyd, and those are the words that should guide you as you go back into your deliberations and fill out the verdict form in this case. like the other lawyers that have spoken to you, i do want to talk about the verdict form. and i think you can tell already from having seen it a couple of times that there is an awful lot of questions you have to answer. and that is because there are an awful lot of things that the plaintiff has to prove in order for you to find in favor of the plaintiff in this case. see, it is not enough just to say, well, mrs. loyd smoked cigarettes, and lorillard made some of those cigarettes, and therefore lorillard has to pay some money, has to be responsible. that is not how it works. the plaintiff has the burden of proving all of the elements of all of their claims. so what does the plaintiff have to prove? well, you can see what it is in the verdict form. and those things are explained to you in your packet of instructions. now, mr. walker walked through the verdict form, so i'm not going to cover every single question, but i do want to start with the first question, question no. 1. and this is part of the -- the whole first four questions ask you about the claim that mrs. loyd had copd. and i want to talk to you about the first one, because it is, no. 1, it is first; no. 2, it is the most complicated one; and no. 3, if you answer that question no, then you do not have to go any further. this is really three questions in one. that is why i have highlighted the three different words that i think are those three questions. first you have to decide if mrs. loyd had copd. see that is highlighted there? if she did not have copd -- and mr. walker walked through all the medical evidence; i'm not going to cover that again -- if she did not have copd, then the answer to this question is no. then they have to prove that mrs. loyd was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine. and again, mr. walker walked you through all that. i'm not going to do it again. but if you do not believe she was addicted, then the answer to this question is no. if either of those are the case, the answer to this question is no. but even if you think she was addicted, even if you think she had copd, there is another piece to this. and that piece is legal cause. was jacqueline loyd addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, and if so, was this addiction a legal cause of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease in jacqueline loyd? well, what does that -- what does that mean, legal cause? judge silver read you an instruction. it is in your packets. you are going to have them. this is the instruction up on the screen. i'm not going to read it to you. legal cause requires that there be some direct connection or substantial contribution. it requires this concept that but for the addiction, the copd would not have occurred. what does that mean? take away the addiction, no copd. if the plaintiff does not prove that, then they do not prove their case. if the reason that mrs. loyd smoked, like she said, was that she enjoyed smoking and did not want to quit, then it was not addiction that caused anything. and that is exactly what the evidence was in this case. mrs. loyd smoked for 40 years, and for 99.5 percent of that time, like mr. walker showed you, she did not want to quit smoking. she did not try to quit smoking. by the way, the few years that she smoked lorillard's products were all in that 99.5 percent of the time where she did not want to quit, would not try to quit. when she did decide she wanted to quit, she quit. she stayed quit. and the evidence has been that she could have quit sooner if she had decided to do that. we are not criticizing her for not doing it. that was her decision to make. she had every right to make that decision. the clerk: first warning, counselor. mr. pedrosa: i'm sorry? the clerk: first warning. mr. pedrosa: thank you. you know, we have been here for four weeks, and you heard from -- i counted them -- i think it was 15 different witnesses. and you saw exactly zero evidence from anyone that mrs. loyd could not have quit sooner than she did. the evidence was all that she could have quit sooner than she did. in fact, when mr. loyd testified, mr. walker asked him, what was different about 1993? and he said, well, she put her mind to it then. and mr. walker said, you knew it at the time, right? you knew that she had put her mind to it? and he said, no, actually i thought it was, you know, just like before. but she had put her mind to it, and she did quit. she could have done that any time sooner. and because she could have and because it was her choice not to, the answer to question no. 1 in this case, whether or not addiction legally caused her copd, the answer to that question is no. the next questions i want to talk about are no. 5 and 6. and that is because these are the first questions on the verdict form where you are going to have to make individual decisions with respect to the different defendants in this case. now, mr. walker did a great job of covering all the evidence, so i'm just going to try to cover the additional evidence or the different evidence that i think applies to lorillard when it comes to these questions where you have to answer one by one for each defendant. and that is true for most of the rest of the questions on the verdict. now, you already know from mr. walker that the answer to these questions is no because mrs. loyd had a type of lung cancer that is not caused by smoking. and that is bac. and i do not want to get into all that. the only thing i want to add to it is that when it comes to lorillard, there is another reason that you should check "no" to these questions. and that is because the plaintiff did not meet their burden of proving that mrs. loyd smoked lorillard cigarettes for long enough to cause or contribute to her disease. what do i mean by that? well, we know that the evidence is that mrs. loyd smoked kent cigarettes some time in the 1980s and that it was for some period of years; '84, whether you think it started in '84 or '83, whether you think it ended in '88 or '89, some period of time in the 1980s. well, evidence that you heard in this case from one of the experts that the plaintiff brought to you, dr. cummings, who was here for five days, is that you do not get sick from smoking a few cigarettes. there is a threshold that you have to cross before you have been smoking long enough to have a risk of disease. and what dr. cummings told you -- i wrote it down -- is that it takes repeated exposure year after year for decades to cause disease. smoke a couple of years, that is not enough. it takes decades. mrs. loyd did not smoke kent cigarettes for decades. she did not smoke them for one decade. the evidence that you have is that she smoked kent cigarettes in 1984, 1985, 1987. and if you want to infer that she was smoking them all through that time, that is fine, but it is still not enough. and so for that reason, you have to answer this question separately. that separate answer for lorillard has to be no, because the plaintiff simply did not meet that burden of proving it to you. that is true for question 5 and 6. the next two questions, 7 and 8, those deal with the plaintiff's claims, what i call their information claims. and the bottom line to these claims, you are going to see it in the jury instructions that the judge already read to you. you can go back and read the packet of the jury instructions. what these claims are about is this: if mrs. loyd would have done something different with new information, that is what the plaintiff has to prove to you. but you heard the evidence on that, you heard it from mrs. evers, that no, there was not any additional information that mrs. loyd -- that would have caused mrs. loyd to do anything different. and there was not a single witness who came in here and told you, if only mrs. loyd had known this, she would have quit smoking; she would have ignored the fact that she enjoyed it; she would have ignored the fact that she did not want to quit, and she would have made her decision based on that. now, mr. trentalange told you to write down the numbers of exhibits that he had put up on the board. and you are going to have all those exhibits back there. ask yourself this: if someone at lorillard or at reynolds had taken those exhibits, folded them neatly in a box, packed them up the same way they are packed for you and placed them on mrs. loyd's doorstep, is there any evidence at all in this case that it would have made one bit of difference to her and that she would have done anything different? there is no evidence like that in this case. and that is why the answer to these two questions has to be no. the next question, no. 9, asks you to compare the percentage of fault of the various parties in this case. and i think a better way of saying it is a percentage of responsibility, because that is ultimately what you are deciding here. it is who has responsibility and how much. and the judge already read you the instructions that mrs. evers, on behalf of mrs. loyd, has admitted that mrs. loyd has some responsibility in this case. so the first thing you have to do is decide what number you put next to jacqueline loyd's name. and when you decide that, you have to take into account the fact that all of the testimony in this case is that mrs. loyd was the only person in control of her decisions. she was the only person that could decide if she wanted to quit or not, if she wanted to continue smoking or not. every day millions of americans wake up in the morning and they decide what they are going to do that day with their life. and they do not make ten percent of that decision and they do not make twenty percent of that decision. they make one hundred percent of that decision. they are one hundred percent responsible for their own lives. just like the 4-h taught, just like mrs. loyd believed, responsibility is one hundred percent. so that is why that number for mrs. loyd should be 100. i do not think you should get to figuring out what numbers go in the other two columns, because i think that number for mrs. loyd is 100. but this is the only chance i get to talk to you, and if you decide, for example, that mrs. loyd is, say, only ninety percent responsible for her own decisions, then you have to decide how to split up the rest. and i would ask you to just keep in mind the evidence that you have heard in this case. that mrs. loyd only smoked lorillard cigarettes a short time in her life, after she had already been smoking for 30 years, at a time when she was an adult, who could make her own decisions, and who was telling people that she enjoyed smoking at that point in time. the next three questions are about damages. and like mr. walker, because i think you do not need to get this far, i'm not going to try to offer you numbers to fill in here. i think the numbers are zero. but i do want to talk about the evidence, because mr. trentalange threw up a bunch of numbers. and the only number that actually came from evidence that you saw in this case was the $110,000 that he talked to you about for funeral expenses and medical expenses. all those other numbers that he came up with are just that, numbers that he came up with. now, i do want to point out that the numbers that he is asking you for in numbers 11 and 12, those are intended -- those are lines that are intended to compensate ellis loyd, mr. loyd. that is the only witness whose name you will see on those lines. excuse me. it is the only person whose name you will see on those lines. mrs. evers is the plaintiff in this case, and it is her job to represent the estate of mrs. loyd. but she does not get additional damages for herself, for any loss of services to her or any pain and suffering by her. the law says that adult children in a case like this, when she was an adult at the time of mrs. loyd's passing, do not get separate damages. so it is only ellis loyd that you are talking about here. and that number that mr. trentalange gave you that he calculated for no. 11 and then he gave you, i guess, a cap for no. 12, he added those together, and he is talking about 60 times what the evidence was for question 10 for funeral expenses and medical of mrs. loyd. that is what he is asking you for in this case. the evidence on -- excuse me. your decision on damages has to be tied to the evidence. the instruction is it has to be reasonable in light of the evidence. that brings us to the very last question, which goes to punitive damages. and again, i do not think you will get to this question, but it is my job to talk to you about all the questions. and what you will have to answer is whether or not you think in this case mrs. evers should get an additional amount of punitive damages from reynolds and lorillard. you will not have to decide the amount right now. that is something for a separate phase of this trial. you will have to decide yes or no for each company separately whether the evidence that they have put on met their burden on this question. punitive damages are not automatic. they have to be proved. and the burden on them is like mr. trentalange told you, it is higher than any other question in this case. and you are going to get an instruction, or you actually have gotten already an instruction on what that standard is. the standard is called clear and convincing evidence. and what that means is evidence that is precise, explicit, lacking in confusion and of such weight that it produces a firm belief or conviction without hesitation about a matter at issue. i think mr. trentalange actually boiled that down about right. he said on this question, if you have doubts, the answer should be no. the clerk: five minutes, counselor. mr. pedrosa: so the other instruction that you got on punitive damages is that in order to prove their claim by this clear and convincing evidence, what they have to show you is that lorillard showed a complete reckless disregard or a conscious indifference to smokers. now, i want to talk to you a little bit about the evidence that they argue gets there, which i do not think it does. they basically talked to you about three things. they talked to you about youth marketing and they talked about things like placing cigarettes in movies that were aimed at kids and things like that. they talked to you about nicotine levels and trying to change nicotine levels. they said they manipulate nicotine levels in cigarettes. and they talked to you about filters. so i want to talk to you about all three. and the first is this concept of marketing to kids and product placement. and you remember dr. cummings talked about the movie superman. and he said, well, marlboro cigarettes appear six times in the movie superman. and you already know that mrs. loyd never smoked marlboro cigarettes. mr. walker's client does not make marlboro cigarettes. my client does not make marlboro cigarettes. so i want to talk to you about my client. that is what i talked to dr. cummings about. and you remember the first thing i asked him when i got him on the stand is, dr. cummings, you know that lorillard did not do this, right? he said, yeah, that is right. i do know that. lorillard is actually different on this. they did not do it. and i said, you know that lorillard did not place its products in movies, and, in fact, had a policy of telling movie producers not to do it; to keep our cigarettes out. and dr. cummings said, yeah, that is right. that is true. lorillard did not do that. now, that is not reckless disregard by lorillard. that is not conscious indifference. that is looking at the situation and deciding, you know what? we are going to say no to this. we are not going to do that. the next thing to talk to you about was this idea about manipulating nicotine levels. mr. walker talked about that a little bit. you know from the evidence in this case, including from dr. cummings on cross-examination, that this idea about trying to lower the tar level in cigarettes while keeping the nicotine level high, that is not something that tobacco companies came up with. that is not something that they invented at lorillard. that is something that the public health researchers and people at the national cancer institute were coming up with as their ideas. this came from outside the tobacco company, from scientists at universities, from doctors, from the national cancer institute. and, you know, back then, just like now, the national cancer institute funded all kind of different programs. in fact, dr. cummings told you he gets money from them, grant money from them for doing his work. back in the 1970s, scientists, both at the national cancer institute and elsewhere, they knew that some people do smoke for nicotine. that is absolutely right. that is not a secret. it was not a secret back then. in fact, in cross-examination mr. walker showed you an article from 1976 and this was by a british researcher named dr. russell. can you pull that up? dr. russell's article back in 1976 in the british medical journal says, people smoke for nicotine but they die from tar. then he explains that their risk of lung cancer and bronchitis might be more quickly and effectively reduced if attention were focused on reducing their tar intake, irrespective of nicotine intake. the most logical way to do that would be to develop a cigarette with very low tar yield but a medium nicotine yield. that is exactly what the companies were doing. that same year, 1976, the national cancer institute had this group called the tobacco working group. the tobacco working group was made up of people from the national cancer institute, from universities, doctors, and scientists from the tobacco companies. and one of the ideas that they discussed in this tobacco working group was this exact same idea that mr. russell was talking about. can we bring up the next slide? the court: one minute, counselor. mr. pedrosa: same thing, 1976. dr. gio gori, from the national cancer institute, was there. dr. spears, who was a scientist at lorillard, was there. and dr. gori asked the consultants, the other folks that are listed on who attended, including dr. spears, to consider the feasibility of producing a cigarette with -yielding a tar/nicotine ratio below 10. in other words, break that ratio, free up the nicotine from the tar so you can lower the tar without lowering the nicotine. now in his list of documents today, i think mr. trentalange put up one document that was a lorillard document. there are some other lorillard documents in the evidence in this case. i want to show you one that dr. cummings showed you. he put it up on the screen when he testified, but he did not actually read from it. i want to read to you from it now. put that up. and that is, again, it is 1976. the same time, same year. recommendations from health-oriented agencies -- that is what we are talking about, nci -- and pressure from competitive companies make it imperative that lorillard develop a flavorful cigarette, delivering lower tar, while at the same time delivering a level of nicotine higher than could normally be obtained from conventional cigarette construction. the same idea. the same thing that the nci is saying we should be doing. that is what lorillard was trying to do. and do not forget, lorillard is a business. the clerk: time, counsel. mr. pedrosa: may i wrap up? the court: one minute. mr. pedrosa: lorillard is a business. and if the national cancer institute is telling you that you could be the first one to make a safer cigarette by following this idea, of course you are going to do that in your business, because you want to be the first one to come out with a safer cigarette and to be able to say to people, we are doing what the nci says we need to be doing. the other evidence that we saw in this case about filters, i just want to go back and point out again what dr. cummings told you on cross-examination. and that is that starting in the 1950s, lorillard worked with dr. wynder, who was the famous scientist that did the mouse studies, on reducing phenol -- which was a dangerous compound in cigarettes that was thought to cause cancer -- from its cigarettes using filters, and lorillard was able to come up with a filter that reduced ninety percent of the phenol. that is not a useless filter. that is not something that does not do anything. that is not reckless disregard and it is not conscious indifference. it is working with dr. wynder, dedicated -- who was a person who was dedicated to the public health to try to make cigarettes safer. it is working with the tobacco working group. the court: thank you, mr. pedrosa. mr. pedrosa: my time is about up. the court: your time is up. mr. pedrosa: my time is up. and that is good, because i have said about all i have to say. thank you again.