mr. trentalange: thank you, your honor. folks, in a little while you are going to go to the deliberation room and you are going to have three jobs. your first job is to answer the questions the judge gives you. another job is to make sure everyone on the jury follows the law the judge gives you. and the third and most important job is to first, before you answer any questions, discuss with each other why you feel the way you do about the answers to those questions. during the next few moments, i'm going to try to give you some tools to help you do that. the first question you are going to have to decide is, as the court just instructed you, about whether or not mrs. loyd was a member of the engle class. the engle class is defined as cigarette smokers who, on or before november 21st of 1996, suffered a disease or medical condition caused by smoking because of an addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine. so question no. 1 on the verdict form is, was jacqueline loyd addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, and, if so, was addiction a legal cause of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease? so it is very important, when you are answering something, to figure out what is not part of that. okay? i had a friend of mine whose name was stan musial, and he used to always say, not that stan musial, when he introduced himself. okay? what is not part of this question you heard a lot about. you heard a lot about, during the trial about choice and whether or not mrs. loyd chose to smoke, whether she could have quit. for purposes of determining whether or not she is addicted, choice has nothing to do with it. so if you are deliberating and somebody says on the addiction question, mrs. loyd chose to smoke, remind that person that choice has nothing to do with the first question. it does not matter if she chose to smoke. it does not matter if she could have stopped. choice has nothing to do with the first question. the first question is whether or not she was addicted. and it is important when you are answering questions, you know, it is like if you are taking a class and somebody tells you, the teacher tells you your average is a 62. well, that does not tell you anything unless you know what a passing grade is. if a passing grade is 65, you failed. but if the passing grade, there is a curve and 50 is an a, that is great. so you need to know the standard that you are going to apply in this case. and you are going to apply to all except lucky 13, question no. 13 is the only question for which this standard is not going to apply. you are going to apply the greater weight of the evidence. and the court has already told you that means the more persuasive and convincing force and effect of the entire evidence in the case. we also talked about something being more likely than not correct. i asked a number of witnesses, more likely than not, is that your opinion? yes, more likely than not. burden of proof. defendants talk about the burden of proof. and it sounds like we have to carry a heavy weight uphill in the rain. that is not -- burden of proof has a connotation that is much more than what it is. the words "burden of proof" do not appear anywhere in your jury instructions. doubt is not part of this case. you heard dr. cummings talk about the defendants' industry and that doubt was their product. doubt does not matter in this case. you can have as many doubts as you want on both sides when you are answering these questions as long as you answer the questions in such a way that you apply the greater weight of the evidence standard. you do not have to be sure. okay? you can have as many doubts as you want. the question is are we more likely correct than not. doubt is the defendants' product. you heard that being said. doubt has no role in this courtroom with respect to questions 1 through 12. so the first part of that first question, was jacqueline loyd addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine? remember that every one of their cigarettes she ever smoked had nicotine in it. that is not in dispute. addiction is defined as a chronic, relapsing brain disease that is characterized by compulsive drug seeking and use despite harmful consequences. that is the definition from the national institutes of drug abuse, part of the national institutes of health. now, if you answer that question, remember, more likely than not is the standard. so jacqueline loyd, based on the evidence in this case, was more likely than not addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine. and remember what we are talking about when we are talking about cigarettes. they are designed for addiction. they have got nicotine in it. nicotine causes and sustains addiction. it is got powerful addicting elements in tobacco. and remember, jacqueline loyd started smoking at age 16. adolescent bodies are more susceptible to nicotine, and adolescents are more easily addicted than adults. remember, also, that between 80 and ninety percent of regular smokers have nicotine dependence. and nicotine dependence, you remember dr. barnett, one of the defense witnesses, conceded nicotine dependence is the same thing as nicotine addiction. the surgeon general -- this report is in evidence. the surgeon general says nicotine addiction is the fundamental reason that individuals like jackie loyd keep smoking. it is why folks keep coming back for cigarettes, even though it makes their breath smell bad and makes them smell bad and they have got to do it outside in the cold, because of the addictive properties of nicotine. okay. and nicotine is addictive. the defendants say in a halfhearted admission that nicotine is addictive in some people. well, nicotine is addictive in everybody. the drug is addictive. we do not say that heroin is addictive for some people. we recognize that drug is an addictive drug. and that is just what tobacco is like. and the surgeon general says that it causes addiction similar to drugs like heroin and cocaine. and that is because of what it does to the brain. it hijacks these receptors that are there to help us survive as a species. and it does that readily and easily because smoke is inhaled. it goes down into the lungs and quickly to the brain, and the pleasure areas of the brain are stimulated. you have heard a lot of testimony about that. the stimulation causes the release of this cascade of chemicals. and they are there. you heard about them. there is a bunch of stuff that is released. and that is why people keep coming back. these receptors that are grown, we have these receptors there. when they are hijacked, the brain makes more receptors. when receptors are empty, they want to be filled. you feel good when they are filled. you feel stressed, jittery and nervous and have cravings when they are not filled. and withdrawal, you have to remember, withdrawal is not just when you make this quit attempt. withdrawal is from cigarette to cigarette, from pack to pack, from sleeping to waking. and anybody that has ever smoked will tell you there is no cigarette like that first cigarette in the morning, because there is withdrawal overnight. and that is the reason why some of these questions about the time to your first cigarette. and you heard that jacqueline loyd smoked first thing in the morning. she smoked in the middle of the night. the time to that first cigarette, that is the withdrawal that happens overnight. and dr. cummings talked to you about the fagerstrom test for nicotine dependence. and he talked to you about the heaviness of smoking index. and he scored jackie loyd. and based on the test that he did, jacqueline loyd was addicted. but you probably already knew that once you heard that she smoked cigarettes, one to two packs a day, for 42 years. she started smoking at the age of 16. nicotine made structural changes in her brain that made it more likely for her to smoke and harder for her to quit. she smoked one to two packs a day. now, that is millions of doses of nicotine and carcinogens throughout her lifetime. as i said, she smoked first thing in the morning. kept an ashtray by her bed. got up to smoke in the middle of the night. she had tobacco stains on her fingers, something that is only rarely found. she gave up smoking while she was pregnant with her last daughter, but she resumed smoking. now, whether that was a quit attempt or whether that was just a fortuitous event, this woman who had been off nicotine and cigarettes went back. that is called relapse, and it is part of the addiction cycle. it is what people do when they quit smoking. she went back because of the addiction. ron cahill. you heard from him. they were married for a brief period of time. mr. cahill told you one of the reasons why their marriage ended, in his view, was because of her smoking. she actually hid her smoking from mr. cahill. that is a maladaptive pattern of activity. you also heard that jacqueline loyd had first-degree relatives who smoked. there is a genetic component to addiction. she had that. she continued to smoke after her copd diagnosis. in 1991 she was diagnosed with copd. the doctor told her to quit smoking, and she kept smoking. she used lollipops, suckers and fireballs. you heard one of her daughters talk about how she burned her mouth. she was craving the nicotine. that is a classic sign of craving, which is a classic sign of addiction. ellis loyd told you that she had tried to quit between seven and ten times. you also heard once an addict, always an addict. and you saw that in the evidence in this case. she said she was proud to have made it through her son butch's funeral without smoking. and she really wanted a cigarette while undergoing treatment at moffitt cancer center. that is in 2006. the nicotine hooks are still in, even in 2006. so that question, whether or not she is addicted, the first half of the question that does not have anything to do with fault, if you use your common sense and apply the more-likely-than-not standard, the first part of that question is clearly yes, she was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine. so the second part of the question: did jackie loyd have copd? so remember, we need to go back to what copd is. copd is airway obstruction that is not fully reversible. now, jackie loyd had asthma. everybody hear that? she had asthma. we have never disputed that she had asthma from the day this lawsuit was filed. but a lot of people who have copd also have asthma. copd and asthma are not mutually exclusive. copd versus asthma is a false choice, folks. it is not ham or eggs, it is ham and eggs. they can go together, and they often do. you heard from dr. mannino. dr. mannino was one of the world's foremost authorities on copd. and he was a little bit nervous in this courtroom. this is not where he is at home. he is at home helping patients who have breathing difficulties, doing research and teaching other people how to help patients who have breathing difficulties. this is not where he shines. but he told you that mrs. loyd had copd and asthma, not just asthma. he told you that asthma and copd commonly overlap. about thirty percent, three in ten of the folks with copd also have asthma. about a quarter of the folks with asthma also have copd. dr. mannino told you that all, underscore "all," of mrs. loyd's lung function tests were abnormal and showed the decline that is typical of the copd. if anybody knows about copd, it is dr. mannino. he told you that jackie loyd, more likely than not, had copd. her condition was not fully reversible. asthma is fully reversible. he told you that she was diagnosed with copd later in life, in 1991. copd typically presents in patients over 50. so it is a perfect fit. asthma typically presents early in life. he also told you, which you know, that mrs. loyd had a long history of smoking, made her more susceptible to copd and that her copd positively responded to bronchodilator therapy, which is used for copd, but it never fully reversed. dr. mannino told you, again, cigarette smoking was a substantial cause of mrs. loyd's copd. so now we have got addiction. we have got copd. what about causation? both experts in this case, the defense pulmonologist and dr. mannino, told you that ninety percent of smoking is caused by copd [sic]. so you have got this disease that is a smoking disease. you have got a woman that is got copd. when you look at this, look through the lenses that, you know, that ninety percent of the time if you have got copd, it was caused by smoking. so the question is, did addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine cause or contribute substantially to mrs. loyd's copd? addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine. copd, ninety percent of the time there is a connection. what about in this case? well, the instruction you got is that an addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine is a or a legal cause of copd if it directly and in natural and continuous sequence produced or contributed substantially to producing such copd, so that it can reasonably be said that but for the addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine, the copd would not have occurred. in plain english, more likely than not, if she gets copd, in large part because of her smoking. my english teacher -- i had to take english twice. my english teacher would be proud that i know the difference between a definite article and the indefinite article. the definite article would say "the cause," implying that there is no other cause. this is the indefinite article, sister calista. "a," "a cause," not "the cause." so your question would be, is this a cause? did it substantially contribute? a peanut butter and jelly sandwich has bread, jelly and peanut butter. you need all three of them. jelly substantially contributes to the peanut butter and jelly sandwich. without it, it ain't a peanut butter and jelly sandwich. okay? so did smoking and addiction -- smoking caused her copd. addiction caused her smoking. did addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine substantially cause -- whether it was a substantial cause of her copd. dr. mannino said cigarette smoking was. cigarette smoking is known to cause copd. she smoked for 40 years. millions of accumulated doses of tobacco smoke did the damage. since addiction caused mrs. loyd to smoke and smoking cigarettes caused mrs. loyd's copd, addiction caused mrs. loyd's copd. and that is the answer to question no. 1. so you are going to have a verdict form -- not this big -- but the first question, was jacqueline loyd addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, and if so, was this addiction a legal cause of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease in jacqueline loyd? the evidence -- and you should be guided by the evidence -- the evidence shows that more likely than not the answer to question no. 1 is yes. so moving on to question no. 2. did mrs. loyd's copd first manifest itself on or before november 21st, 2006? mr. bigger: '96. mr. trentalange: i'm sorry. '96. i get excited. the evidence is, more likely than not, mrs. loyd's copd first manifested itself on or before november 21, 1996. mrs. loyd was first diagnosed with copd on 8/5/91 at tampa general hospital. actually, there are pulmonary function tests that are a little earlier than that that are diagnostic for copd, also done at tampa general hospital. dr. mannino dated her copd to 1991 with those pulmonary function tests. mrs. loyd was also diagnosed with acute exacerbation of copd at south florida hospital. if you remember, that was two days after she got married to ellis loyd on february 16th, 1992. could i have the elmo, please? this is the record that is august 5th, 1991. she was called jacqueline rivers then. and you see acute exacerbation of copd. you must stop smoking. copd. this is tampa general hospital back when they used these dot matrix printers. see the emergency care center, the tampa general hospital. okay. so that is 1991. you can turn the elmo off. there is multiple medical records that refer to mrs. loyd's copd between 1991 and '96. so question 2 is not a real hard question. and neither is question 3, so we can go quickly. do you find that jacqueline loyd -- did the copd first manifest itself on or before november 21st, 1996? question 2 is certainly yes. and then the next question is, did mrs. loyd's copd first manifest itself at a time when she was a florida resident or citizen? folks, 1991, she was living in florida, no question about it, in hillsborough county. you can see the address on her medical records from tampa general hospital. she got married a hundred feet from here at the hillsborough county courthouse on valentine's day in 1992. you have that marriage certificate and wedding license -marriage license in evidence. you can see the county of residence or her place of residence. this is an easy question. her copd first manifested itself when she was a resident or citizen of florida. and, again, she was a resident or citizen. she was married here. she had the acute exacerbation. it is not hard. now, once you get past these three questions, remember i told you during the jury selection there was a key to a room, and inside the room the question is, do we get in the room? does the key fit? once these first three questions are checked yes, the key fits and we go into the engle room. and in the engle room are these engle findings that the court told you about. smoking cigarettes causes lung cancer. not the halfhearted admission that some people who smoke cigarettes get lung cancer but most people who smoke cigarettes do not get lung cancer. this is straight and to the point, and there is no mincing words. smoking cigarettes causes lung cancer, specifically including adenocarcinoma. smoking cigarettes causes chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, or copd. nothing halfhearted about that. smoking cigarettes does not cause bronchioloalveolar carcinoma, bac, lung cancer, the kind of cancer she did not have. fourth, smoking cigarettes does not cause asthmatic bronchitis as related to copd. nobody told you that she had asthmatic bronchitis. fifth, the nicotine in cigarettes is addictive, period. not qualified. not in some people. smoking -- the nicotine in cigarettes is addictive. sixth, the defendants placed cigarettes on the market that were defective and unreasonably dangerous. r.j. reynolds and lorillard, the defendants, did that. seventh, the defendants r.j. reynolds and lorillard concealed or omitted material information not otherwise known or available, knowing the material was false and misleading, or failed to disclose a material fact concerning the health effects and/or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes. these defendants in this case did that. and by the way, instruction no. 4 about how you have got to treat corporations the same way you treat individuals. amen. treat these folks, these corporations, the same way that you would treat mr. reynolds if he did this stuff. do not let them hide behind a corporate veil. treat mr. lorillard the same way you would treat a guy that did this stuff. okay? absolutely. we are all equal. eighth, the defendants agreed with other companies and industry organizations to conceal or omit information regarding the health effects of cigarette smoking or the addictive nature of cigarettes. those companies include -- i will not read all of them -- but the folks that you heard in this case. and they include the organizations that you heard about, the tobacco institute and the tobacco industry research committee. this agreement was entered into with the intention that smokers and members of the public relied to their detriment. so when they talk to you about jackie loyd and what does this have to do with jackie loyd, you know what it has to do with jackie loyd? they intended to hook smokers. and they want to -they want us to come in here with an individual link. remember, folks, they were not fishing with a rod and reel like a little kid off his dock. they were fishing with dynamite. they were not going after individual fish. they were going after every fish and trying to sweep them in in a net. so that is what they did. and they did it with the intention to get people to rely. ninth, the defendants were negligent. that is, they failed to use reasonable care, which is the care that a reasonably prudent cigarette manufacturer would use under like circumstances. so those are the engle findings. we are in the room. and that is what is in the room with us. so when we are answering the rest of the questions, remember where we are. we are in the engle room. number 4, did jacqueline loyd have copd before may 5th, 1990? and if so, did jacqueline loyd know or by the use of reasonable care should she have known before may 5th, 1990, that she had copd and that there was a reasonable possibility that copd was caused -- was caused by smoking cigarettes? excuse me. remember the last election, there were a bunch of amendments on a bunch of things, and they had numbers, so you would see signs, yes on 6, no on 3? well, this is the only question on the verdict form that you need to answer no. the answer is no. no on 4 by the greater weight of the evidence. and by the way, this is an affirmative defense. these are the defendants that are claiming that jacqueline loyd had copd before 1990 and she should have known about it and she should have acted sooner. the same defendants that called a witness on friday evening to say that she never had copd. so she never had it but she had it forever. the defendants in this case are claiming that she had copd for a long time and should have known about it even though they are claiming that she never had copd. they are talking out both sides of their mouth in this case, because you cannot never have it and always have it. so she was first diagnosed with copd in august of 1991, or if you believe the pfts that are a little earlier in 1991. and some remote reference somewhere? you did not hear anything about anything from any witness about her having copd before that. so the answer to question no. 4 is no. no on 4. question no. 5. remember we are in the engle room now. was smoking cigarettes containing nicotine manufactured by each defendant a legal cause of jacqueline loyd's lung cancer and death? and you are going to get a jury instruction on causation for negligence and for these other counts. and if you pay attention to it, which i know you will, you will see that there is a little bit of extra in that jury instruction. there is something called a concurring cause. there is a second part that says, in order to be regarded as a legal cause, the negligence in this need not be the only cause. it can also be a cause if it operates in combination with the act of another, some other cause or some natural cause. and that is in there because there is some evidence in this case that other things besides smoking, particularly the defendants are going to argue jacqueline loyd's choice, and you heard reference to some exposure to elements and all that stuff. the question is, can other things have operated in combination with the negligence to cause her diseases. the reason that instruction, that concurring cause instruction is there is because there is some evidence. on question 1, there is no concurring cause instruction. okay? because with respect to the copd, there is no other evidence of anything else causing her copd except the cigarette smoking. that is why there is no instruction on concurring cause. keep that in mind. and if anybody wonders why is there this concurring cause instruction for negligence but not for the first question, it is because there is no evidence of any cause for the first question. so was smoking cigarettes containing nicotine manufactured by each defendant a legal cause of jacqueline loyd's lung cancer and death? remember, the evidence is going to be that she smoked camels, winston, kent and true. you heard that from the witness stand. and every one of those cigarettes contained nicotine and carcinogens. you heard testimony from multiple witnesses about that. r.j. reynolds makes camel and winston. lorillard makes kent and true. so more likely than not, smoking caused mrs. loyd's lung cancer. remember -- and i know you have taken great notes and everything. i'm just highlighting this and going quickly. i apologize if i'm telling you stuff that you already know. mrs. loyd had a mass in her right lung that got noted on x-ray at watson clinic in august of 2006. she had that follow-up ct scan that showed the mass was also in her lymph node at 4-r. it suggested metastatic disease, that the cancer was spreading. a pet scan -- remember that thing that lit up on the screen? that confirmed the diagnosis. she had metastases in her liver and spine. she had a primary lung adenocarcinoma. her cancer was not bac. the defendants picked the only cancer that is not covered by the engle findings to hang their hat on in this case. but she did not have bac. her cancer was caused by smoking, and her cancer caused her death. remember dr. villa? dr. villa was arguably the most impressive person that testified. he was short and to the point. harvard medical school graduate. board certified in six specialties. he is both a pathologist in the lab and a treating oncologist dealing with patients. he told you that among the reasons why this was adenocarcinoma and not bac, it did not look like bac, it did not act like bac, it did not have the properties of bac. and there it is highlighted for you. it was poorly differentiated versus well differentiated. and you get the picture. i know that you have been here for all that. i'm not going to read you all of those. but clearly, this is not bac. dr. tanvetyanon. treating doctor. folks, he is the only guy in this case that had his hands on mrs. loyd. okay? he is the only treating physician that testified in the case. dr. tan. mrs. loyd had adenocarcinoma. he sat here, soft-spoken. the pathologist at moffitt -- and this is key. he told you that the pathologist would have put it on the report if there were features of bac. but there were no bac on the pathology report. he did not consider it at the time he was treating her. he is had time to reflect. he told you it is not bac. the ct scan in august showed a solid mass. bac would show up as a haziness. her lung cancer metastasized. and he said bac never metastasizes. mrs. loyd's 40-year history of smoking was a substantial contributing cause to her lung cancer and death according to the guy who really, unlike everybody else that testified in the case, had a responsibility to his patient, mrs. loyd. dr. sider, the radiologist, came in here and he told you that what he saw on films was not bac. he showed you the pet scan, that bright, solid object. that is not bac. so, folks, question 5, was smoking cigarettes containing nicotine manufactured by each defendant a legal cause of jacqueline loyd's lung cancer and death? the answer is clearly yes. number 6. i'm sorry. before we get to that, remember, the defendants' arguments with respect to bac are flawed. the ck-20 that they want to blow up and show you. ck-20. it is the magic bullet. it was not the magic bullet. first of all, it is not even ck-20 positive. it is ck-20 focal. or as dr. bennett said reluctantly, after i showed him his notes, it is faintly positive. so it is not even a strong positive. they have this dedifferentiation argument, which is really heads i win, tails you lose. the reason it is bac is because in the lymph node, it looks like adenocarcinoma. okay. well, why would not it look like bac? well, that could happen too. if it looked like bac, it would be bac. and if it looks like adenocarcinoma, then it is bac. it does not make any sense. this is most consistent with it being adenocarcinoma. far more likely. okay? question 6. was the negligence on the part of each defendant a legal cause of jacqueline loyd's death? now, the answer to that question. we know that they were negligent. remember, the court has already instructed you that they are negligent. so they negligently manufactured cigarettes, and she smoked those cigarettes and it gave her copd and lung cancer and she died. so, clearly, i will not go through the whole causation thing again, but clearly, their negligence was a cause of her lung cancer and death. so i will not go through that whole thing, but it is the same point with respect to negligence. and you might have some trouble distinguishing between the two, but you do not have to do that here, because she smoked both. and both of the defendants' cigarettes had carcinogens and nicotine in them. so, now question no. 7. please state as to each defendant whether jacqueline loyd reasonably relied to her detriment on the concealment or omission by that defendant of material information not otherwise known or available, or their failure to disclose material facts concerning the health effects or addictive nature of nicotine. and, folks, i have a board here for you. we have a lot of stuff in evidence. it took some time to get it in because there were objections that had to be resolved. and i know it was an arduous process. but if, while you are taking notes here, if you could jot down these numbers on these various issues. these are the defendants' own arguments -- own evidence, rather. i almost said arguments. and there is a big distinction between evidence and argument. your decision has to be based on the evidence. what people say from up here, that is argument. evidence is what has to drive your decision. so the evidence is in these documents about what they did and why they did it and what their evaluations were and how they were doing. okay? you have got documents that relate to addiction, youth marketing, conspiracy, and the filter brand. filter fraud, rather. okay? question no. 7 is about concealment. question 8 is concealment. question 9 is the percentage of fault attributable to each. i think you all know when you are going through these questions, go through 7, 8 and 9 all together at the same time. okay? because we already know there was a concealment. and i'm going to check yes, yes and yes on 8. because if you go through these documents -- and i have written them down for you. and i show them on here, but obviously you cannot write that quickly. but this board will be up the whole time. look at what these -- what some of these documents go to -- okay? -- in terms of the addiction question and the defendants' knowledge. cigarette smoke should contain sufficient nicotine to supply the necessary requirements of the smoker with respect to this compound. moreover, nicotine is addictive. we are then in the business of selling nicotine, an addictive drug. cigarettes have certain unattractive side effects like lung cancer, emphysema. so they know that they are in the business of selling drugs and that their drugs cause cancer and emphysema. that is 1963. certainly the nicotine level of b&w cigarettes was not obtained by accident. we have a research program in progress to obtain by genetic means any level of nicotine desired. the habituating level of nicotine. how low can we go? they are talking about hooking people, and they want to make sure they do not want to go too low. happily for the tobacco industry, nicotine is both habituating and unique in its variety of physiological actions. nicotine is the sine qua non. that means it is that without which, in latin. in other words, it is the reason why people smoke. people do not shoot heroin in their arms for the water content of heroin, they do not snort cocaine for the baby powder they use to cut, and they do not smoke cigarettes except for the nicotine. they would not smoke except for the nicotine. if you look at the document on the right. for winston, ph values were determined. the results of these studies show that there was a very strong positive correlation between smoke ph and sales trends. in other words, the ph has to be just right so you can inhale deeply and get the nicotine kick. and you can see all these other documents when you go into the deliberation room. but if you look at the one in the bottom middle, most of those who have smoked for any significant time would like to stop. many but not most of those who would like to stop smoking are able to do so. that is a defendant document from 1982, pt1820. the entire matter of addiction is the most potent weapon a prosecuting attorney can have in a lung cancer/cigarette case. we cannot defend choice if the person was addicted. okay? r.j. reynolds and lorillard would go out of business without nicotine. their documents tell you that. if we move toward reduction or elimination of nicotine from our product, then we shall eventually liquidate our business. without the chemical compounds, the cigarette market would collapse. this is a philip morris document. pm would collapse and we would lose all our jobs and consulting fees. however, we can never -- we cannot ever be comfortable selling a product which most of our customers would stop using if they could. that is to say, if the exit gate from our market should suddenly open, we could be out of business almost overnight. okay? so the reason they are putting this stuff in the nicotine is clearly -- or the nicotine in cigarettes is clearly for economic reasons, to keep selling cigarettes, to keep their jobs, to keep smokers coming back. okay? you have seen the stuff on youth marketing. okay? you have seen the stuff on the illusion of filtration. the illusion of filtration is as important as the fact of filtration. people who had nagging doubts about cigarettes, they could switch to filters and have a crutch, a psychological crutch and a self-rationale for continuing to smoke. but the filters were just an illusion. okay? the doubt, the lies and conspiracy, you heard all about that, and you will see all that in evidence. okay. the defendants keep saying over and over again, this case is not about other people. this case is about jacqueline loyd. what does this have to do with jacqueline loyd? folks, jackie loyd is buried. jackie loyd lost her life prematurely because of products that these defendants made. if they do not get the tie, i cannot help that. but clearly the evidence is such that you can get the tie. you understand what this case has to do with jackie loyd. more likely than not, jacqueline loyd relied to her detriment on the concealment or omission by r.j. reynolds and lorillard of material information. why do we know that? i mean, their agreement to conceal health effects was a legal cause of her death. okay? why? because if they had come out and said, instead of issuing these statements that there is still doubt and we want to have an honest discussion about smoking; they said early on, if they ever find out there is anything injurious about cigarettes, we will take it off the market. not only did not they take it off the market, but they lied and concealed material information. if all that effort were directed to telling people -- like it is now with these campaigns that we have now -- if all that effort were directed to telling people about the harmful effects instead of concealing the harmful effects, what would have happened? what would an admission have done? well, controversy would have been gone. instead, there would have been clear and present danger. instead of debate, there would be the highest threat level. instead of doubt, there would be maximum deterrence. instead of denial, there would be maximum motivation. so now we get to the percentage of fault. remember, by the way, we are talking about concealment. these are smart people. we think of them as people. they are people with a lot of resources. and those resources, all the force and effort of r.j. reynolds and lorillard and the other conspirators were directed towards motivating, influencing people like jacqueline loyd. do we really believe they spent all their money in vain? that they wasted all their money? that there was no effect? that is basically the argument. we took billions of dollars and flushed it down the toilet, because that is what for-profit corporations that are traded publicly do. we waste money. we have no reason for doing what we are doing. we are not measuring the effectiveness. and we continue to throw money away. folks, you get to take your common sense back into the deliberation room with you. ask yourself, does that make sense, that sophisticated businesses would throw money away if what they are doing did not have any effect, or keep doing what they are doing if what they are doing would have no effect? clearly this influenced jackie loyd, not by name. you know, somebody told me something a long time ago about, you know, when your number is up. a soldier told me, when your number is up, you know, if the bullet has got your name on it, it is got your name on it. and somebody else said to him, i'm not worried about the bullet with my name on it. i'm worried about the one that is addressed to-whom-it-may-concern. you do not have to shoot at someone individually. you can spray an area, and if you are there, you are there. and they did not individually target jacqueline loyd. they just sprayed an area with bullets, and one of them hit her. now, we do not have to prove that they were aiming at her, because they were not. they are just spraying the whole area. and that is what happened in this case in terms of permeating the culture with advertising. getting people to smoke not just because they saw ads or remembered a particular article, because that was the culture. they smoked because everybody smoked. and everybody smoked because it was cool, because it was glamorous. and they marketed to teenagers who had, you know, self-esteem issues and were going through adolescence and they could smoke to be cool and they could smoke to fit in. and sooner -- sooner than they expected, they are smoking because they were addicted. and it was not cool anymore, but they still got up in the morning and lit a cigarette. and you know the way it goes. days turn into weeks, weeks turn into months, and months turn into years. before you know it, jacqueline loyd is smoking for 15 years before there is ever a warning label on any cigarettes, and she is smoking 40 years, 42 years before she gets diagnosed with copd. and it is just not an accident. those two things are connected. the flood of media, the flood of advertising, the concealment, the false controversy, all that stuff is connected. if it were not connected, folks, they would not have done it. in evaluating the percentage of fault in this case, we told you that mrs. loyd is responsible for her action in continuing to smoke. she is taken responsibility in this case. when you consider that, consider that she was 16 years old. she dropped out of high school and never finished. she was 16 years old in 1951. she smoked for 15 years before there was ever a warning. when you are thinking about the fault, you know, again, treat these people, treat these corporations like people. okay? and she is the -- she is not here. the decedent, mrs. loyd, lost her life because of what those folks did. so when you are attributing fault, remember that they are the perpetrators and she is the victim. okay? when somebody breaks into your house, they do not break in, you forget to lock the door and they go in your house and they rob you blind. okay? you are partially at fault because you left the door unlocked and you should have locked the door. but who is more at fault, the thief or the victim? okay. if you are in the wrong place at the wrong time and you stay out late and you are the victim of a crime, your parents told you not to stay out late. by golly, if you would listened to them, you never would have been assaulted or whatever the analogy is. but clearly, if you are apportioning fault, that is a smaller percentage of the fault between these folks. so jacqueline loyd -- again, this is my suggestion. you do whatever you want. but if we are apportioning fault, a 16-year-old high school graduate -- not even high school graduate, a 16-year-old who did not finish high school, got married, moved out of her house, grew up in a culture where people smoked, she deserves ten percent of the responsibility, and the defendants deserve ninety percent. now, you heard a lot about r.j. reynolds and not much about lorillard. that is the structure of the case. but every one of their cigarettes contained nicotine and every one of their cigarettes caused cancer, and they concealed and lied and covered up to the same extent as r.j. reynolds. if you come up with a different percentage, that is fine. but that is my suggestion based on sitting through the evidence in this case. remember, every one of those cigarettes was designed, engineered and manipulated to cause and sustain addiction. these folks were dealing in drugs. this is the same thing as this. no difference. they were dealing drugs, and dealing drugs in such a way that they would cause and sustain addiction. god put nicotine in tobacco. but these folks hijacked that naturally occurring substance and turned it into an addictive substance. that is where we get to question no. 13. actually, i want to go -- yeah. question 13. and this is a question where you can apply that different standard of proof. this is the question where it is not more likely than not. it is not tipping the scales just a little. it is clear and convincing evidence. and one of the things that, first of all, is instructed is clear and convincing evidence is evidence where you are not supposed to have any doubts, where you have to be sure. okay? that tells you that greater weight of the evidence is a lesser standard. okay? but this evidence is important, because now we are talking about punishing folks and now it is about all those other folks too. please state as to each defendant whether you find by clear and convincing evidence that punitive damages are warranted against each defendant. okay? clear and convincing evidence is evidence that is precise, explicit, lacking in confusion, and of such weight that it produces a firm belief or conviction, without hesitation, about the matter at issue. okay. you will get the instruction. it is actually in your packet. reckless disregard of human life or safety. consciously indifferent to the consequences. wantonly and recklessly disregarded the safety of the public. the conduct showed such reckless indifference to the rights of others as to be equivalent to an intentional violation of those rights. you know, folks, everybody's heard about the wolf in sheep's clothing, but sometimes the wolf comes as a wolf. it is hard to wrap your brain around how bad the conduct was in this case. this is about everybody touched by the defendants' conduct. this is about 440,000 people who die from smoking every year. okay? one death is a tragedy. 440,000 deaths is just a news story that we lose touch with. every one of those people had a soul, a heartbeat, dreams, aspirations. and their lives were cut short, stolen, by the conduct of these defendants. it does not get any worse than that. it just does not get any worse than that. 440,000 deaths -mr. walker: objection, your honor. 403, you sustained an objection to this during trial. the court: overruled. mr. trentalange: 440,000 deaths a year is 1205 -- 1205 people dying every day. four jumbo jets crashing every day. every day. i mean, would we ever countenance that? especially if the airlines covered up mechanical defects and told you that they did not exist first and that, if they found them, we would do something about it? and i mean, would we ever put up with that? 15 million preventable smoking deaths. again, this is not some figure in a book, folks. these are real people. more than all the people that died in all the wars in american history. now, when we get to damages, we have got to talk about both punitive damages, which the evidence clearly warrants -- if this is not clear and convincing evidence, then we can just throw away that term, because it does not exist. compensatory damages in this case. okay? you are going to be asked to award compensatory damages. damages are for the harms and losses that were suffered in this case by the estate and by ellis loyd. damages are to fix what can be fixed, put back what can be put back, and to make up for what cannot be fixed or put back. this is not about sympathy, folks. if the defendants get up and tell you this is not about sympathy, mr. trentalange already told me that. okay? the time for sympathy is over. this is about money. this is about compensating for the harms and losses. your verdict, val di is french. it is another thing that means to speak the truth. you will speak the truth by your verdict. and your verdict has to contain damages that fairly and adequately compensate the estate and ellis loyd for the harms and losses that they have suffered. when you are assessing mr. loyd's harms and losses, you only consider his harms and losses. no outside factors. okay? no outside factors, like if it is too much money for one person or whether it is going to change his life, whether he had other resources, what people might say about that. only the harms and losses get weighed, are the only things that go on the scale. loss of support and services, that is the value, the replacement value of what his wife did for him. and the other damages are the human losses. they are the biggest damages in the case. if somebody says when you are awarding the human losses to mr. loyd, if somebody says, that is too much money, remind them that those are the biggest damages in the case, that the human losses are the biggest losses in the case. compensate means to hang at the same level, to balance the harms and losses for the amount of money necessary to fix, put back or make up for the harms and losses. mr. bigger: mike. mr. trentalange: yeah. the first thing is really a matter of the arithmetic, medical and funeral expenses. they are $110,000. okay? so the first question is just simple math. i will write 10 k, k for a thousand. everyone knows that, but i'm lazy. so $110,000 for medical and funeral expenses. loss of services, that is the value of what mrs. loyd did for mr. loyd during their marriage, while she was alive. now, folks, you can value them in any way you want, and anybody who is married knows that -mr. walker: objection, your honor. improper argument. this is not evidence. the court: approach, please. (at the bench) mr. walker: can we have this taken down? the court: yes, please. what is your objection? mr. walker: there is nothing in evidence about the value of services that mr. loyd lost. all those numbers that he put up on there are something the lawyers, i guess, came up with. but there was no testimony about it. there is nothing in evidence about the replacement value of services. mr. trentalange: there is a jury instruction on the replacement value of services. they can value it any way they want. i'm making a suggestion. they can pick any number they want. mr. walker: there is no evidence on it, judge. the court: okay. your objection is overruled. it is argument. mr. walker: okay. (in open court) mr. trentalange: may it please the court? the court: yes, sir. mr. trentalange: could we put that back up there? folks, remember, it is only question 13 that is clear and convincing evidence. all these questions are greater weight of the evidence. so while you are deliberating about damages, if somebody says, i'm just not sure that that is the right amount of money, remind them that you do not have to be sure, as long as that is more likely than not the correct amount of money. you can have as many doubts as you want on both sides as long as the greater weight of the evidence, more likely than not, is the standard that you are using. so more likely than not, the damages here are $110,000 for funeral expenses. you can value the loss of support and services -- those of you who are married know your spouse often works more than 40 hours a week and that the value of their services many times is far greater than minimum wage, but i just picked a number as a calculation, as a starting point. if you think that is too high, lower it. if you think it is too low, raise it. i defer to your collective judgment on that. but this is just a starting point. okay? and mr. loyd's future life expectancy is actually more than eight years but i picked that as a starting point that you can be comfortable with. but we know that it is been six years since mrs. loyd's death. and at 40 hours a week, that comes to just under $100,000 in lost support and services. somebody -- if somebody said, well, that is not worth it, you know, remind them that your wife, working around the house, if she did not do it, you would have to pay somebody to do it. same thing -- if your husband did not cut the lawn, you would have to pay somebody to cut the lawn. so mrs. loyd did certain things and you heard about them. and mr. loyd is without her now. so the law recognizes a value to that loss. in the future, same thing. 40 hours a week at minimum wage, 129,625.60. i will leave off the 60. and remember that this is just a starting point. you can do what you want with it. it is just a suggestion to get you started. okay? 226,845. okay. then we get to the biggest losses in the case, the harms and losses. ms. loyd was married to his wife for 15 years. you know, in the movies, boy meets girl and they live happily ever after, and everything is over in between 90 and 120 minutes. but it ain't like that in real life. both mrs. loyd and mr. loyd took a lot of wrong turns before they wound up together in the right place. and they matured and they found each other and they were together for 15 years. and, you know, there were a lot of references to how many times she was married and i guess there was a good reason to ask all those questions, so that every name of every husband could be dragged out in front of you. i will give the defendants the benefit of the doubt they were doing that for some valid purpose. but, folks, the thing that matters here is the marriage we are talking about and the relationship we are talking about that was destroyed by the defendants' wrongful conduct. okay? they took a wrecking ball to mrs. loyd's marriage and to mr. loyd and he is left in the wake -- the wreckage of what they left him with. no slide can capture what he feels. you saw him on the witness stand. he worked his whole life. he worked for a company called central maintenance. he was a member of the boilermakers' union. he lost his wife. he is dealing with that. you heard testimony about how he is still -- he wore his wife's scarf for a long time. he still keeps her pictures up. he is had a hard time dealing with it. so, you know, you have got to -- ever see those commercials that sally struthers used to do and other people do where they have those kids that are very hungry in africa and she is trying to get people to give money for them, a worthy cause. but i have to tell you something, i have a hard time looking at that. that is very hard. i will confess to you that sometimes i change the channel, because i do not want to look at that. you cannot change the channel. you have to look at ellis loyd's harms and losses and think about what it is like for him to have lost a spouse and what it is like to get up every day from the bed that his wife used to sleep in and realize that she is not there. and it is getting better, no question about it, but it is never going to be fixed. you cannot change the channel on that. you have to look at that and you have to consider that. when you do that, i want to give you a cautionary instruction. and that is, do not get carried away. nobody wants a runaway jury. nobody. not the defense, not the plaintiff. okay? so award him an amount that is fair and just in light of the evidence. but when you figure out the amount of money on the harms and losses and the biggest losses in the case, do not award more than $6,000,000. so i'm going to put less than or equal to $6,000,000 in this case, because anything more than that, i think, we would have some problems on appeal. so you have gone through this, and you are going to add lines 11 and 12. and this, i'm going to have to add here. this could be challenging. so this is 336,845. i do not know what number you are going to put here but you will put your answer down here. so it will be something less than or equal to 636,845. that is less than or equal to. folks, i'm going to sit down for a little bit. how am i doing on time? the clerk: you are about eight minutes. mr. trentalange: hum? the clerk: about eight minutes. mr. trentalange: eight minutes. okay. well, i will save my eighth minute for rebuttal. i will tell you -- i missed a page. good thing i have eight minutes. so please state as to each defendant -- we have already talked to this -- whether you find by clear and convincing evidence that punitive damages are warranted against the defendant under the circumstances in this case. yes, yes. and let me emphasize to you, folks, if this is not punitive damages, then nothing is punitive damages. if this is not clear and convincing evidence, nothing is clear and convincing evidence. if you say no to this, you might as well slap a blue ribbon on their chest and tell them, good job. that is the way we want american businesses to work. excellent work, folks. you answer no to those questions, that is what you are telling them. do not tell them that. thank you, your honor. mr. trentlange: all right. we can get started. may it please the court. the court: yes, sir. mr. trentlange: there is a fellow that was not from missouri. his name was bill shakespeare. and he is famous for writing something that says, methinks thou dost protest too much. and i think that is pretty much applicable to this case. let me tell you about missouri. missouri is a wonderful state. i spent a week there one night. but the reason -- the reason that "show me" business comes out, you know where that comes from? it comes from the fact that after the civil war, there were a lot of scalawags. scalawags are people that wanted to take folks and scam them. and there were a lot of them that flocked to missouri because missouri is one of those states that was kind of like a border state. it was not clearly for the south and it was not clearly for the north. so a lot of these carpetbaggers and scalawags flocked to missouri. and there is another phrase called the missouri boat ride, being taken for a missouri boat ride. that is why people developed that phrase in missouri, show me, because unlike you, they had to have a healthy amount of skepticism. but you came into this, and the people that had skepticism, the judge sent them home. you are supposed to look at the evidence and we will show you through the evidence. but you are not supposed to have that attitude that they had in missouri, and rightly so, because it was based on survival, because of all of the people that did stuff like the defendants did in this case, lorillard and reynolds. you see, people in missouri were subject to lies, concealment and misrepresentation about medicinal products for the most part. and you had the medicine men that would sell bottles of tonic, doctor good and stuff that was supposed to do things that it clearly did not do. so just like the defendants in this case, people in missouri misrepresented things and concealed things that consumers were entitled to know. so that is a little bit of history where that comes from, that phrase. and we have shown you, folks. but, you know, methinks thou dost protest too much, it reminds me of a case that we all learned about in law school. it is a case of a farmer who is got cabbage and his neighbor has a goat. and the cabbage farmer has all of his cabbage eaten by his neighbor's goat. so he goes to court and he says, my cabbage was worth $100. your goat ate my cabbage. pay me $100. and the lawyers in that case, just like the lawyers in this case -- there is the goat; there is the cabbage -- the lawyers in this case said, hey, you had no cabbages. even if you had any cabbages, they were not eaten. if your cabbages were eaten, it was not by a goat. if your cabbages were eaten by a goat, it was not my goat. and if it was my goat, he was insane. that is what we have got here in this case. she was not addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine. they did not cause copd. and if they did, if it did, she did not live here at the time. and if she lived here at the time, she had copd for too long. and by the way, even after she had copd for too , she did not get cancer. oh, and if she did get cancer, it was not lung cancer; it was not the kind of cancer they said. and even if it was the kind of cancer they said, it was not from smoking cigarettes. remember those hurdles that mr. walker put up at the beginning during opening statement? he says we have got to clear all those hurdles. but you know, we have 440 hurdles. there is a certain number of the hurdles that you have to, you know, jump over as part of the race, part of the rules. and you can have the right number of hurdles or you can have some neighborhood kid who thinks it is funny to go out there and put up extra hurdles just to make you jump over them. okay. in this case, they put up a lot of hurdles that really are kind of, you know, not really big hurdles and we have to jump over them. they are just putting up hurdles for the sake of hurdles. really? was she a florida resident in 1991 when she got diagnosed with copd? really? she got married here. okay? she went to tampa general hospital. her permanent address is in hillsborough county, florida. two days after she got married, she went to south florida baptist hospital in plant city, and she got diagnosed with an acute exacerbation of copd. really? we need to jump over that hurdle? okay. consider that hurdle jumped over. i'm not going to spend any more time on that. you want to talk about expert witnesses. well, you get an instruction on expert witnesses. and i thank mr. walker for talking about credibility, because frankly, he is playing on our field. you want to throw some reallies in there. really, we are going to have a credibility contest between tobacco companies and expert witnesses? tobacco companies. you remember those engle findings? where are they? the guy that murders his parents and then comes in and pleads for leniency because he is an orphan. they want to talk about credibility? okay? mr. loyd -- mrs. loyd, rather, was supposed to know all about the dangers of cigarettes. but to a person, everybody that spoke for these tobacco companies raised their hand and swore to tell the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth, repeatedly said, smoking does not cause cancer, nicotine is not addictive. really? the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth. you want to fight about credibility? game on. okay? if there is anybody whose witnesses are not worthy of belief at all, it is witnesses that sign their name on the back of a check that comes from one of their companies. okay? you want to talk about dr. cummings? dr. cummings is devoted to helping people. he is a hero, folks. he has co-authored surgeon general reports. he is written 350 peer-reviewed publications. yeah, he is a mercenary. one man's mercenary is another man's freedom fighter. he is fighting to stop addiction and disease. and the real question is not why is he rooting for the tobacco company -- for the plaintiffs against the tobacco companies. the real question is, why would any health professional root for anybody else? that is the real question. they attacked him on the periphery, because they cannot come at him directly, because he knows their documents; he is read their internal materials, like their diary. and these documents that we trotted out here, make no mistake about it, they did not want anybody to ever see those documents. these are the findings in this case. okay? smoking causes lung cancer specifically including adenocarcinoma. and you remember when i talked to dr. tan? i thought this was a settled issue, but i'm wrong. dr. tan said she had adenocarcinoma because he picked from the types of adenocarcinoma that were nonsmall, nonsquamous carcinoma. and by the way, dr. bennett, when he testified, he said, i looked at the tissue sample, the biopsy, and he said she had adenocarcinoma. so their own witness says exactly what dr. tan says. there is no change. it is a further refinement of the subcategory. and the real point is that it was not bac. now, just like the guy in the goat case, they are clinging to anything they can to survive. okay? they are like on a sinking ship. they are going to reach for any board that they can to try to stay afloat, but the ship is sinking. she did not have bac. mr. walker wants there to be a magic bullet, like the ck-20. it is not a magic bullet. okay? ck-20 is not diagnostic. no person told you that that is the end of story. dr. villa says if that was all you needed to do, you could just read the slide report, read the pathology report, and you have got a diagnosis. like the elephant, that is one piece of a puzzle. you have to put it in perspective. you have to put it all together. significantly, nobody here told you that she definitely had bac. they talked about being consistent with and they used hedge words to give themselves some out. dr. cole told you. remember, he is the fellow that is been paid over a million dollars by r.j. reynolds to testify in cases like this. mr. walker showed you that 64 percent business with bac. yeah. mucinous bac. but the radiologist told you, based on the radiological presentation, it was nonmucinous bac. you know that song they played you about smoke, smoke, smoke your cigarette? the song they should have played you was that is my story and i'm sticking to it. they are going to pick whatever piece they can pick to try to escape responsibility. and that is what they are doing in this case. and they have got fine lawyers. so they are going to create all kinds of doubt. and doubt is the tobacco companies' product. but this case is not about doubt. this is a case about more likely than not was a person who smoked cigarettes for 42 years addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine? come on, folks. that is as easy as the residency question. can you create a lot of doubt? can you try and make people think over and over again? folks, there are still people that think elvis is alive. okay? there are folks that want to see president obama's long form birth certificate. there will always be room for that kind of doubt. and given enough time and enough skill, you can create it anyway. but that is not what this case is about. this case is about the greater weight of the evidence. you know, the devil was talking to some of his lesser angels, and they were trying to figure out a way that they can get people's souls. and the lesser angels said, you know, we have got to tell them that they should not repent. and that was the consensus. and the devil looked at them and said, you know, you guys do not understand. we should tell them they should repent, but we should tell them they have time. and that is kind of what is going on here with cigarettes. they do not tell people not to smoke cigarettes. they tell them to smoke cigarettes. and they create doubt. and they give the psychological crutch that people need when they are addicted. mrs. loyd never said she was addicted. do you know why? because people that are addicted do not know they are addicted. there is a saying in some 12-step programs, denial is not just a river in egypt. okay? how many times have you heard it? it is classic. i could quit any time i want to; i just do not want to. i mean, that is kind of the hallmark of addiction. and as for quitting and not quitting, mrs. loyd quit every night when she went to bed, and she relapsed every morning when she took that first cigarette and her body responded. that was the fix. she quit and started again. that is quitting. it does not have to be a formal "i'm going to quit and i'm never going to smoke again." dr. cummings has treated over 10,000 addicted smokers. he told you that she was addicted. that is the evidence in the case. but you want to talk about dr. barnett? she disagrees with the very book that she was relying on, on the percentage of people that were addicted to cigarettes. she disagrees on the significant findings. she took issue with withdrawal symptoms. you know, god bless her for helping people, because nobody disparages physicians who help people. i'm sure she does a lot of good. but in this courtroom, she was represented as a nationally renowned expert. she has not written a single thing on addiction. she does not have -she has not ever had a smoking cessation clinic, and she has not written a peer-reviewed article on anything, period. not addiction, not anything. she is treated a grand total of one person that came to her specifically to stop smoking. she belongs to an organization -- sorry i'm talking fast here -- she belongs to an organization that has as its position statement the eradication of tobacco. it has as one of its goals moving people in tobacco companies to other jobs. okay? that is an organization that she chooses to belong to and that she lists on her resume, her cv. and she comes in here and testifies for a tobacco company in exchange for money. you want to talk about credibility? okay. what does it say when the hardest part about making it through your son's funeral is whether or not you are going to smoke? what did you just put up there? mr. bigger: water. mr. trentlange: oh, thanks. what is the most likely explanation for why all of their customers smoke so much that they die? it says smoking, but it should be smoke. you have got two choices. they just did not value life. they understood the risks and they basically jumped out of an airplane without a parachute. or addiction had its hooks in them and the conspiracy worked on them. if you have got to pick between 15 million people that lie -- that died and the tobacco company lies and concealment, what is a better explanation? i want to go back to some of the things that mr. walker said and that to a lesser extent mr. pedrosa talked about. and this is -- these are the documents that we had. i do not know if anybody got a chance to write them down, but i want to go through them. i want to leave them up there so you can jot them down. and then, actually, i guess we cannot have the elmo on at the same time, so we will go back to those. can you put that board up? can i get elmo on and we will get the board up? okay. again, i'm of the belief that smart people in big corporations do not do things by accident. this building just did not build itself. it happened. even though nobody saw it being built, it is here. okay? and that is the way things like this conspiracy happen. people do it for a reason. number 12. the court has instructed you that r.j. reynolds tobacco company and lorillard tobacco company concealed or omitted material information about the health effects or addictive nature of their cigarettes or both. okay. this is not a few, you know, bad seeds that are writing documents that we happened on. this is a determination. they did it. they actually concealed it. in terms of talking about taking responsibility, not once during these four weeks did i hear one witness for the defense or one statement from their lawyer that they did that. okay? the issue for your determination on plaintiff's claim for concealment is, as to each defendant, whether jacqueline loyd reasonably relied to her detriment on the concealment or omission by that defendant of material information not otherwise known or available, or their failure to disclose material facts concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes. a material fact is one that is of such importance that jacqueline loyd would not have acted as she did but for the defendant's concealment or omission of that fact. okay. read that again. the court is telling you that they concealed, that the defendants concealed material information. and then it is telling you that part of that material information is a collection of facts. the court is then telling you a material fact is one that is of such importance that jacqueline loyd would not have acted as she did but for the defendants' concealment or omission of the fact. so she had this stuff. she would not have acted the way she did. okay? that is already determined. mr. walker: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. mr. walker: move to strike. the court: overruled. mr. trentlange: if the greater weight of the evidence supports the plaintiff's claim, then your verdict should be r.j. reynolds -- for r.j. reynolds and lorillard. if the greater weight of the evidence supports plaintiff's claim against r.j. reynolds or lorillard, then you should so indicate on the designated place on the verdict form. folks, they did all this stuff. they never came out with ads that said smoking causes cancer. they had opportunities to do that. they had opportunities to inform people about -can i go back to the slides? they had opportunities to inform -- to inform people about the nature of their products. but 1984. we talked about that document, can we have an honest discussion? that is a reynolds' document. 1984 ain't that long ago. okay? 1984. i was a second lieutenant at ft. benning, georgia. that seems like yesterday. okay? they were telling people that it was not a settled question. now, if everybody knew it was a settled question, what does that say about their credibility? if everybody knew, then those folks were just lying, bald-faced lies. they were doing that for a reason. it is because if you are addicted to something, you just need something to placate yourself; you just need that one thread, that psychological crutch. okay? should i study for this test? everything in your body tells you i need to study for that test, because it is tomorrow. but you have got that one friend that comes over and says, let us go have a beer. you have got plenty of time. you know this stuff. you have got it down cold. let us go out. that is called a bad influence. it is called an enabler. okay? if you are dealing with addicted people. they were enablers. they were the folks that gave jacqueline loyd and millions of other smokers that psychological crutch. folks, they knew they were doing it. okay? they come in here and they say, the defendants, lorillard and r.j. reynolds, come in here and make like this never happened. they just want to ignore all of their documents and everything that they did for 50 years. they did it because they knew it would work. and it worked. and now they are coming in here and they are telling you no connection. no connection. gasoline, matches, burned down building, no connection. okay? and they do it with something called linguistic infiltration. nothing that happened in the defendants' case was an accident. it was calculated to convince you. and our case is calculated to convince you too. but they -- you know, in congress, whenever anybody wants to get something passed, they call it something that you do not want to go back to your district and say you voted against. so they will have a bill that has something to do with roads and bridges in somebody's district, and they will call it the civil rights act of 2013. because they know you are not going to want to go back to your district and have somebody say, you voted against the civil rights act. senator jones voted against the civil rights act or the women's equality act or whatever it is. so they pick buzzwords. and in this case, their buzzwords are choice and freedom and responsibility, because they want to make you think that if you vote for the plaintiff on your verdict form, that you are against freedom. who is against freedom? everybody is against freedom -- everybody is for freedom. but you do not have the freedom to market a cancer-causing product to kids under 18. and they did that. look at the documents. the youth marketing documents. remember that one picture of a girl with a prom invitation? she is clearly in high school. okay? they marketed to kids. they had unattended vending machines. that is in the surgeon general's reports. okay? this is not about freedom. this is about responsibility. but it is about corporate responsibility. okay? you cannot just have one side of the equation. it is about the choice. they chose to make every pack of cigarettes that they marketed, knowing that it was going to kill people, knowing that they were lying about the disease-causing properties. it is about choice. it is about responsibility. but they had a choice. they had multiple choices. going back in the twenties, when they first started learning about the cancer-causing properties of nicotine and tobacco -- excuse me -of tobacco, when they first started learning about the addictive nature of nicotine. they know that nicotine is the thing that keeps the smoker coming back. and in the thirties and in the forties and in the fifties. and in 1953, when the word was starting to get out, they had a choice. they could have said, we need to take a serious look about whether we are going to keep selling these products. okay? think about other products, folks. okay? when there is a defective crib, the manufacturers of cribs for babies do not try and figure out a way to convince people that they are not really dangerous; that it is the baby's fault or it is the parents' fault. they recall the crib and they take a good look at it. there are choices. but these guys got together and they decided that they were going to have a secret meeting. and mr. walker says it was not secret. it was not secret because the times, the new york times found out about it. it was not like they published it and invited people to come. and they kept what happened at that meeting secret for years until finally, because of some lawsuits, those documents got revealed and we saw what was going on. they had a carefully calculated plan to hold ground and to deceive the american public, including health officials. that is one of the reasons why those surgeon general reports that they cite do say what they say about filters, because they did not know that they were rigging the tests. you see, the machine measured tar and nicotine in cigarettes, and they had vent holes just past the point of the machine. dr. cummings talked about that. so they were cheating the machine. okay? all the way along they had choices to be honest and forthright. okay? but they did not do that. let me talk to you just a little bit about cancer. can we get the elmo, please? mr. walker talked to you about adenocarcinoma. again, they want, not our cigarettes, you know, not our cabbage, whatever. he talked about adenocarcinoma having the weakest correlation with cigarette smoking. this is in evidence. it is pt3895. it is from the 2010 surgeon general report. health officials are still trying to catch up to where some of the tobacco companies are or were in terms of their knowledge. moreover, where squamous cell carcinomas had been the predominate form of lung cancer, by the late 20th century, adenocarcinoma of the lung was becoming increasingly common, presumably reflecting deeper inhalation of smoke that was facilitated by ventilated filters as well as other factors such as changes in agricultural practices, tobacco curing, and cigarette manufacturing processes that could lead to increased concentrations of tobacco specific nitrosamines. it is the surgeon general of the united states. yeah. cancer. remember at the turn of the last century, lung cancer was virtually unknown. cigarettes changed all of that for the worse. okay? pt3895, the 2010 surgeon general report, page 298. the changing histology of lung cancer is also consistent with the role of nnk. adenocarcinoma has now overtaken small cell carcinoma as the most common lung cancer type. this nitrosamine in tobacco smoke produces -that is what nnk is -- this nitrosamine in tobacco smoke produces primarily adenocarcinoma in rodents. however, this outcome has also been attributed to differing inhalation patterns of the current cigarette smokers. as nitrate concentrations in tobacco increased from 1959 to 1997 -- who do you think is doing that, folks? --nnk concentrations in mainstream smoke increased and those of bap decreased. researchers attributed these changes to tobacco blends with higher levels of air cured tobacco, the use of reconstituted tobacco, and other factors. so this is not some accident that happens. these are tobacco companies designing, engineering, and manipulating tobacco to cause and sustain addiction. okay? mr. walker keeps talking about this autopsy. i guess we do not need that. you can turn the elmo off. mr. walker keeps talking about this autopsy. by golly, i thought after he heard from cindy evers about why they did not have an autopsy, that would have been it. but i guess not. i mean, we heard from cindy evers about why the family did not want an autopsy. and i'm reminded of this lawyer who was cross-examining a coroner on the stand. and the coroner is testifying in a death case. and the lawyer said, now, doctor, you did not check his pulse, did you? no, sir, i did not. you did not check his breathing, did you? no, sir, i did not. you did not listen for a heartbeat, did you? no, sir, i did not. well, then he could be alive, could not he, doctor? the doctor looks at him, well, son, i've got his brain in a jar in my office, but for all i know, he could be out practicing law. okay? we do not have an autopsy in this case, but we have enough evidence. we have more than enough evidence. but the absence of evidence in this case does not preclude you from reaching a finding. it did not preclude any of the treating physicians from reaching a finding. it did not preclude any of the defense experts to reaching a finding. and by the way, if the defendants wanted an autopsy in this case, there are court procedures that would have allowed them to get the judge to order an autopsy in this case. okay? so that frankly is a missouri boat ride, talking about the autopsy. in terms of the "but for" causation, "but for" is stilted language. most legal terms are stilted and archaic and they should be changed. if you blew up legal talk i would be very happy. "but for" means without. okay? without. that is it. would she have smoked, would she have taken in between three and four million doses of tobacco smoke containing nicotine without the nicotine? probably not. it is as simple as that. more likely than not. probably not. would she have kept coming back for more if there was not nicotine in there? probably not. that is what but for means. she was a daily smoker? absolutely, she was a daily smoker. she was a daily smoker for 42 years because she was addicted to nicotine. if you were a daily drinker of heavy amounts of alcohol for 42 years, pretty sure you would be an alcoholic. okay? but there is a fundamental distinction between cigarette smoking and drinking. okay? for most of her lifetime she could smoke anywhere. she could smoke anywhere. so it was not going to be disruptive. it was not going to cause her to miss work or not to be able to engage in activities. most of the examples that are given in terms of how she would be addicted or the tests that were being used are anachronistic. if somebody lit up a cigarette right now in the courtroom, the bailiff would come over here and make me put it out or make that person put it out. you cannot smoke on a plane now. there is federal law against it. but back at the time, you could smoke just about everywhere. so it was not that much of a sacrifice for jackie loyd to refrain from smoking for brief periods of time while she was in church. okay? and the 4-h thing, you know, i do not know where that is going. she spent some time in 4-h, and she took an oath in 4-h where they had a pledge or whatever it was called. it was nowhere near as significant as the oath to tell the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth. i wish these folks lived up to the 4-h pledge. we would not be here. but lorillard and r.j. reynolds did not live up to the oaths that their officers took, and they did not live up to the pledge. they did not live up to the promise. remember that guy with the smaller babies quote that was on "face the nation"? you saw that film. he said, if -- or when, as in if, anything in tobacco smoke is identified as being injurious to health, we will take it out. i do not think so. there are other promises made that they would take it off the market. that did not happen. so they did not do what they said they were going to do. they misled and they concealed. we want to hold them accountable, because jackie loyd is one of the people they misled. and mr. walker wants to talk about newspapers that she never read. folks, there is an idea that when you send a message out, the reason they picked the new york times, the new york times is called the newspaper of record. it is the most influential newspaper on the planet. and they took out a full-page ad in the most influential newspaper on the planet, along with newspapers in every city in the united states that had a population or a circulation of 25,000 or more. they did that because they wanted to send a message to people. it cost a pretty penny to do that. they would not have done it if it was not going to reach people. it reaches over and over again. that wendy's commercial that they used. that was perfect. because people know "where is the beef?" who never even saw that commercial. people hear, "where is that beef?," who never saw that commercial. because it is not just the initial message, it is the repetition, it is the culture, it is the environment that gets created. that is what they did. they crafted the environment. and then you had a very well educated person from stanford, dr. hoffman, who came in and told you all about her historical research that she did that she does not put on her resume for this tobacco company. and she said she did not consider the tobacco company documents and what the tobacco companies were doing and how it influenced behaviors during the time period that she was looking at. when you talk about having less than the whole picture? i mean, that is deliberate ignorance, deliberately disregarding information that is there and readily available, because it is by the people that are paying her. so her testimony about what was out there was interesting. i found particularly interesting the reference that mr. walker put up that said, if you smoke tobacco -remember that schoolbook? i do not remember my schoolbooks, but that little schoolbook brought me back. it had a quote from there about if you smoke tobacco for any length of time, you will likely become its slave. really? what if you just like it? what if you do not want to quit? i mean, which is it? you have got to pick a side. either tobacco smoke -- tobacco in cigarettes is addictive or it is not. either it causes