mr. wilner: may it please the court. the court: yes, sir. mr. wilner: ladies and gentlemen of the jury, my favorite time has arrived. we can chat. you cannot answer back but we can kind of chat, and so i've been waiting to do it. as you see sometimes i get a little frustrated and i like to do it all the time. it is a great system. i mean, it is not perfect. this is not perfect. but it is a great system. there is been a huge amount of labor. very difficult. his honor has borne, beared, borne with us throughout -- throughout the storm of the century, and we are here, and we are here to make -- you are here to make an important decision. and first i want to -- i want to thank the people that have -and these are just a few, but it is a team effort. janna blasingame has been my right arm and i coul not function without it. edward warren has been m other right arm, i could not function, but my real right arm has been tracy thompson who has gone through unbelievable travail to be here. jenna strom also with our office has been here, of course, has been with us night and day. so thank you all. thank you all. thank you. i first -- and i'm -- i'm timed. i hate to be timed, but i am. and janna has told me that -- she said, woody, you know, what you do is you start talking about something, you get so interested, you want to keep going on that subject. you have to pul the whole trial back in perspective. so i said, okay, i will. i will do that. but i am interested in a couple things i'm definitely going to talk about. so the first thing -- i thought, first things first, why do not we talk about the verdict because that is really what we are here for, what you are here for, and everything depends on it. all the time and effort that has gone into this trial depends upon what you do in your conscience and yo common sense to fill out this verdict. so let me go through it really quickly. the first question -and you have seen this before -- was julius frailey addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine and, if so, was cigarette smoking because of such addiction a legal cause? now, one of the things we are going to talk about in a minute is that one of the first things to live by is we said, look, legal cause does not mean the only cause. never have said that. never has come from this side of the table. causes all combined. there are many causes. there are a million causes why we are here today on this earth. but, and this is a big but, we do not have to prove that a case is the only cause. and there is actually an instruction and you have heard it, i'm going to -- when i get to these slides i'm going to give you, i'll have it in detail. but the basics are that it need not be the only cause if it is a substantial contributing cause. and we will live and die by that. no problem. so we have got to prove that cigarettes -- and this is just -- this is class membership. and if you find that, then mr. frailey joins the class. he joins the class, certain facts are now binding on him. first things first. let us answer this: was he addicted to cigarettes? well, i'm going to go through all -- not all the signs, but he maxed out on all the scales of addiction. there is not any real serious -- i say serious contention otherwise. the question is was cigarette smoking because of the addiction a legal cause. and now we get down to this question -- and i'll talk about it more because i have a little bit more time. i think what reynolds would say is nobody really -- nobody's addiction really matters because in the end they always choose to smoke. and what they are talking about really is the philosophy of the human being. and that is why i used my little analogy here of my foot. and i want to go into it for a second because it really does illustrate, at least it does to me, that this -this dichotomy between being a human being and beii affected by things, that they are both in your brain and outside and the fact that we do not know the answers to, you know, these philosophical questions about free will. we do not really know that, but we do know that certain things affect others. so if i put my foot under here and start loading it up with weight, you say, mr. wilner, you have said that before. well, here's what it means. we heard all sorts of interesting testimony about how the brain works and how nicotine in the brain works and how the receptors work and when you are addicted and you do not have a cigarette, it is sending those discomfort, pain maybe, like pain, into parts of your brain, not that different from what it would feel like if i had my foot under here and had 60 pounds of weight on it. and so if it hurts not to have a cigarette when you need one, when you want one, want one, too, whe your brain is telling you to go get another one, if it hurts like it hurts with your foot under there, if i move my foot and relieve the pain, that is like lighting up. that is your cigarette. so within that analogy would you say that it was my choice to move my foot? well, maybe, in some sense up till maybe the weight gets to be ridiculous. i do not know. but that is not the question. the real question is: did the -- was the weight a cause of me moving my foot? that is the question. not whether human beings have freedom of will, which we all hope we do, becomes almost religious issue, okay, we have i but yet we know we are acted on, we know things affect us and addiction is a very powerful effect inside the brain. as we will see here mr. frailey described it himself as the dragon inside he could not slay. and so it is not to be minimized. so that is all we have to say. not was it the only reason, not that people are robots, not that the will is not free in the philosophical sense. but did the weight in his brain caused by years of smoking contribute -- a substantial contributing cause, that is all, to his lighting a cigarette which in this analogy becomes getting away from the pain. so we say yes. and the next is: was this cigarette smoking over years and years and years a cause of his esophageal cancer? we fought that battle in the last few days. i'm going to take you back to it but not this second. all day, all this stuff about how it really was not -- the cigarettes did not contribute at all, we heard, and we will prove to you that is wrong because they have already admitted, though the did not want to say it that way, but they have admitted they have. the relative risk of two to three is a substantial contributing factor. there is no question. and i'll prove that to you in a second. if you mark yes to this because it is a -because of addiction and because the esophageal adenocarcinoma, a cause, a significant cause, was cigarette smoking, then you go on to the next question: was r.j. reynolds' negligence a legal cause? now, notice it does not even ask whether r.j reynolds was negligent because if you mark the fir box, if he joins the class, then you are instructed that r.j. reynolds was negligent. that is not an issue anymore. so the only thing it becomes is: was that a legal cause? and i'll discuss what the negligence was. it was negligent marketing. it was putting up sports images when you knew better. it was before 1969 failing to put a decent warning on, although your scientists had told you that it was killing people. mr. walker: objection, your honor. mr. wilner: that was all negligence. mr. walker: arguing the content of the findings. the court: overruled. mr. wilner: the next is: state whether the defective and unreasonably dangerous cigarettes placed on the market by r.j. reynolds were a legal cause. well, if you have the first question answered that the smoking was a legal cause and you have said yes, then this one becomes almost a formality because you have already answered about th cigarettes. it is telling you they were unreasonably dangerous, it is not asking anymore because that is what the class found. and so the only question is: were the cigarettes a legal cause? you have sort of answered that. so that is kind of a formality. the third is whether the concealment or omission of a material fact -- and we will go down through the list of what that was and how it affected mr. frailey. you answer yes or no. that is fraudulent concealment. the fifth is civil conspiracy to fraudulently conceal, that is, did they get in bed with others. and you remember the picture of the hotel where they all got together and decided, our plan is going to be to keep the information here and not let it out as well as we can. and we will show how that made a difference. that is number 5. number 6 is, if you are still with us, comparative fault, r.j. reynolds -- philip morris because r.j. reynolds is blaming philip morris, we will talk about that in a minute -- and julius frailey. and we have not backed away from our responsibility in this case. everyone bears some responsibility for their conduct. you will not hear us say that julius frailey is blameless. what is the number for that? i would say maybe it is ten percent i would say r.j. reynolds -- i would say that philip morris, that is only the merit, they want to say merit was used in the '70's, we know it was used in the '80's, not too long before his death. does not matter that much. the -- r.j. reynolds is still the big player here. i would say if you are going to give anything to philip morris, maybe 5 percent, and the remainde would be to r.j. reynolds, which would be 85 percent. something like that. but that is up to you. and then: what is the total amount of damages? and i'll get ahead of myself a little bit here because you are going to say, well, wait a minute, mr. wilner, you have not gotten there yet, but since i'm here on the verdict form, you will see that there is a lost military pension, there is stipulated medical of 157,000, funeral of 7, lost military pension of about 270,000 and social security losses and they total? -- they total 533,000 -- 533,000, and they are split between -- they are split between these two and i'll talk about that in a minute. but these total up to 500 -- the estate. okay. 533,000. you see why i have janna here? 533,000 and then yes, because i did not read this well, this is -- this is a totally different thing on the bottom, this says: what is the pain worth? you know, what is the loss of mr. frailey's company, companionship, his life to her? and he would have lived, according to the tables, 13.7 years, and you have to decide what that is worth per year, or not per year. you can decide any way you want. what i'm suggesting is something like 200,000 a year which would be 3,400,000. but -- but that is up to you. you know, that is up to you. that is a hard thing to say. and i may be low. but you may think i'm high. but then we get to the last question, and the last question is a very interesting question, which is -- which says: number 8, punitive damages. under the circumstance of this case state whether b clear and convincing evidence punitive damages are warranted. and you will have been instructed -- yo have been instructed that that is the thing that goes on about reckless disregard. that is the reckless thing. that is the uncaring. i described it before as, was it intentional what they did or was it an accident? if it is an accident then there is no punitive damages. we will live and die by that. if they did it on purpose, if they hid this on purpose, if they -- if they concealed things on purpose, if they -- if they made their cigarettes more addictive on purpose, if they -- if they knew what they were doing throughout this, then the answer is yes. now, this case is interesting because that number 8 gives you the option. if you mark that, you can come back and reconsider it, you can decide you were wrong, or you can decide you were right an you can decide how much would be a worthy punishment. and you will be given instructions on that and we will ask you at the proper time, if you mark that, to send a message that the conduct is not proper. and we will talk about what -- at that time what would be a fair message. that is all. if you do not mark that, you cannot come back and look at that. if you do mark it, you have the option of coming back, and that option -- i do not need to take very long. but that -- you can then sit down, consider your option and say, well, you know, wh should we do? so that is the verdict. that is the end. so now let me go back -- and would you turn that off for a second? i want to go to my chart. my chart. here is -- difficult to read but i'm going to go through it quickly because it is good -- i think it is good to remember things we did. let me get a little pen. i said at the beginning the first deal would be, are we class in or out? that is the first question. said that first. secondly, i said one big issue would be reynolds, did they tell the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth? and that is -- that is the historical record. and, incidentally, it is also true in this case, did they tell the truth to you in this case, the whole truth and nothing but the truth through their witnesses? i say no. and the third is: did they make their product as safe as they could make it? we say no way because an addictive product is a deadly product when it has carcinogens. carcinogens plus addicti equals disease equals death. so if you make your product addictive, you have not made it safe, as safe as you can, and, furthermore, when you make your product addictive, why are you making it that way? sales. that completes the circle. so it is intentional that they made their product that way and made it deadly. the is next comparative negligence, you just saw. what is comparative negligence? weighing the negligence. we are okay with that. we are okay. no man -- remember, though, no man's an island. nobod acted alone, neither did mr. frailey. he was embedded in the culture of his day. i'll tell you about that later. the next thing is a cause versus the cause. we agree it is a causes b and b causes c, a causes c. also a, b, c, d, as long as a is a contributing cause to the end result, regardless of how many other causes there are, it does not matter, we will show you that the power of the carcinogens in cigarettes ratcheted up the risk in terms of the cancer that was already there from his esophageal reflex -- reflux, whatever he had, it ratcheted that risk up. it doubled or tripled it. that doubling or tripling was significant. he would not have got his disease when he got it, he would have lived many more years according to the best probability we could bring to this issue. so that is that. it is a cause not the cause. we also talk about substantial factor, that is the same thing. number 5 is -- i said we are going to go with the mainstream. the mainstream means n somebody's opinion. and i think you will see when we brought witnesses in here, they did not just say, well, this is my opinion, i do not have any with me, and you will just have to take my opinion. they brought a stack in. and they said, this is -- this is this document, this is this document, this is this document, this is the surgeon general. this is just not my opinion. this is the mainstream. we focused on that throughout the whole time. and then the last is on purpose or accidental. that is the punitive damages. so we started off, we wanted to talk about addiction. and i illustrated the difference between the old and the new. the old is it was a habit. that was what the scientists believed except inside the cigarette companies they knew better. they did not say anything about it. now we know all the way up in time that it is physical, it gets in your brain, it is a brain disease. we did not know that before, we know it now. a lot of what you have heard, i think, from r.j. reynolds' witnesses even today was a lot of the ole stuff. well, anyone can quit. well, not really. oh, you just have to try. not really. it affects you. 80 to ninety percent of people are addicted according to that same book, the diagnostic statistical manual, 45 percent can quit, that is what that book says. the one that the witness for r.j. reynolds used. next is: do not avoid the present versus past. today we know cigarettes are -- everyone knows, we will pull the clock back, not so sure, so avoid present mindedness. use the historical method. this was a little out of order but i'm going to say -- going to go through it any way. this was dr. kyriakoudes, all about the hill & knowlton. that was the -- that was the conspiracy. and -- am the looking up the documents. i was out of order. okay. now we are back to the causation that dr. feingold talked about. you know, there was so much attack on dr. feingold. dr. feingold, unlike dr. washington, specializes in tobacco-related disease. that is what pulmonary doctors do, because tobacco is inhaled into the lungs and it also gets all the way through the body because it causes all those other diseases, we know that. so dr. feingold, who has read in detail ever surgeon general's report, has read thousands of articles on exactly how cigarettes work, including these tobacco-specific nitrosamines, talked all about that. they -- and dr. feingold was the first one to say, of course there is precursor lesions, we do not question that, but the carcinogens attack the precursor lesion and accelerate it down to the cancer. and it increases your risk, here he said, from one-half a percent a year, two to three times, i wrote three here, to 1-and-a-half percent a year, and if you took -- if you took that percentage from your barrett's esophagus only, then after 30 years you would have 15 percent. if you took that percentage you would have more than thirty percent. it is that difference that is our -- that is our proof, you go from 15 percent to 30 to 45 percent risk in 30 years. that is a terrible risk to take. that is the substantial contributing cause of cigarettes. they accelerate, they hit the barrett's esophagus, they hit the area in your esophagus that is damaged already from the -- from the reflux and those carcinogens get in there and they increase your risk. and i'll prove that in a little bit. next. this was this increase in -- you know, this trying to argue, well, because the esophageal adenocarcinoma goes up late and is still going up, that it -- that it cannot be due to smoking. well, baloney, because adenocarcinoma of the lung is goin up, too, unlike squamous cell carcinoma of the lung. why is that important? a change in cigarettes started in 1959 with the increased nitrate content that has driven adenocarcinoma of both the lung and the esophagus through the roof. that is what is happening. and here we talked about more of the anatomy of the esophageal cancer and how it works on this part and how smoke also damages or paralyzes this esophageal sphincter, causes more acid. it all contributes. and then we talked about the different -- how tareyton contributed, how many packs there were, million doses of tareyton, 7 million doses total. the merits, we never backed away, we said, fine, smoke merits at one point, whatever that is. merits are a substantial contributing cause, we are not arguing that. that is fine. let the merits be. but nobody can back away from tareyton. in fact, there were camels before that. probably from '48 to -- at least from '43 to '51 camels and lucky strike also made by r.j. reynolds. next -mr. walker: objection, your honor, facts no in evidence. the court: overruled. mr. wilner: addiction, we talked about addiction. this is dr. feingold, the brain disease and now we got technical. these are the receptors. diagrams of the receptors, how they work, when they are empty, they send the message to the brain. brain's not happy. type of a pain. all right. then we went through the steps, how do you diagnose addiction. fagerstrom test. even defense witness maxed out. maxed out. and this is it, how soon to the first cigarette, all these things. why is that important? could not get an answer here but, obviously, dr. feingold explained it, when you titrate all -- all night long and your liver removes the nicotine, your receptors are triggered and you get up in the morning and the first thing you want to think about is a cigarette. certainly do not want to think about it like, oh, i want that delicious smoke in my lung, you need it to quiet your receptors. placed mr. frailey -- actually that was -- that was kind of conservative. that is the average. mr. frailey is way out here and that is -- that is -that is exactly what we heard from all the witnesses, maxed it out. maxed the scale out. 125 pack years. chantix and these other things that are now available, first available in the 1990's, maybe some gum earlier, i do not know exactly about that. but the patch was 1991. zyban, chantix never, not in his lifetime. and now we talked about cps 1, the biggest study in history with cps 2, and why the modern cigarettes from the change in 1959 made a horrible, horrible thing as the risks between these two great studies in the '50's and '80's just about doubled. and this is bedrock mainstream science right out of the surgeon general's report, nobody's doubting it or at least we are not. then we talked about what reynolds had done an how the knowledge of addiction early on in 1962, '63, those famous documents that said, we know mo about addiction now, they are in evidence, came dowi were sent to addison yeaman, vp of brown & williamson, their company, that said nicotine is addictive, we are now in the business of selling it. never turned it over to the surgeon general. the surgeon general did not have it in 1954. error was not corrected until 1988. this is their slide trying to impeach dr. feingold for $30 million over his lifetime. and, you know what, i'll tell you, tell me a successful doctor -- and this is his whole business where he pays his nurses and everything else, trying to -- trying to suggest that dr. feingold is doing something wrong -- forensic science, forensic medicine is critical to this country, and that good doctor has devoted his life to being able to come in here and lay it out. and there is one more thing. he did not ask -- and i ask you not to believe anything because it came from his lips. every single statement, i suggest, you demand that it is backed up in government reports, in documents. an that is what dr. feingold is about. he said, i'm not -- it is not me. it is the evidence. and that evidence speaks. it speaks with a different tongue because it is old. you know, there are documents piled up that were first made available in the '90's. but -- but he said do not -- you know, it is not -- it is not my opinion. it is the opinion of the mainstream of scientists, it is the opinions that were expressed -mr. walker: objection, your honor, improp( bolstering. the court: the objection is sustained. mr. wilner: his opinion was expressed by the r.j. reynolds tobacco company in documents that 1 brought up one after the other. this was, again, their -- the defense thing, i'm not sure what their -- oh, these are -- these are causes of acid reflux. did not write smoking, a big cause. we went through that. yes. but it does not matter. whatever -- whatever reason he had the acid reflux, the carcinogens in smoke attacked that barrett's esophagus and accelerated it and this is more white females than white males. take the plaintiff as you find him. i mean, yes, he had whatever risk factors he had. that is not the point. the relative risks are multiplicative versus additive, what a debate. i'll give you a diagram that proves exactly that a relative risk takes all comers. if your risk is 100 to one because you have got barrett's and you smoke, then you are a part of the population over here that had a two-time up to three-time increase, it is no longer a hundred it is now 300 and that is why you get it. and why i had t fight all day with that, i do not know. it is pretty obvious. next is the amount of the military -- i'm just going straight down. i think that is all my chart. now, janna is going to tell me that i have to go now and go through some more things that i don want to forget. so, edward, do you mind terribly if you switch me on to the slides? all right. kind of a multimedia presentation here, but i was kind of -- better -- better part of valor here. okay. can we start? number 1. number 1. so with that, you know, kind of summary, julius frailey, this is a -- you know, my point here is that julius frailey's death at 67 should not happen. people in this country should not be dying at 67. people in this country should not be addicted to cigarettes that run their lives, where they are hanging around behind trees shaking and getting a drag on a cigarette, that should not -that is not normal. it did not happen until recently, until the 20th century. there were no cigarettes. and now as the 20th century peaked, we became a nation that lived by cigarettes and died by cigarettes. and that is wrong. and it was engineered by r.j. reynolds and the purpose, the reason we are asking you in this case to preserve your option to punish, because we are in that unique situation where you have that option to declare, was this and is this -- because we bring it up to today, you know, we heard from dr. gentry o tape, remember that was that tape, he is saying, you know, addiction, he is not sure it causes disease today. and they have never tried to make a nonaddictive, less-addictive cigarette. they have put nothing into addiction. why? guess. sales. you make it nonaddictive you do not get your repeat customers. that is it. that is it. if that is okay -- if that is okay with everybody, then they do not get punished, they should not get punished. if that is not okay, then preserve that option. all right. so i'm getting there. next, please. married 1994. i'm sorry, married christmas 1991 -- married in august 1971. thank you. i get excited and i do not read. it is a sweet picture. in the early 1970's, here's the family, you have met them before. next. we started this case, you know, the question of class membership, i will not go over this too much. and next, guiding us through the analysis is, did they tell the truth? did they make their products as safe as they could? did they -- did they make their cigarettes addictive and keep them addictive for profit? and we say yes. we have prove that. you listened to dr. gentry from their -their -- from their offices. he admits, yeah, without the addiction we do not have the business. and, no -- but, no, it does not really cause disease. next you will be asked to compare the choices each party made. did rjr use reasonable care in tl design? was it reasonable for mr. frailey to start smoking and to become addicted? did he choose t become addicted? no. was it reasonable for him embedded in his culture to start smoking or was it unreasonable? i'm sure he would like to take it back if he were here. we say fine. give them -- blame him some. but consider who made that culture. who -- who pumped the culture up. whose ads pounded $2 billion a year to pump that culture up? next. also consider nobody is in this alone. everybody depends on everybody else. seventy percent o the people smoked during the height of the culture. next. and we are here for the mainstream. we are going to talk about that in a little bit. next. and i talked about this. i said, a cause versus the cause. let us go through this for one second. you have heard it many times. it is a legal cause if it directly and in natural continuous sequence produces or contributes substantially to producing the death so that it could reasonably be said that but for the negligence mr. frailey's death would not have occurred. okay. a big long sentence. and it then goes on to say, this is a cause versus b cause. in order to be regarded as a legal cause of mr. frailey's death, rjr's conduct need not be the only cause. w( agree. people act. does not mean that r.j. reynolds did not act. or its conduct may be a legal cause of his death even though it operates in combination with the act of another, which could be mr. frailey. fine, no problem. or some other cause if such other cause occurs at the same time as the negligence and the negligence contributes substantially to producing his death. all that means is that is a definition of legal cause. you can apply that to the addiction. you can apply that to the disease. you can apply that all the way through, you will be told it is all legal cause. legal cause does not mean the only cause, il means one cause. when you hear r.j. reynolds' counsel, i believe they are going to say, look, the cause was mr. frailey -- he is the only cause. use your common sense. was mr. frailey acting alone? next. and the final thing is was it an accident or was it intentional what r.j. reynolds did over the years? next. consider also the different witnesses that came up. and i've just put this in here. r.j. reynolds' historian as opposed to dr. kyriakoudes. he could not even agree that mr. frailey received rations of cigarettes. he wanted to debate that he was not in combat so he did not get rations. mr. frailey was in combat. he -- he -- his ship got four battle stars, he was fired upon. it was not what killed him. what killed him was what was within and what he smoked. but he was -- he was i combat, but that did not even matter because the rations were given to everybody so who knows? but anyway, he wanted to debate that, he did not even know. could not agree there was ever a cigarette culture. and, you know, that -- the funny thing is when he did that, he brought in this magazine to say how the surgeon general's committee was written up and it was really -- well, i'll put this on in a minute, but i'll just show it. this -- this -you will have this in evidence, it is great. 64. fairly late. and we have heard all this -- you know, there have been lots of things talked about the surgeon general's committee. so these are the surgeon general's committee. i already showed this once and there is another page over here. and here they are when they are deliberating. smoke-filled room. ashtrays all up and down and smoke all over in the room. and that was not -- here's the important part about this. it was not part of the story. it was not like they were saying, oh, and look at them smoking. it was so ingrained in the culture that the doctors, the professors who were asked to opine on whether or nc cigarette smoking caused cancer, were sitting there smoking. and now r.j. reynolds wants to blame mr. frailey for smoking. well, mr. frailey did exactly what r.j. reynolds told him to do his whole life. next. he could not agree on what kids do with what their friends do. could not agree that r.j. reynolds, when they cited the epa and their charco filter, could not say that was -- that was trying to make a health reassurance. i mean, come on. you cite the epa. you say, the epa does charcoal filtei so does the cigarette. oh, no, no, that is got nothing to do with it. it is about taste. could not agree that sports, celebrities, and advertisements were health reassurances. well, why else put a sports -- why else put joe dimaggio on there? they are functioning. they are strong. could not agree that an advertisement conveyed anything other than words on the paper. that is not reasonable. could not agree that doctors smoked in front of their patients. of course, they did. of course, they did. and they hawked the cigarettes, too. r.j. reynolds -- next, please. ms. hayes, dr. hayes, could not agree that anything influences a single decision a person makes, even a 50-pound weight on a foot. would not influence it is your choice to move your foot. hundred-pound weight, your choice to move your foot. excruciating pain, your choice. i do not say it is not your choice. i say the pain makes a difference, that it is part of the reason. could not agree that smoking more than seven hours a day equates to spending a lot of time. okay. could not agree that mr. frailey was addictei despite agreeing that mr. frailey scored at the top of the chart. could not agree that a strong successful person would be addicted. and, finally, next, dr. washington who said when she first took the stand, i'm not an expert on cigarettes as a cause of disease. she agreed with dr. feingold every point until she got outside her expertise and then she tried to fudge around with relative risk. she agreed with the numbers but then she said, well, it did not matter that there was a relative risk of two to three in this case. and i will come back to that. dismissed the surgeon general's report. that is amazing. said that it was an advocacy piece. you will have it in front of you. it will be evidence, the 2004 and 2010. you can decide for yourself if you think these are advocacy pieces or they are scientific works. take whatever time you need. we will stand by them. we will stand by them. if you think that those are wrong, we are wrong. if you think those are wrong, we are wrong. kick us out. if you think that is good -- this is policy and science and you know what dr. feingold said and he' right, it is not the latest, it is not always out, the -- the -- you know, and catch the latest study because they are not always replicated, but it is solid gold. it is bedrock. it is mainstream. see for yourself. we will stake all -- we will stake our credibility on that. you find anything in there that is different from what we have said, then we are wrong. so not according to dr. washington. it was just an advocacy piece. of course she had not read it. did not agree -- oh, did not agree with mr. frailey's treating oncologist, dr. marsland, who treated him, signed his death certificate, said his smoking caused his disease. that was that last letter i showed. and she went, oh, no, he is just an oncologist. just an oncologist. dr. washington told you you cannot rely on one source. it is all these different sources. she was one source and that is all she would talk about. i tried to get her, please produce something that we can talk about. you refused to talk about document a, refused b, refused study c, refused beacon, refused finbar and on and on and on and and on, none of them are good enough. well, what is? well, i do not have anything. okay. why do not you suppose she had it with her? because she did not want to be cross-examined on it. that is the reason. so you cannot cross-examine -mr. walker: objection, your honor, improper argument. the court: i'm sorry? mr. walker: improper argument. the court: overruled. mr. wilner: dr. washington told you you cannot rely on one source. she wanted to come up and say, i'm a consultant, this is -- this is the source. and she only brought one single source and that was her opinion. next. we covered the question so skip that. these are the findings. if you find that there was a class action, these are the findings. you will be told them again. they are not to be questioned. once mr. frailey joins the class in question number 1, if you should so find, then you are told that r.j. reynolds was negligent, you are told that cigarettes are addictive, that cigarettes cause esophageal cancer among other cancers, you'n told that reynolds placed -- that reynolds' cigarettes were legally defective, you are told that they concealed or omitted material facts, you are told that they conspired and that they were negligent. that has been determined, it is not subject to question. you say, mr. wilner, why did you put on all this evidence of it in addition? and i'll tell you what that was. it was for the last question to maintain your option to punish. otherwise, we did not have to put on anything, we could say, was he addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine and was the addiction a legal cause, if so, they were negligent. they -- they -- their product has been found to be defective. do not have to make that determination the first time. all our evidence goes to whether it was done deliberately, whether you should punish them, and also to weigh, how much goes to one part; and how much goes to mr. frailey. and we are fine with that. next, please. and if you find that there is -that the engle -- that he is a member of the class then all these things apply, we have have talked about that. mr. walker: objection, your honor, incorre statement of the law. the court: overruled. mr. wilner: next, please. so what about brands? okay. good. thank you, janna. what about brands? well, you know, i'm not going to go back into all this, who said what to who. it really does not matter very much but it is pretty clear that when ms. frailey went back after -- after an agonizing 24 hours of deposition and tried to collect her thoughts and figure out what was going on that she realized that the merit switch was late, the merit switch coincided with -- with several things that happened to her daughters or with her daughters and she sat down to try and figure it out. relentlessly questioned on that. next, please. so on and on, you know, when did she (sic) switch, in the '70's. and she -- she -she realized she was off afterwards. next, please. she reviewed the family photos with her daughters, put them in date order, sherry and debbie, the daughters, reminded her that it was not until after 1986 and those were because of life events, marriages, and people that were born, kids that were born, and they said, yes, that this is when it happened, do not you know? and people ge these things wrong all the time. it causes us to go nuts in cases but this is what happens. and so -- and, also, when was the nicotine patch? it was after the switch. there was confusion, and now we know there was no nicotine patch before 1991. so, next, please. and we have looked at some pictures. can we -- how -- how closely can we tell that is tareyton in that picture? i do not know. there was -- it is very hard to see. i admit. and so look at it yourself, see what you think. it does not matter because if that is the late '80's, it could be another. but it looks like tareyton according to the witnesses that testified. it is just one of the family pictures and so who knows. but it appears to be that the best reconstruction is late '80's but, again, r.j. reynolds is throughout the case. next. so this is more testimony. when you were married to mr. roderick what brand of cigarettes was your father smoking? tareyton. whe you and john -- when did you marry? 1986. supplying that information. next, from sherry. it was when my son had a baby after 1986. next, please. so what happened then? as she testified, when she did this reconstruction, directed us to dismiss philip morris. now reynolds want to come in and blame philip morris, saying the; deserve a percentage. well, okay. we do not back away from it. whatever merit use you think there was, who cares? if they want to blame philip morris, whatever. it is a percentage that takes away from the total and -- but i'm not arguing that any cigarette smoking was not contributory. i believe it was all contribu— i suggest to you it was all contributory. next. was mr. frailey addicted? and let us go through this rapidly. nicotine addiction is a fundamental reason. that is in your book. it has a whole chapter on nicotine addiction in this book. you can read it yourself. it is the fundamental reason, not a fundamental reason. this is the fundamental reason and they did not mince words. next. there are nicotine receptors in the brain. we looked at those. next. the smoke goes in the brain. next. when your -- when your receptors are full, you feel good; when they are empty, you feel lousy. if you do not have receptors, then you do not have any of those effects. people do not -- who are not addicted to cigarettes, do not want cigarettes and they do not feel bad when they do not have them. people who are addicted to cigarettes need cigarettes, like cigarettes, want to smoke cigarettes, and they need them because their receptors are sending messages to the prefrontal cortex where they make decisions saying, decide f me, please, open that pack because i need it. it is not my opinion. it is in here. it is not -- it is not dr. feingold's opinion. it is in there. next. his addiction history, a hundred pack years at least. if -- if mr. frailey is not addicted, then there is no such thing as addiction because this was heavy addiction, heavy use. if mr. frailey was not affected by this in his brain, then it does not exist. next. he was supplied cigarettes in the navy. we know that. and at the same time we saw thing like this, a military man, r.j. reynolds advertised that cigarettes, this is what you do when you are in the military and, man, in 1943, every kid -- every kid worth his salt was wanting to enlist and fight for this great country. and look what they did. they said, this is what you should be doing while you are fighting and while you are in the military, smoke. next. same thing. get that sub, this is the navy side of that. and be happy with that cigarette. next. and here he is. so did not he do exactly what they wanted him to do? yes. exactly. it is almost -- it is almost -- it is -- it is -- it is incredible how -- how he follows along. now, it does not mean he is a follower. it means he is in the culture. next. now he switches to american tobacco company's tareyton cork tip. and we suggest to yo you can look at that photo and the pictures in that ashtray show little, bitty cork-tip cigarettes that match the herbert tareyton cigarettes in the early '50's. it is consistent with everything. and we heard something here, well, it was not herbert tareyton. well, i do not know. i think everybody called them tareyton. next. mr. -- by 1947 mr. frailey was smoking one-and-a-half packs a day. we saw that. next. by the early '50's american tobacco company puts a charcoal filter on. there you go. not only that but they show sports figures. next. '61 he is being promoted to lieutenant with a pack in his pocket. next. and all his friends. you can look and see, they are all packing. you will see it on the actual picture a lot easier than that, it does not look like it is got good contrast. next. he is teaching a class as part of his life. it was -- next. it was a way of life after the navy in 1977. here's another picture. 1982, go to '82, cigarettes. this is -- this is at his funeral -- at the funeral of his grandmother. next. this is the one we think has tareyton's in it. it is got -- it is definitely after '82 because look how much older everyone looks. sorry i did not mean that. because i'm just -- we are being -- you know. and, next, there are -- or, next, tests for addiction. i do not need to go over this again. he maxed them out. next. two packs a day for 50 years. next. five minutes awaking, no one can contest. next. smoked almost all the time. next. wanted to stop smoking, was not able to. we heard all about it. next. wanted to stop smoking. next. felt bad when he was not able to smoke and never overcame the addiction. said he was addicted, addicted till he died. next. if this is not a -- a very fitting comment, nothing is. because people have the hardest time with what is inside. that is -- that is what is most difficult when it gets in your brain, when it invades your brain, that is when it is hard. next. all right. fagerstrom test, we can skip that. we have done that. skip down to, dr. hayes believes people choose again, this is my analogy. yes, you do, but the pain is -- is a factor. she compares, next, the 50-year smoking history to eating kisses. next. next question is: what about causation of the esophogeal cancer? i will take that on right away. i'll come back to that in a minute. he had 6 million doses of cancer. next. were they a legal cause of mr. frailey's death? that is what we are going to talk about. next. so we go to the 2004 surgeon general report and we are going to begin talking about what this -- what relative risk really means. and so let me do that now. no, i'm going to do that later because i want to skip down to 76. was negligence a legal cause oi mr. frailey's death? next. i say they did not put the right warning on before 1969. next. we know what happened in 1941. the scientists -- we know what happened as lung cancer shot up. esophageal is not on there. we did not put that together. it is in the surgeon general report. cigarette consumption went up. something went on next. '41, alton ocsner says, due to smoking. next. 1950, it is an important factor. 1953, next, the mouse -- mice get painted. there is bad things happening. 1953, proof that smoking is a cause. next. the tremendous increase, dose response. next. no responsible observer can deny this. next. dr. oscar auerbach in '56. next. the stepwise progression. those are precursor lesions in the lung just like the esophagus. next. joins navy at 17. next. he is on to dallas. next. no warnings at all up until '66. next. in '66 it says, caution, maybe. next. in 1970, strengthened, and that is where our warning claim ends anyway. next. in '85 the current warnings. now, for purposes of -- not for our warning claim, but for purposes of public knowledge, cancer did not get on until 1985. addiction's never been on. keep in mind -- that is to keep in mind. next. all right. what did he say about warnings? the next slide. before 1966 there were none. so there is nothing to say. in 1966 it said, may be hazardous. and what did he say? we read i to you earlier. do not they know? may be. may not be. do not they know? and in 1970 when it said -surgeon general's warning, he said, now they tell me. now they tell me. because by that time he was heavily addicted. he had been smoking since 1943. next. this is his testimony. may be hazardous to health. he was adamant. he said the surgeon general should know. next. and in 1970 he said, after all these years now you tell me. next. he said, do as i do, not -- do as i say, not what i do. hopelessly -- hopeless for someone in that strength with that power that he is done everything he wanted to do to be unable -- have to tell his son, do what i say, not what i do. why did not he just do it? he could not. how embarrassing to a military man to have to say that, do what i say, not what i do. why would not he do and set an example if he could. it is a really good question. it is a really, really good question. you got somebody who was a military man, he' done everything in his life that he could commit himself to except this and he had to tell his son, just do as i say, do not do what i do. it tells you. next. negligent marketing. i really do not have time to go through the education books we talked about. they all said that growing boys and girls should not smoke. tobacco will interfere with your nerves. skip over to 103, while they were saying that, here's -- here's what he is reading outside of school, that 21 of 23 of these great baseball players are smoking it and they never got on your nerves. there it says, they do not get on your nerves. go to 106. r.j. reynolds, joe dimaggio, jumping joe hawking a cigarette. a kid. you reall want to say, the kid learns it in school and joe dimaggio's telling him something else and you wan to blame him for believing joe? you are going to blame him for believing joe dimaggio over his -over his teacher? why did they pick joe dimaggio because he was the most -- he was one of the most famous people in the country, especially among little boys. next. the cigarette culture. how did it become? next. doctors smoking, presenting smoking. next. offering cigarettes. go to -- go to santa claus next. what more inviting thing? next. here we have just an amalgamation of all the silly things that were on and you saw many of these commercials. what was the point? they made it -- they made it so that it was natural. it was okay to smoke. yes, there were ads that said do not smoke. i mean, there were -- there were write-ups once in a while. but $2 billion a year was going into saying joe dimaggio, santa claus, mickey mantle, hollywood stars. go to 10 -- 112 -- 114, hollywood stars. next. 115. more hollywood stars and santa claus. 116. holidays and things that you did. 117. doctors. doctors lining up saying you can d it. who do you believe? next. 118, "from here to eternity." everybody's smoking. 119. granny in "beverly hillbillies," sampler. 120. a nurse helps john wayne smoke in "wings of eagles," puts it in his mouth. nobody said a word about it. 121, it was kool. that is really what is driving the cigarette culture. it was kool. that is "grease." a little later but it is the same. it is all the same. joe dimaggio, "grease," it is all the same. r.j. reynolds' decision to do that. not ours. the result was that he did exactly what r.j. reynolds wanted him to do. let us go to 123. there was a health scare in the '50's. we know that. 124. all these companie were part -- are now part of r.j. reynolds and the; all acted together with philip morris, too. they knew that. next. go to 126. inside the company, we have showed you this, they found these carcinogens. next. claude teague writes about it. go to -- go to 130. he tests -- he writes about their testing of these substances, probable presence of carcinogenic agents. how do they choose to responc in 131? 132. filters. say, well, i know you have heard it is bad. but, hey, charcoal filter. and the most incredible thing is to hear somebody say, well, that is -- is not really telling you that it is safer. that is taste. so they have it lined up with a filter for your water and they say, charcoal better and, yeah, they say taste. and what they mean is, i know you have heard this problem about cigarettes, but this stuff is going to filter out the bad stuff. and you can believe it. now, what did -- go to 137. what did -- how did these ads affect mr. frailey? you saw them in the jacksonville journal. he switches to tareyton cigarettes. we do not know exactly when, but sometime before '51, smokes them for, we do not kno^ exactly when, but sometime probably in the '80's. they say earlier, they do not know. but we are -we will do the best we can. and how do -- and, next, how do you know that these ads made a difference? do you recall any advertisements that your dad may have seen that would have influenced his smoking? he was on submarines and that he said that he used to -- he liked the part about the charcoal filter that they used to do because he was on submarines and that is the same way they filter air on submarines. they mentioned submarines. 136, flash it for a second. they talked about submarines. it is in there. freshens the air on submarines. michael frailey was not making it up. he saw them. he said, you know, i'm doing what i can. so what else? you know, blame him, but he wa doing exactly what they suggested to him. so they were suggesting that these filters would help. they were suggest -- every ad, every single advertisement for cigarettes, even if it does not say anything, is an endorsement of cigarettes. you know, if it were deadly, you would not put up a person having a good time. it would be deadly. so that is about his reasonable conduct. 142. he did everything they asked him to do. 143. did they fraudulently conceal? well, we know they did. how did it affect mr. frailey? 146. their own people said, complete removal of the compounds in the cigarettes are required. 147. the main interest is that they are known to be carcinogenic. 148. their own scientist says, there is no way we can refute auerbach. so what di they do? they came out in -- in 150 and they kept attacking the statistics. statistics do not prove cause and effect. in the next one they said, doubt is our product, we are creating doubt. and then next they said, what is truth to one is false to another. we are interested in evidence which we believe denies the claims. but in the next slide, the american cancer society says, the controversy you have created is your own creation. just a quick note on the next slide, this is exhibit 721. it is a small piece but it is ominous. in maine, the state health department in july announced plans to put up 30 billboards to warn the public about smoking. five of the signs were actually put up. you may have seen the picture. industry efforts, the other 25 were not placed. now they are going to say, i'm sure, oh, it was not in maine. that is not the point. that is not the point. it is the -- if you have the intent and the ability to pull strings to pull down signs that are warning people about the hazards of tobacco, just think about it. that is all. it is not to say that mr. frailey rode through maine. it is to say that r.j. reynolds had its tentacles and was powerful enough to pull billboards off. to get the billboards removed. this is the only one we have got, not the only one. this is one little piece of the puzzle that they were able to get that done. so think of the power that is going on here beyond -- beneath the scenes. so it is through industry efforts, industry efforts. they all got together. how about -- the next one is 902, very scary. this is the development of dr. haag to infiltrate the ama. wow. next. this is trying to get wynder fired. this is 903. you will have it. we are disturbed that dr. wynder, who is a great scientist, basically we want you to not -- we want you to pull him off this research. that is underhanded, that is deliberate. next. dr. haag admits it is the most -- that he -- he was the most important factor in preventing any action. next. we have the nicotine. the discovery of nicotine, we will be there in a second. 160. in the public they said, case against tobacco is not based on any proof. that was as late as 1984. in -- go to 166. they knew about these nitrosamines and the stated that nitrosamines are the most potent carcinogens known to man, an internal memorandum never made public. the most powerful carcinogens known to man in their product. next. they also stripped their files. we will remove all reports. and next, the surgeon general, we believe the number problem is the extent to which the officials, meaning the surgeon general, knowingly mislead th american public. attack on the surgeon general. and we heard -- we heard that here in this courtroom. we heard an attack on the surgeon general. what did r.j. reynolds know, that it was -- i'll only show a few. 170. we possess the knowledge of the effects of nicotine far more extensive than exists in the published literature. and they knew that the physical basis of addiction. -- and number 174, you will have this. this is a document you will have. it is exhibit 758. nicotine is addictive, 1963, from inside the brown & williamson tobacco company. nicotine is addictive. read the whole document. it is fascinating. talks about how their research organization was just a public front. he is goes on and on, he says, nicotine is addictive, we are in the business of selling it. if you read one document, read 758, fascinating document. and then -- okay. my time. my time. then on 176 they say, let us not turn it over to the surgeon general. in 235 the surgeon general says, it is a habituation, not addiction. next. and next -- sorry. okay. i'm going to skip over some. you are happy about that. 213, that is another interesting one. this is the party line as late as 1990, they are saying the numbers games, 400,000 people dying a year from cigarettes. it is numbers games. that is from brown & williamsc now reynolds. 214. when the surgeon general finally comes out with the addiction warning -- and this will be in evidence, too -- it will be photocopied, i do not have that -- i do not have another one of these. they say, claims that cigarettes are addictive are irresponsible and scare tactics. so let us go to 217. with all this, they created and maintain the cigarette culture and we say there is no question that all these things contributed. there was irresponsible marketing. pushing filters. there was false advertising. there was movies. and there was a doubt campaign that we just saw. they all fed in to make it normal and acceptable, they are all substantial contributing causes. they caused the family and friends to smoke, too. they -- they promoted athlete smoking and they all got down to mr. frailey smoking. and his decisions included that. we do not -- we are not taking that out. we are not taking anything out. it is all contributing. and, then, of course, their defective product, which we -- which is if you find he is part of the class, has been found to be defective, thriving his addiction, resulting in life-long persistent smoking, killing him of this disease. next. we went over and over, this is the total per capita chart. it is in the 1969 -- i'm sorry -it is in the 1989 surgeon general report. you will see it in there. you want to look at it, it is exactly what we talked about. i'll talk some more about it in my rebuttal. here was the cigarette scare. here's what they did to drive the consumption back up. here's where the surgeon general came in, dropped it down, they drove it back up again. the real thing that drove it down, as we heard from dr. kyriakoudes, is when you could not smoke at woi and you could not smoke in buildings anymore and it became less socially acceptable. so eventually that culture declined. and now we are in a decline, hopefully. but he was -mr. frailey was right in the right part of this. and had they not driven it back up and had they not built it up, it would have dropped, and if it would have dropped, we believe that mr. frailey would hav had a shot not to die like this. and, therefore, all of this was contributory to his death and that is the way the case -- that is the way we put the case together. let us go to 221. we believe the anti-cigarette theory is a bum wrap, says the american tobacco company. a bum wrap. how callous. how callous could that possibly be. you will have that in evidence. next is a fascinating document. you will see this document and i'll give you the number. i do not have it, it is the nordine study. 72. 72 is an amazing document and i suggest you take a look at i because in 72 they admit that most of the people wh( are using their product would stop using it if they could. they are scientists, not us. and they also say -- and this is what is chilling, chilling, they say, if the exit gate -guess what that is -- the exit gate means you can get out. but you cannot get out of what is in your brain. and they were worried that someone would find a cure for addiction. what happens if you find a cure for addiction? they are out of business. my god, that is -- it is obvious. and so here it is, their own scientists in a secret document that we now have, and their contesting it still. if the exit gate should suddenly open, we could be out of business overnight. how much more can they admit internally that it is the lack of an exit gate, it is the lack of a cure for addiction that keeps them in business. unfortunately, for everybody, addiction kills 2 -one out of two to one out of three people who smoke regularly are dead because of it. so here you have one of the greatest conflicts in american history. you have the profits of this enormous company and you have it -- you have it dead on against the life of its customers. and it is all driven by this addiction because if you were not addicted, you could easily say no. if somebody told you riding in a yellow chevrolet was going to give you cancer, you wouldn have any problems driving in a black one. but the dragon within, it is got big problems if you put it down. so my point to this is what an incredible thing to say. and you know what, dr. gentry was th modern equivalent of this 1982 document because he said the same thing. it was hard to understand but he said the same thing. he said, yes, yeah, well, i guess, i guess that, you know, we depend on repeat business. you bet you do. and, oh, but addiction does not cause disease. well, okay. and i had to step him through. i said, does addiction make people smoke more? well, yes does smoking more give you more and more carcinogens? well, yes. is it the repeated carcinogens over and over again pounding your bloodstream, pah's, tobacco-specific nitrosamines, million doses circulating through your body, does that -- do you think that causes -- that has an effect that one out of two people are going to be dead from your product? do you think so? no, no, because they can quit. well, okay. i can -- i can sit here all my life with 500 pounds crushing my foot but when i move it, it is sure a reason. it is the failure to -to take responsibility for it. and, i'm sorry, i'm excited. take -- i do not mean to be excited. the last document i want to tell you about just for a second. another one of these, how dare they say this. a cigarette is the perfect type of perfect pleasure. so that is the exit gate. next one. i do not know why that thing slides around. i hate that. a cigarette is the perfect type of perfect pleasure. it is exquisite and it leaves one unsatisfied. like, you smoke it 10 minutes, 15 minutes, receptors, buzz, buzz, buzz. another one. it is exquisite and leaves one unsatisfied. what more can one want? and we will th provide exquisiteness and hope that their customers remain unsatisfied because they will buy more. all we want, then, is a larger bag to carry the money to the bank. the circle is complete. we have -- we have uncovered. we understand it now. we did not for a long time. we now understand what has killed 400,000 people and mr. frailey. it is that reynolds and its co-conspirators have wanted a larger bag to carry the money to the bank, and in so doing have engineered their product. and i'm going to go into that in detail, in fact, you can -- i do not have a lot of time to do it. but if you look at this book, this book that i hold to me, because it is the truth. this is the truth. we live and die by this. this is -- this is the surgeon general of the united states and the biggest committees and the best scientists that ever got together. and you bet you we do not take it lightly. he is got a section in here called the changing cigarette. and i read it, actually. it may be a long time ago, you do not remember it that well. and it talks all about how changes in the last 50 years have made the cigarett more addictive. and they actually say -- you can see it, it is on page 117. you can read it. all these changes in the past 50 years, how they manipulated it, how they got these special filters to make it easier to get down into the lungs fast. they knew about how to do that. they experimented with it. they said they were going t( be in the nicotine business, and they were. many o these documents will say the same thing. they are going to be in the nicotine business. now i'm going to save a little time because i get to come back after -- for another few minutes and i promised you i was going to diagram out how relative risk multiplies. i'll do it first a little bit. and then could you -- could you give me a little of that. a little of this and a little of that and then i'll be done. and i need a piece of paper. it is in my smaller white notebook. janna says use the back. my mother said always use a new piece of paper. fantastic. this is three minutes. i'm going to come back and do this in more detail because i do not want any confusion here. this is like -- you know how they used to say, confuse the enemy, it is not our business to be confusing. i'm going to absolutely -- this is -try to explain this. i hate to try to explain mathematics but we are going to -- i'm going to try. okay. this was this beacon study that you saw these are -mr. walker: objection, your honor, this is n in evidence. the court: it is not in evidence, is it? mr. wilner: no, but we have talked about it and seen it. the court: i know, but it is not in evidence. mr. wilner: well, okay. all right. i'll just -- i'll copy the numbers. no problem. so in the beacon study we had two groups of people that they followed. okay. they followed the people who got cancer and who did not, whether they were smokers and nonsmokers. so, really, here's hov i diagram it. okay. there were -- of the people who got cancer -- it is always hard to explain this but it is not a hard concept. all right. and i'll be back to this, too. if you have -- you end up with two groups of people, one who are nonsmokers who have barrett's esophagus and we say -- we adm it, this is the first thing out of dr. feingold's mouth, barrett's esophagus is part of the way you get cancer. fine. you have people who have -nonsmokers, barrett's esophagus and smokers with barrett's esophagus. and these two groups of peopl are otherwise identical except for the fact that one of them -- one -- one -- one group smoke and one group did not. no other changes. they were young, they were old, they were white, they were black, they were this, they were that, but they did not -- they were only selecting -this is not the only study, it is all over the place. this is just illustrating this concept. they studied the smoking effect, which means the other effects, you average them out, or else they are going to do what they say confounds. so they do not confound, you separate out, you have got the nonsmokers here, everything else is the same. you got the smokers here, everything else is the same. and you watch and you see what kind of disease die they get. well, here's what happens. the nonsmokers get a certain rate, which was about one-half a percent per year. so over ten years they get 5 percent, over 30 years 15 percent will get the cancer. the smokers, they get -- their relative risk over the nonsmokers was two to three. remember that? two t three, everybody agreed. so the smokers, their risk was two times a half a percent or 1 percent, maybe up to 1-and-a-half percent. that would be the three. so for -- each one of those people would progress at instead of a half a percent a year from 1 to 1-and-a-half percent a year. what is that mean over the long run? if you progress at half a percent a year, it means that in 10 years, you would have a 5 percent chance; in 20 years, you would have a ten percent chance. okay. so if you are a nonsmoker with barrett's esophagus and you do not smoke, in ten years you would have roughly a ten percent chance of getting this disease. is that good? no. it is bad. but that is not the end of it. if you are a smoker at all, you have twice that, which means you are not progressing at half a percent a year, you are progressing at 1 percent a year, which means you are now at twenty percent, which is -- which is really bad. and, now, if you are a heavy smoker, because we saw that lineup of heavy to light -- you know, light to heavy and it got worse and worse, you are up to, the study said, 2.7, 2.71 up to 3, even in some maybe up to 4. instead of having a 1 percent chance, instead of having a 5 percent chanc in 10 years, you have got a ten percent chance in 10 years and in 20 years your -- your -- let me do it right. if you had a half a percent, in 10 years it would be 5, in 20 years it would be 10. if you have 1 percent, in 10 years it would be 10, in 20 years it would be 20. if you have a percent and a half, it would be 15 percent in 10 years, thirty percent in 20 years. what is all that math for? it is to show you that barrett's esophagus, that is fine, we all -- all the people that get this disease have it, but it is not enough. its -- its progression is relatively slow, ten percent maybe in 20 years. but if you smoke on top of that, it is up to thirty percent in 20 years, and those odds are bad. that is what we mean. it is the acceleration of the risk from ten percent to thirty percent. that is relative risk. that is what they mean by relative risk. dr. washington, notwithstanding, because she could never explain it coherently. so our idea and the idea that is been consistently expressed, you can read it here, too, on relative risk, relative risk operates relatively -- relative to all other risks. that is what they mean by relative risk. dr. washington, do you understand relative is relative to all other risks? when you accelerate one, you accelerate them all, when you accelerate from -- from a half a percent a year to 1-and-a-half percent a year, you have three times the risk of dying and you are up in the thirty percent category according to the calculations made in these numerou studies which dr. washington refused to acknowled; and -- and, furthermore, refused to say as the surgeon general in 2004 -- and you can read it, there is a whole section on esophageal cancer. and this is where they conclude esophageal cancer is cause -- is caused by cigarette smoking. and they do not mince the word. and so when i finally had to face her face up to this, she tried, well, it is -- it is an advocacy piece. yeah, right. well, they did not really mean it. well, it says it. okay. i disagree. fine. so now we know where yoi stand. and you know where we stand. we stand wi this, we stand against that. we stand for a country where the -- the great resources of this country and the great free enterprise system is not designed and not being used to deceive people. we stand for -for a profitable enterprise that is not profiting by killing half the people that it interacts with, that it sells its products to. i'm going to sit down in a minute and i'll have a few minutes to come back. the reason that we have presented this is to maintain that option so that you can run down this list and you can say, there may be a punishment goal here. this is about mr. frailey. it is all about mr. frailey. it is also about the united states of america. thank you. mr. wilner: all right. good. i will accept whatever challenge mr. walker gave me to -- i do not actually -- i do not know if he actually said it, but i'm here to tell you, he could not have gotten it any more wrong than he got. and we will -- and i'll -- i'll go over what i -- i have 35 -- i have 40 minutes, i think, to do this. okay. so what are you thinking? well, you want to know, i'm sure, will you -- mr. wilner, will you clear this mess up about this relative risk? i'm sure people are just going back and forth. what does it mean to have relative risk? okay. so i'm here to tell you that dr. washington -- i'm not going to pull any punches. dr. washington was either way out of her field when she was talking about this or she was deceptive when she was talking about this. she was either way out of her field or she was deceptive, and i will not pull punches on that. now, i got -- i did a slide here. and i -surprise me with that. okay. here it is. so we are here -- or i'm going to explain, i hope -- i hate to do math, but i'm going to explain why a relative risk of two to three means that you increase your risk of -- by not two percent, but 200 percent to 300 percent and that that is significant. okay. that is what i'm going to do. first, i'm going to show their own slide, stupid as it is, but i'm going to take one thing off of it. two times more likely, that is what they said. that is what a relative risk means. two times more likely than what? than you would have it without smoking. and i'll say it goes from two to four, but let us just say two to three. two times more likely than what? well, than what? here is what i copied down. we all talked about it. these are the results of that study and here is -- and i'll explain it. i'll just take 10 minutes and i'll explain it. these were the people, up here, who did not smoke. the ones -- the controls that did not get cancer. there were 3563. the ones that did get cancer, out of that number, there were 358. it ran about ten percent. those were the people who had barrett's, because everyone who had cancer had barrett's. no problem. and if they -- if they did not smoke, 358 out of 3563, or ten percent, got cancer in that -- in that period. okay. if you take the next group, which were all the same, they were no different, they were the smokers. but they still had the barrett's esophagus. they had whatever else. there were 5 of them, but there were 1,098 cancers, for a total of 21 percent. so what that is telling you is if you go -- if all you change is the smoking, you go from ten percent of those people to 21 percent. that is the two. you are not adding it to anything else. it multiples its way up for -- taking all comers, from ten percent to 21 percent. it is about two. and then if you had -- if you had a heavy smoker -- if you remember, it said 45 pack years. we actually were out here over a hundred, so we do not know what this would be. 458 over 1689, for 27 percent. i did not write it well. it was 27 percent, which was the 2.71 that we saw. that is the relative risk over the non-smoker. so, now, i asked reynolds, tell me -- i'll ask the phantom dr. washington, go ahead, come back a tell me. no -- if the non-smoking group and the smoking group are the same insofar as barrett's esophagus, why did twice as many of the smoking group get cancer? twice as many. not two percent more. twice as many. and if you are a heavy smoker, almost three times as many. why? there is no reason, except the smoking. this is the -- this is the most basic epidemiology there is. and it was in the paper. and why she fought me on this, she is either, honestly, not familiar with epidemiology, which may be true, because she is a laboratory scientist and she was very dismissive of a lot of this. oh, no, that is not right. that is not right. that is not i tried to reason with her. look, what i am -no, no, no, no, no. you are wrong. you are wrong. you are wrong. that is all we heard. never saw a single thing that she brought in that says that what she was doing, which -- which -this additive nonsense, this garbage -- this is garbage. i demanded proof of that. there is nothing like that. that does not even make sense. she is saying that two percent of the risk was smoking. oh, really? well, how come the smokers were twice as likely to get cancer if she says it is two percent? it is crazy stuff. and she is either -- she is either just confused. i'll give her that, maybe just -- just got confused about this. maybe got led into it by the r.j. reynolds' lawyers. and you know what? could i have the, why we': dropping the new york times? is that -- i'd like to show that piece of evidence. maybe she got confused. maybe she went along with it. maybe her consulting business, she liked to cultivate the cigarette companies. i do not know. it is shocking to see a doctor with that resume say something so preposterous as it adds two percent, when she is staring in the face of the same study that she seemed to know about a little bit, the biggest study ever, the beacon study that determined exactly this. and twice as many smokers get it and almost three times as many, if you smoke more than two packs -- more than two packs a day, more than 45 cigarettes. i'm sorry. that was not two packs a day. that was 45-pack years. and we had over a hundred, over a hundred. so how is it -- how is it? it is crazy. it is -- it is -- it is mind-blowing that that would happen. so, okay, what is your explanation, mr. wilner? well, okay. i'll tell you in a minute. so here we go. i -- i tried to work it out. from ten percent to 21 percent is about two. and we know everybody's been saying two. mr. walker kept saying two, two, as if it was two out of the bigger number. it is -it is the number. that is the number that we are here for. twice as many people, or three times. and ten percent to 27 percent is about 2.7, which is exactly what -- exactly what the beacon study said, exactly what everybody else said, except dr. washington, who had some bizarre explanation, found in no -- nothing she could come up with, nothing at all, and she protected herself from cross-examination on any of these studies that had numbers in them, very effectively, by just saying, well, i do not -- i do not -- well -- well, none of them are authoritative. nothing is authoritative. when dr. feingold came up here with a full book, basically, saying, go ahead. ask me questions. all right. so he is -- he is wrong? she is right? well, let us -- let us do it -- let us take that risk and -- or the number of people and see what it means for people. so i draw two boxes. a thousand people, non-smokers with barrett's, their rate of progression, a half a percent a year, according to everyone we heard. in 30 years, 150 people out of the thousand, who do not smoke, but do have barrett's, get adenocarcinoma of the esophagus that is the rate that everybody agreed. it is not -no one knows 100-percent sure. it is an average rate. okay. but if you have the disease, which everybody who gets adenocarcinoma of the esophagus has the disease, has barrett's. okay. so what? but if you do not smoke, only 150 people get it. if you do, 405. that is the deal. so -- and for that, you are going to say, it is not a substantial contributing cause? well, that is -- that is crazy, too. i mean, if 400 -- if you are in one of these -if you are here, rather here, and you know 405 people are going to get a disease that kills them and only 150 here, you can bet your bottom dollar you would think it was substantial. so we are -- what does that say? i've used 10 minutes already, but it is well used, i hope. so i -- i do not know what else to say about dr. washington, except that i think also you can look at her demeanor. she tried to be a good witness by engaging you and smiling and everything but she failed some very important tests of witnesses. she failed to have a darn thing with her. she disagreed with everything in the world except herself. she was very difficult. she kept changing the subject when i'd try to focus on one. it was always back over and she acted like a politician and trying to deliver the same message over and over, regardless of the question. and that is not really -- we are doing -- trying to do science here. we are trying to clarify this. and she was drilled to do this maybe she thinks it is good for her consulting. i do not know. if she really believes it, she needs to brush up on some of these epidemiology, because she misse it pretty big, or she was being deceptive. i'll call a spade a spade. i'm sorry if that is it. now, let me put up something else. this is exhibit 426. it is very interesting, actually. you know what they say, back to the future. here is 1969. why we are dropping the new york times, by the american tobacco company. and the nonsense about the american tobacco company, well, they made the tareyton, and they are part of reynolds. reynolds has merged with them. they are all the same. brown & williamson, they are all the same. you heard those instructions. i do not know what mr. walker was talking about, now trying to separate his company. he cannot. they are all the same. you have been instructed. those are the instructions for the case. so here we go. it says, sure, there are statistics. this is 1969, after the first surgeon general's report, the second, the third had come out. there had been so much research. we were awash at research. and they -- and here american tobacco is saying, we think the anti-cigarette theory's a bum rap. and each time the congress of the united states has held hearings on the cigarette controversy, distinguished independent scientists have gone to washington to say, so, which means that the anti-cigarette theory is a bum rap. so it is nothing new, unfortunately, for the cigarette company to have distinguished scientists who come in and say the wrong things. mr. walker: objection, your honor, improper argument. the court: overruled. mr. wilner: how do they get people to do it? i do not know. how do they get distinguished scientists to go into congress, year after year, and say, it does not cause cancer. the statistics are wrong. the cigarettes are fine. you should not pass any laws. all in your documents. that is the scary thing about this industry, is they have been able to do that. they have been able to get scientists corrupted, in some way or another, to go into congress and -- and testify about this. so maybe that is an explanation. a few more. i'll just pick off some things. there is so many. mr. walker says, oh, we did not talk about lung cancer. lung cancer is the canary in the coal mine. lung cancer is so related to cigarettes that you can -- that it is a barometer. and when the lung cancer hit, that is when the companies had the responsibility to do something. and -- and it has nothing to do with whether it has other diseases that are much -- that are less likely to occur than lung cancer and occurred much later in time. lung cancer was the thing that triggered the first cancer scare and that is what they had a responsibility to meet. because if you are going to get any kind of cancer, that is what they have to tell you. they do not have to say, oh, well, you are going to get esophageal cancer. they have to say, you are going to get cancer, and they did not. in fact, mr. walker asked -- and i want to answer that first. he went over here and he said, concealment -- oh, my god, what did we conceal? you want to know? i'll tell you. okay. first, they -- they -- let us talk specifics. they say that their charcoal filter is better and they should have said their charcoal filter is meaningless, garbage, nothing but sales. nothing. you heard nothing that that charcoal filter was good for anything. and, you know, it is very interesting to criticize all the documentary evidence you have. who ever came through that door for r.j. reynolds to put this in perspective for us? because if there was a different perspective, why did not they call someone to say, oh, tareyton really did do better? or why did not they call somebody to say, oh, here are the documents that explain what a good company we are. oh, here's a document that explains that when claude teague, our senior research scientist said, if the exit gate from our product was ever open, we would be out of business. oh, no, no, no. that was wrong. here's -here's our scientists coming in to say some explanation. i cannot imagine what it would be. but where is it? so mr. walker gets up here and says, oh, mr. wilner just picked several exhibits out of millions. yeah. how long have we been here? how many -- ho many weeks would it take to go document by document this story is told. you know more about the cigarette industry than almost anyone on earth now you have had a graduate course in the horror of this deal, of what happened in the 20th century. then more. i'll tell you, you should have said filters were garbage. people thought, when they smoked their filter, that they were getting better, that it was better. the filter craze went off as soon as this cancer scare. bam. they said, give them filters. give them filters. let the filters reassure them. and they think filter, filter, okay. and you know what? mr. frailey thought that. that was in this case. he -- he looked at it and said, yeah, it is the same kind of filter as a submarine. i mean, that is powerful. that is reassurance. oh, yeah, it is the same as a submarine. they had an obligation. filters are garbage. they -- they should not have produced these things and say -- and suggested by their marketing that people -- oh, okay, then -- then smoke filter. fine. they should have informed on addiction early and powerful. they did not. their own scientists discovered, in their own scientific work that we traced for you, that addiction was physical and powerful in the '60s. what did they do with it? deep sixed it. do not tell anybody. and remember that document from sir charles ellis that said, we now know more about the -- aboui the addiction than is published in the literature. for obvious reasons, it is being kept at a high level of secrecy. and you betcha. you betcha. it was kept at a high level of secrecy. so they had that obligation to tell people, you have a product. your scientists have discovered it is addictive, not just habit forming, addictive in the brain. you have a -- a -- a -- an important obligation to tell -- tell it. you should -- you know, you want to get very specific. they want to talk about esophageal cancer. well, why do not you tell people then that if you do have this reflux thing, a, it is going to be worse if you smoke? and, b, if you ever get this barrett's esophagus, which we seem to have spent so much time, you should not smoke. you are the last person that smoke -- that should smoke. because if you have got this thing, and you smoke on top of it, your risk goes from 105 per thousand in 30 years to 400 -- or 150 to 405 in 30 years per thousand. so why not say it? never said it. they want to know what would information -- well, you know, i -- we agree, mr. frailey was smart. and he was an achiever. and now they want to say, well, he would not have -- he would not have paid attention to something like that. say it was addictive. he was not an alcoholic. he did not drink. he did not use addictive drugs. why would not he have taken that into consideration? most people do not want to become addicted to something. why was that a big secret? i think we know. because, once the word got out that it was addictive, it was part of the rejection of the cigarette and the cigarette culture. it came late. it should have come early. should have come early enough to save -- to save mr. frailey. so tell them about it. tell everyone. and, you know, would you put up -- oh, i'm still here, okay. can you switch to some slides real quick? thanks so much. so, now, i'm not saying that every message has to go directly to mr. frailey. i never said that. although, it would be nice. it would have been good. they should have said it. they should have said it on every pack. it is addictive. but 469, when they knew about it, by god, they should have. in the '50s, it should have said cancer -ms. blasingame: sorry. mr. wilner: we have never figured it out. it is magic. double your salary again. i do not know what i'm up to. okay. could we play, then, 217? so, you know, we talked about the cigarette culture. and the point of this is that it is not just what you tell the person who you are dealing with, mr. frailey, as they keep trying to say that one person is an island of a person. what if his friends -- and these are all lined up. remember, the -- the cigarettes in all their pockets? perhaps, these people, if none of them had smoked, if his cohorts had not smoked, that -- that would take away a lot. and that is why people smoke they emulate. they copy. they want to be in the group, especially kids. and so the warning that i'm asking for, and the concealment is not iiist to mr frailey it is to all these folks. it is to the culture around him. if you would have let the word out, instead of keeping it silent, the culture would have not flourished the way it did. it would have driven down long before. because now we know it is on tt way down. so if you take the cigarettes out of these people's pockets, then -- now we are on the road to providing the kind of information that we need. not just, well, mr. frailey, did he see enough advertising? let us look at -- oh, and look at 37 real quick. that is the group. so what if you -- what if you erase these? you know, this is 61. we do not have that. we do not have mr. frailey standing there as the only -- only person who was smoking. and mr. walker says, well, i never said that. well, i -- i almost heard that. their expert historian refused to really go into this -- the -how credible it was and important it was to smoke. a couple other pieces -- i'm not going to take too much time. but the surgeon general's reports are advocacy? i do not want to go back into this, but -- what have you got? 225 and 226, okay. so, again i'll -- i'll stake our reputation on that. if you pull out one sentence that says, we have programs to help people quit, okay, fine. let us look at the rest of the science. and, in fact, while we are looking, i've got a page for you. this report, the 2010 report, take a look at page 298, because 298 has a -- will put to rest this business of when the cigarette changed, if it were important, and 298 has got the discussion of the cigarette change. here it is. nitrate concentrations in cigarettes increased from -- i do not have the screen up, so i'll -- just hold it up. 298: nitrate concentrations in tobacco increased from 1959 to 1997. nnk concentrations i mainstream smoke increased and dap decreased. it is the nnk, the nitrosamines, that are associated with the adenocarcinomas. it says it. it is the benzopyrene-type things that are -- that are involved with the squamous cell and the nnk increased since 1959. so whoever said otherwise was not exactly right and that is fine. and if they found something that dr. feingold did not agree with, okay, no problem. this is what it -- it is from 1955 -- 1959 on when the nitrate concentrations increased. okay. do you want to show 225? ms. blasingame: (inaudible.) mr. wilner: oh, okay. i will in a little bit. they are blaming mr. frailey -- well, here's an interesting question. we are now -- we are now told that mr. frailey had to be a tormented smoker or else he could not be addicted. well, where does it say that? again, i'm back to the books. i'll look through the chapter on nicotine addiction. i mean, this is -- this is the -- the unbiased source that -- i mean, nobody -- you know, nobody here paid these -- these physicians to write it. where does it say he has to be tormented? who invented that? jill hayes invented that. was he tormented, in fact? how about hiding behind a tree, with trembling hands, getting a drag of a cigarette from a friend? kind of tormented. they say he has to have thrown away ashtrays. where does that come from? never have heard that. they say he started with rabbit tobacco. so what? oh, here's a whopper. he -- mr. frailey tried nicotine patch and smoked through it -- this was after he was already with cancer -- and, therefore, he was not smoking for the nicotine. that is -- that is baloney. a nicotine patch, as you can read, does not deliver nicotine the way a cigarette does. a cigarette delivers it in seven seconds to the brain. nicotine patch is much more diffuse, has to go through the skin, has to enter the capillaries. the lung is as big as a tennis court. the transmission of nicotine to the brain is instant. nicotine patches have not been that successful at getting people off. they deliver nicotine, but they do not deliver it the same way. and, yes, you should not smoke on the nicotine patch, because you get a lot of nicotine in your system, but you do not get it the same way. your brain does not respond to a nicotine patch the same way or, else, it would be a perfect remedy. there would be no problem about people smoking just give them a patch. but they do not see -- it does not seem to work very well. so for r.j. reynolds to come in here and say, oh, come on, give him a -- he should have -- it is proof that he was not nicotine addicted. they need to go back and read some more of the books. they need to understand nicotine addiction. and why the heck do not they have an expert on addiction? when i cross-examined dr. gentry, dr. gentry, from the r.j. reynolds tobacco company, kept back away from my questions on addiction. he said, i was not an expert. i do not really know. i said, well, who is? you are the chief scientific officer. you are the -- on the leadership group. who knows about addiction in r.j. reynolds? and he said, well, we had somebody, but he is gone. they have to change. they have to change. they cannot run this billion-dollar company, multi-billion-dollar company with nobody on the leadership team even knowing about addiction. it is crazy. that is what this case could accomplish. this case could send a message to r.j. reynolds to say, you have got to change. we were told that mr. frailey did not try to stop. i'm not going to go back through all the agony that he went through. how many agonizing days did he get up in the morning and say, i'm going to quit today? never told anybody because he was embarrassed to tell them. how many agonizing days was he in the military -- and we do not even know, he was off serving somewhere. how many agonizing days? how embarrassing it is for a man of this caliber to be beaten. mr. walker: objection, your honor, facts not in evidence. the court: the objection is sustained. mr. wilner: they say that he wanted to smoke. well, addicted people want to smoke. that is true. and people who have their foot under a weight want to move it. and it feels really good when you move it. and it feels really good when you light up, when you are addicted. big deal. nothing, you will see nothing in the surgeon general's report that says addicted people do not want to smoke. they do. it affects your brain. it affects the prefrontal cortex, and it is just uncomfortable not to smoke. and then all this about free choice. yes. i think my analogy holds. there is free choice. people do have free choice. so does reynolds, had plenty of choices, plenty. had the choice whether to market filters. had the choice whether to tell the truth. had the choice whether it should be providing information, instead of hiding information. had the choice whether it should fight the surgeon general in public or should agree with him. had all those choices. had the choice whether to engineer the cigarette for more addiction, as the surgeon general said, or to try and eliminate addiction. what about their choices? so we do not say that people are not free to choose. people are free to choose, but they are influenced by powerful things inside their brain and that is what addiction is. the 1988 surgeon general -- which you will have, too, discusses that, and you will see those pages if you like. they talk about the documents. oh, the documents are just -- they are just a few documents. and who is british american tobacco company? really? do not know. british american tobacco company is your company now. british american tobacco company owned brown & williamson, which i now part of reynolds. you will be instructed that they are responsible for brown & williamson, its connection to british american tobacco. if there were no connection, you would not -mr. walker: objection, your honor -mr. wilner: you -- mr. walker: -- incorrect statement of the instructions. the court: overruled. mr. wilner: you would not be able to see thos< documents. they were just from some -- you know, somebody else. you would not be able to see them. plus, they all got together. all these tobacco companies work together. we -- we brought you document after document that said they accomplished more together than they could possibly accomplish apart. because when they got in the hotel -- that was just the beginning. it lasted -- it lasted and lasted. nobody knows exactly when. probably up through the '90s. but they -- but when they got together, they were able to accomplish much more than if anyone hai defected. what if somebody had defected and stood outside and said, you know what, we agree, nicotine's addictive. we agree our product's killing two out of -- or, one out of two people. we agree that we have engineered it to be addictive. what would that do to the rest? they would be dead. so they cannot do it. on the -- on the -- on the concealment, mr. frailey said, when he saw the 1970 warning, he said, now you tell me. and we agree. interestingly, he also said, as i indicated before, he said, do what i do -- do what i say, not what i do. a humiliating thing. a humiliating thing. we -- they wanted to talk about the new york times. this is incredible that they would suggest that the ad -- ad that we happen to have from the new york times showing -- showing -- i think that was the one that showed joe dimaggio, but we have hat several, the giants and so forth. well, look, we are talking about things that happened a long time ago. the new york times has archives. but the ads were everywhere. every other billboard in the united states was a cigarette ad. the -- if you watched one channel, you watched cigarette ads all night. the companies in one year -- and i forgot the year -- reynolds alone spent $2 billion on advertising and marketing. billion with a b. that is enormous by any standard. and so to say, well -- to make light of this at this point and say that mr. frailey must have had to go to new york is preposterous. it is baloney. it is garbage. mr. frailey, like every other person in this united states, was surrounded by advertising. you were read from, from this ftc report, counsel read a piece of it, when he said, oh, it is only seven percent. this was also read to you during trial: the commission believes that the warning label on cigarette packages has not succeeded in overcoming the prevalent attitude towards cigarette smoking created and maintained by the cigarette companies through their advertisement, particularly the barrage of commercials on television which portray smoking as a harmless and enjoyable social activity that is not habit forming and involves no hazard to health. i could not have said it better. and this was from 1967. i mean, how could -- i mean, they were so right. it has not succeeded in overcoming the prevalent attitude towards cigarette smoking. and who created it? the cigarette companies through their advertisements. the barrage of commercials on television which portray smoking as harmless and enjoyable social activity that is not habit forming and involves no hazard to health. so do not tell us, do not tell us that you were not the engineers, or one of the engineers, behind the cigarette culture. you know why? follow the money. what does that mean? who profited from the cigarette culture? who do you think? reynolds profited. and its co-conspirators profited. the last thing i want to talk about, it was raised -- a question of, what is it worth? what is -what are the damages? i suggested that 20 -- that 13 years together. there was almost -- well, it is not just 13, because there was three years mrs. frailey watched mr. frailey dying in unspeakable -unspeakable ways. and there is no point for me to talk about it. it is unspeakable what happens to people when they die of cancer of the esophagus. it is just unbelievably devastating. because when that organ goes, you cannot eat. you -- you bleed from both parts of your body, both ends. you are in pain. it is -- it is unspeakable. she endured that for three years and watched. and the worst part about it is, there was not any hope. i mean, it is -- it is so devastating. it is just "when." and the surgery, and the disruption, and the horrors of running to the hospital. i mean, it is not -- i'm not dwelling on that for a reason. it is -- it is -- it is too -- it is just horrible. and so what is that worth? and then you add 13 years of that to -- that were not -- that we did not have -- they did not have together. she has not put her life together. she was extremely, extremely disarranged by this and has not -- has not really recovered at all. i mean, you can make your own judgment. being -- being grilled for hours and hours. and i guess the last thing i'll say, so what is that worth? we said 200,000 a year. i do not think that is enough, but that would -- that would be 3.4 million. that is probably low, but i do not want to overreach anything. somebody will say, mr. wilner, you are asking for too much. somebody else will say, you are asking for not enough. i have no idea. there is no exact standard, but i'll tell you, it is the only thing we have got. we cannot bring him back. to make this trial meaningful, that is the meaning. that is the only meaning we have now. he' gone. oh, there was one other thing i wanted to look at. that is the little -- the pack -- the tareyton picture. which one is that? call it up. this is the last thing we will talk about. it is silly. page 20? slide 20? okay? take a look at that. this is so silly. it is the last thing i'll talk about, in the amount of time. twenty -- all right. look at slide 20 real quick. this is this picture. here's -- here's what everyone thought was tareyton, you know. switch to 134 real quick. well, that -- that is red actually. this is a lousy picture. do we have one where the color came out right? try another one. it is really a really red pack. i do not know where it is, but -- all right. is what? ms. blasingame: (inaudible.) mr. wilner: all right. i showed them a pack anyway, that -- it is not orange. it is red. tareyton is bright red. go back to the other one. 20, go back to 20. all right. so, you know, i think everybody kind of thought that was the tareyton and still does, but, i mean, it is -- it is really hard to tell. and you look -- you could look and look. counsel over here says, trying to suggest, oh, it is not really tareyton, because it has the wrong number of letters. okay. but they said it had seven letters and merit, which is the next cigarette he smoked, by all accounts, only has five letters. so if anyone can tell that that is a tareyton or a merit -- it is certainly not a merit. it looks like a tareyton. but you know what? it is hard. and poor mrs. frailey goes down, gets this stuff together, she is been grilled and grilled, gets her -- gets her children, trying to figure this out. and they say, do not you know that -- that, you know, daddy switched. and one says, it was after i married john roderick in the '80s. and another one, it was after the little boy was born. do not you know that? oh, yes, i do. and, look, it looks like tareyton, and maybe it is. we cannot really, really tell. but big deal. and then says, look, if tar- -- if merit was only a few years, then it is not right to bring the case against philip morris. let -- it is -- that would not be right and so let us drop it. okay. and for that, a major attack on credibility. let us instead, instead, consider who is attacking whose credibility. because if you look at the documents that we have given you, and they are -- there are lots, you will see that at one point in time reynolds' scientists say, inside, when they know nobody else is listening, they go, cancer, it is -- it is terrible. when the -- when the people come from outside the -- when the -- the document called, visit to america -- oh, it is document number 158. that is a good one. got to read document 158. fascinating. british people come over to visit the companies and they interview them. and they go, yeah, yeah. and they go, here is -- what do you think of cancer? does your product cause cancer? everyone says, yes, except berkson. he was the one guy who said no. berkson -- read your life magazine. he is in life magazine saying, they are still putting 'em up, even though they have admitted they know it. my point is, all the internal documents say, we know it is addictive, we know it causes cancer. every time they opened their mouth, they denied it. and, consider, is that a history of -- of not telling the truth? you could call that not truthful. is that a history? when has it ended? and when will it end? and in this -- in this case, you have -- we have -- you have the power to start making a difference. send a message. let it end. let it end here. right here. thank you.