closing statement mr. lewis: may it please the court. the court: yes, sir. mr. lewis: members of the jury, in a little while you will go into that deliberation room and you will have three jobs. one of your jobs, as mr. gustafson explained to you, is to fill out that verdict form and answer the 5662 questions that the judge has posed. your second job is to make sure that everyone on the jury follows the law that the judge gives. and your third job is to reason together and explain to each other why you feel the way you feel when you answer those questions. now, for the next few minutes, i want to discuss with you what i humbly believe is probably the most important part of the case. and in your verdict -- "verdict" means to speak the truth. your verdict must speak loud and it must speak clear. and the truth your compensation verdict must speak is the amount of money it will take to compensate and equalize, balance the harm that has been done in this case. now, instruction number 6 is pretty simple. question number 6. and that question is, "what is the total amount (one hundred percent) of any damages sustained by plaintiff kathleen gafney for the loss of frank gafney's companionship and protection and for her pain and suffering as a result of frank gafney's injury and death?" 5663 it says, "in determining the total amount of damages, you should not make any reduction because of the responsibility you charge to frank gafney. the court will make any reductions that is appropriate based upon what facts you find." so what your job is, is to equalize, to compensate, to balance the harm caused by the conduct of these defendants. so you got a harm, a big harm in this case. and your money damages verdict needs to make up for that harm and balance that scale. now, what i like to refer to this is, members of the jury, it is your call to action. when you see that compensation part of this verdict, it is your call to action. and the question was asked by mr. gustafson, what are you going to do about it? what are you going to do about it? this is your call to action. mr. bassett: your honor, objection. the court: legal basis? mr. bassett: sending a message, improper argument. the court: i'm sorry? 5664 bassett: improper argument on sending a message. the court: overruled. go on. mr. lewis: okay. you can turn it off. now, the evidence in this case, as mr. gustafson has pointed out, has not only shown more likely than not, but beyond and to the exclusion of any reasonable doubt that these cigarette companies, these defendants, lorillard and r.j. reynolds, knowingly and blatantly devalued human life for what they readily admit in their formerly secret documents, profit. and the evidence is clear that these companies knowingly and blatantly violated the basic rules that a company should tell the truth, that a company should not mislead, that a company, if they know something is dangerous in their products, they got to tell people. they cannot keep it to themselves. so members of the jury, they did not do it just by spinning like politicians do. they did not do it like that. these companies took people like mr. gafney and did not tell them, did not tell them what they already knew about 5665 the products that they were selling. so the question is asked in order to compensate and help offset the damages to mr. gafney -- mrs. gafney for the wrongful death of her husband, who died decades earlier than he should have. now, what exacerbates mrs. gafney's pain, her suffering, her lack of protection and companionship is that mrs. gafney, she suffers from seeing mr. gafney at the end of his life die a slow and painful and agonizing death at the hands of the companies that dishonestly manipulated him chemically, physically, psychologically and emotionally, without him truly ever recognizing it for the sake of their money. and so i say to you, members of the jury, that mrs. gafney' pain is real. her pain is immense because she lives with that fact every day of her life. now, you heard her take the stand and raise her hand and give her testimony. she told us -- and everybody that you heard in this case that took the stand and had something to say about mr. gafney -- and let me just try, as 5666 mr. gustafson did, to tell you some of the things that you heard, because i do that so you can understand just what condition her condition is in. they told you that mr. gafney was a friendly man. he was an intelligent man. he was a determined man. he was a strong-willed man. he was goal-oriented. he was a god-fearing man. he was loyal. he was someone you would say, i want to call him my friend. he was a fantastic guy. he was kind. he was honest. he was trustworthy. he was an excellent lawyer. he was a wonderful husband. he was a wonderful father. he was a wonderful son. he was a wonderful brother. he picked hisself up when his father died and put hisself through school and took over the family as the head of the family because his brother went to seminary. and mr. gafney as a young man could not go to georgetown university, but he decided, i'll stay home and put myself through school. he was a self-made man. mr. bassett: your honor, i object at this point. argument is improper to the law and the 5667 evidence. the court: overruled. go on. the evidence you can respond to in your closing. mr. lewis: now, obviously, mr. gafney, from the evidence you heard -- and if you would have heard something different, i guarantee, you would have heard it -- he was a good man. he was a wonderful human being. and even though these cigarette companies say, yes, yeah, we lied to him, we concealed, but do not worry about our conduct, because mr. gafney should not have believed all the lies we told for the many years that we were telling the lies. that is their position. but i tell you this, they can say what they will about mr. gafney, but to mrs. gafney, he was the greatest man to ever walk in her world. and mrs. gafney, her suffering is magnified because he was taken from her in the cruelest, most callous and intentional way. and that, members of the jury, was for the money. now, the truth your verdict must speak, it must make these cigarette companies meet its 5668 full responsibility also. as mr. gustafson said, mrs. gafney accepts the responsibility that mr. gafney holds some responsibility, too. but now it is your job, it is your job, because they do not take responsibility. they say zero, to make that determination. and for mrs. gafney for healing, for true healing -- mr. gafney died september 17th, 1995. the other day we were here in this courtroom was the anniversary of his death. she celebrated the anniversary of their marriage august 22nd when we were here in this trial. and, members of the jury, for her to begin the healing process, they got to give full account. they got to give full account. mr. bassett: argument, your honor, sending a message. the court: i'm sorry? mr. bassett: i object as it is sending a message argument, it is improper for this at this point in argument of damages. the court: overruled. go ahead. mr. lewis: now, when a person you love more than yourself is yanked away from you, and 5669 when they are yanked away from you for no good reason, there is a festering wound, and it cannot heal properly. and you, members of the jury, have a rare opportunity. you have got a rare opportunity that you may never get again. and that is the opportunity to express a fair and full verdict to mrs. gafney and let her know that you understand what her condition is, and at that time there is a clear understanding of what happened here, it was wrong. it was just flat-out wrong. it is wrong for cigarette companies to lie. it is wrong. it is illegal for them to lie. and, members of the jury, now -- because it is flat-out illegal and it is wrong, now to the extent that the law allows, you can make it right. you can make it right to the extent that the law allows. you cannot bring mr. gafney back. if you could wave a magic wand and bring him back mrs. gafney will walk out of here out of this courtroom as happy -- mr. bassett: objection, your honor, objection. this is improper argument. the court: sustained, mr. lewis. 5670 lewis: members of the jury -- mr. bassett: your honor, may we approach? the court: not at this time, mr. bassett. mr. lewis: members of the jury, a fair and full verdict should reflect the enormity and the magnitude of the harm in this case. now, i would suggest to you that protection, companionship -- just think, what is more important than protection and companionship that a husband can give a wife? the very thing that one fears the most in life is to be what? left alone and to be without protection. so when a couple like this bounds itself together -- and i showed you all of these photographs. baron, can you put those up. that is the prom photograph. when a couple bonds that way like mr. and mrs. gafney did when they were so young, the bond, the bond gets stronger as they get older. now, you can see -- go to the next one. just go through them. and i'm going to ask you -- i put those photographs into evidence, and i know it was painstakingly, so you could 5671 look at them. and i did not do it because i was trying to waste your time. i wanted you to have the full extent so you understood a couple of things, and one of them was the magnitude and the enormity of what it was that she lost. now, this unique bond is ripped away decades too early. and, members of the jury, the only way you can say what the magnitude of harm is, is by your money verdict so that as alone as these companies have contributed to make kathleen gafney -- when she leaves this courtroom today, she will go home like she is done every day, to tieka, one of her dogs, to wrigs, one of her dogs, and she is going to be alone. and as much as the conduct of these tobacco companies have contributed to destroying something that can never be brought back, the one thing that you can do is -- to help is to render that verdict. the clerk: counsel, 15 minutes. mr. lewis: thank you. now, members of the jury, as i take my seat, give me a couple more minutes, but from mrs. gafney's perspective and through her eyes, there is no way that what they did makes 5672 anything that they did right. and so for full compensation in this case, members of the jury, there are one of two things that you can do. you can give a verdict in this case that is a token amount of verdict, that is half what full compensation should be in this case. or you can give full compensation. and we would respectfully request that you do just that, full compensation, and render a verdict that says when companies do what these companies did in this case, we place a full and uncompromised total value on the case, and that is why in this case, to finally step up and to start to protect and let mrs. gafney begin to heal, this is the kind of case where i need to ask you to return a verdict that is loud and clear in the amount of $10 million. mr. bassett: objection, your honor. the court: legal basis? mr. bassett: improper argument, sending a message, outside the evidence for that amount. the court: overruled. mr. lewis: now, members of the jury, let me explain something very clearly. a lot of people say that when a lawyer says $10 million, 5673 he really means 5 million or 6 million or 8 million so that someone can argue their way down. but i tell you, i do not -- i stood here and i was the one that got to ask you questions when we selected you. and at the end of the day, i asked you questions about full and fair compensation. i and we, every step of the way since august the 16th, have told you what we wanted to do and tried our very best to do it. i do not want to try to manipulate and say 20 million so you can come back 10. no. i want to make it clear that the right figure in this case is $10 million. it is not $11 million, it is not $9 million. the right figure in this case for this loss is $10 million. and i say that very clearly and very humbly, understanding what your role is as jurors, but there has been enough devaluing of the full worth of human companionship and of human worth and all the agony caused and contributed to by all that these companies did, members of the jury. there has been enough of that. and i say to you enough is enough. and your verdict should speak loud and it should 5674 speak clear. mr. bassett: again, your honor -- the court: sustained. mr. lewis, sustained, focus on the damages. mr. bassett: your honor, move to strike. and may we approach? mr. maguire: may we approach? the court: no, you may not approach. i will strike the last comments. mr. lewis: that is why the verdict should be $10 million. it does not need to be a penny more. now, members of the jury, as i take my seat, know that from mrs. gafney's perspective, the last thing that mr. gafney ever said to her was, "katie, i love you." and we respectfully request that you render a full compensation verdict that respects and shows that you understand the loss of protection, companionship, her agonizing pain and suffering that she has suffered as contributed to by these cigarette companies. thank you for giving me the time and attention that you gave me, and now i ask you to give them the same attention you gave me. 5675 thank you, your honor. closing statement mr. maguire: if it will please the court, counsel. good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. let me start on behalf of myself and lorillard and everyone here thanking you, 5695 frankly, for your service and for paying such close attention to us all these long, long days. i'm going to sum up the evidence on behalf of lorillard and then you will be hearing from randy bassett for r.j. reynolds, but i just want to say, on behalf of all of us representing the defendants, from the defendants, we thank you for your time and your patience and your attention. as i said in my opening, this case is about one smoker, it is about frank gafney. and the plaintiff has the burden of proving that mr. gafney was addicted and that his addiction was so powerful, so compulsive that he did not have control, that he did not have a personal choice, and that lorillard and r.j. reynolds deprived mr. gafney of his control of his personal choice. and that was plaintiff's burden. now, in fact, throughout this trial, you have learned a great deal about mr. gafney. that mr. gafney was aware of the risks, that mr. gafney enjoyed smoking, and until 1995 did not want to quit, and that mr. gafney was in 5696 control of his smoking and was able to stop whenever he made the decision that he wanted to stop. that is what he wanted to do. you heard mrs. gafney acknowledge that she and her husband had very different views about smoking. mrs. gafney never liked smoking. and she made her views very clear. but mr. gafney enjoyed smoking. and he made it clear that is what he wanted to do. mrs. gafney has admitted that her husband made his own decisions. and when he did, he knew everything he needed to know about the danger and about the addictiveness of smoking. sometime in the 1970s, mrs. gafney has told us after smoking for some 20 years, mr. gafney stopped smoking cold turkey. he stopped for an entire year. he did it to get a better deal on life insurance. he knew about smoking. he knew the risks. he knew the dangers. and he also knew how to stop. we know from dr. burns and dr. cummings, plaintiff's witnesses, that all of the nicotine was out of mr. gafney's body within a couple of days of his stopping for that year. and we know from dr. burns that if 5697 mr. gafney had quit for good during that year in the 1970s, instead of restarting and taking up smoking at the end of that year, he would have avoided his lung cancer. mr. gafney was in control of his smoking decisions, no one else. and after that year with no nicotine in his system, he made a decision to start smoking again. when he started to smoke again, he knew all of those things about cigarette smoking. he was in his late 30s, 1970s, late 30s or early 40s. he was running his own business, he owned the business. he was married with three children. there were warnings on every pack of cigarettes. now, mrs. gafney did not want him to smoke, but he did want to smoke and that was his decision, and there is no one here that is challenging his smoking decisions. but mrs. gafney is asking to be paid for her husband's smoking decisions. until 1995, mr. gafney did not want to quit, and until then, he never tried to quit, not once. until then, he never tried to quit for good. he stopped for various reasons, but 5698 he never intended to quit. until then, until 1995, mr. gafney made very clear to mrs. gafney and his friends that he did not want to quit and that he enjoyed his smoking. as mrs. gafney admitted, he thoroughly enjoyed each and every single cigarette he ever smoked. he chose to smoke. he said that is what he wanted to do. that was his choice. the only evidence in this case that is more powerful than mrs. gafney's words are mr. gafney's actions and the way that he lived his life. and mr. gafney proved to all of us that he was able to stop smoking because that is what he did, he did stop. plaintiff cannot prove, could never prove in this case that addiction took over mr. gafney's life or prevented him from quitting because mr. gafney showed that he was able to quit whenever he was motivated to do so. now, let us walk through how that evidence helps you fill out the verdict form that the court is providing. we will start with question 1. may we put that up here. 5699 was frank gafney addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, and if so, was such addiction a legal cause of his lung cancer and death? now, this is the first question on your verdict form and it is the class action membership question. this is the gateway question. the first question that the plaintiff must meet in order to maintain this case. the engle findings do not apply when you decide this question. you, this jury, the only people who decide this question based on the evidence you heard in this case. if you answer no to this question, then your work is done, the engle findings do not apply, the case is over. only if you answer yes to this question do the engle findings apply. then you have to go to the other questions on the form. and when you look at this question, you may remember we did briefly in voir dire, you see it is really in three parts. the first part is was frank gafney addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, that is the first part. 5700 and the second part is if so, whether his addiction was a legal cause of his lung cancer. and the third part is whether his addiction was a legal cause of his death. if you answer no to any of those three parts of the question, any part, then the answer is no. and as you think about each subpart, each of those parts, remember that it is the plaintiff's burden to prove each and every one of those parts to you. so let us take the first part. was mr. frank gafney addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine? now, you just heard from mr. gustafson that various witnesses said that mr. gafney was addicted. and each those witnesses said that based on the fact that he smoked a pack or more of cigarettes a day for 40 years. and based on that, they concluded that he was addicted. if that is all we needed, we would not need a trial. we would not need a jury. but that is not all we need. we need a jury. we need a trial. this is a question that has to be decided. 5701 we need you to judge the evidence. when a plaintiff comes into a court of law seeking money, a lot of money, a great deal of money, the plaintiff has a burden of proof and she has to prove addiction. this is a legal question that must be based on the evidence. and you heard medical evidence. it is not simply addiction like we use in normal everyday life. i'm addicted to the soprano's or i'm addicted to, you know, shopping or i'm addicted to some tv show. addiction is a medical term and it requires a medical diagnosis. in fact, mrs. gafney understands that, has recognized that for years. you saw it earlier today what mrs. gafney said back in 2008 in her written answers to interrogatories where she was asked, did she contend that mr. gafney was addicted, and she said yes. and you may remember that she specifically said that addiction is a medical diagnosis. "yes, i do," that was the contention that mr. gafney was addicted. "but addiction is a medical diagnosis." there is no dispute here really between the defendants and the plaintiff 5702 that addiction is a medical diagnosis. at trial mrs. gafney testified and she was asked, and she agreed, addiction is a medical diagnosis. so why then did her medical witnesses not give you the standard medical diagnosis? there is not one medical record that indicates that mr. gafney was addicted or diagnosed with addiction. no one in this case has testified that mr. gafney met the medical standard for a medical diagnosis of addiction. mr. sales: objection, your honor, misstates the evidence. there is no evidence that there is just one standard. the court: ladies and gentlemen, you will rely on your own recollection of the evidence. remember what the attorneys say is not evidence. it is just to help you in determining what you believe the evidence has shown, but you rely on your own recollection. go ahead, mr. maguire. mr. maguire: you may remember that the plaintiff presented dr. cummings to you. he said addiction is a brain disease. but he is not a medical doctor and he did not say 5703 anything about mr. gafney. plaintiff called two medical doctors, dr. burns and dr. cohn. dr. burns is a medical doctor. he is a pulmonologist. he said mr. gafney was addicted. but dr. burns never gave a medical diagnosis. he was never asked to apply the dsm-iv. in fact, in his entire testimony, dr. burns was never asked about it and never even mentioned the diagnostic and statistical manual iv. now, why is that? if mr. gafney was addicted, if he really met the criteria for a medical diagnosis, why did the plaintiff not ask dr. burns whether he met the criteria of dsm-iv? instead, dr. burns talked to you about smokers like mr. gafney, smokers who suffered from withdrawal, smokers who could not quit, smokers who were hopelessly addicted, smokers with buerger's disease who kept smoking even in the face of amputations. but dr. burns admitted that was not mr. gafney. mr. gafney was in control of his smoking, and when mr. gafney decided to stop, he stopped. the fact is, dr. burns did not remember an 5704 awful lot about mr. gafney. dr. burns said he had not read the depositions in, i think it was, three years. and you may remember that dr. burns has been testifying a great deal. with all the smokers that he has testified about over the last three years, even over the last year or so, dr. burns could not remember some details of mr. gafney's life. you may remember, just compare how dr. burns remembered the details of mr. gafney with dr. kaplan. for example, dr. burns really could not remember the details of what mr. gafney's sister had related about his stopping smoking for lent one year and how he was not happy about it and how he told her, even though he made it the full 40 days, that was the last time he was going to do it. he was not going to do it again. dr. kaplan remembered all of that. dr. burns was not so sure and could not remember a lot of the details. dr. burns could not remember that mr. gafney had won the bet. or how mr. gafney told the insurance company that his weight had not changed the year he stopped smoking and his 5705 weight at the time was pretty much what you would expect of anyone getting older. you may remember we looked at that insurance application from the 1970s, and mr. gafney was 205 pounds, which is -- that was in 1977. and that was up from about 190 pounds when he left the army reserve about 12 years earlier. dr. burns was a little rusty on most of the facts about mr. gafney's life and his smoking history. he just relied on the fact that mr. gafney had smoked a pack or pack and a half a day for 40 or 45 years. and as you heard from dr. kaplan, that is not a basis for a medical diagnosis. that is why dr. burns never mentioned the dsm-iv and never even tried to apply it to mr. gafney. the plaintiff also brought you dr. cohn. dr. cohn did not remember mr. gafney at all. he never diagnosed mr. gafney as addicted in 1995. and there is no evidence that any doctor who ever treated mr. gafney while he was smoking ever diagnosed him as addicted to nicotine. but plaintiff's witness, dr. cohn, did tell you that the dsm-iv is the medical 5706 profession's standard for diagnosing nicotine addiction. dr. cohn said he does not apply that standard in his own practice. he is focused mostly on treating people for cholesterol. dr. cohn admitted he is not a specialist in addiction. he described himself as a quarterback. he refers people out to specialists. we presented a specialist. dr. kaplan, unlike dr. cohn and dr. burns, is board certified in psychiatry. he does use the dsm-iv. he does use it for medical diagnosis. he uses it when he treats patients every day. dr. kaplan explained the dsm-iv, why it is the standard for the diagnosis of nicotine dependence, and he applied it to mr. gafney. and he showed you why he concluded mr. gafney was not addicted. and he explained to you how mr. gafney was able to control his smoking. as dr. kaplan told you, mr. gafney did not have clinically significant impairment or distress. he was in control of his life and in control of his smoking. and fact that he smoked for a long time does not make him addicted. only about fifty percent of regular 5707 smokers meet the dsm-iv criteria of clinically significant impairment. and mr. gafney was not one of those people. when you consider whether the plaintiff carried her burden of proof in this question, ask yourself, with all the doctors who knew mr. gafney or who treated mr. gafney, why did the plaintiff, a registered nurse, who knows that addiction is a medical diagnosis, not ask any of the doctors for a dsm-iv medical diagnosis? there is no record, no testimony, no expert that diagnosed mr. gafney with addiction under dsm-iv. all that you were provided with, dr. cummings, showed you a heaviness of smoking index and a fagerstrom test, and he admitted quite openly on cross-examination that under those tests, even somebody who has never smoked a single cigarette is addicted. dr. kaplan was the only doctor to make the medical assessment, the dsm-iv assessment, to answer the first part of the question: was mr. gafney addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine? he told you why he did not diagnose mr. gafney as addicted. so the answer to the 5708 first part of question 1 is no, mr. gafney was not addicted. if you answer the first part of question 1 no, then you do not need to answer anything else. you just write no for question 1 and you are done. if you decide that mr. gafney was addicted, then you have to answer the next part of the question. and the next part of the question is: was addiction to nicotine a legal cause of his lung cancer? let me talk to you a little bit about that part of question 1, the second part of question 1. was addiction to nicotine a legal cause of mr. gafney's lung cancer? even if you find that mr. gafney was addicted, that does not mean that addiction was a legal cause. why not? because the question of legal cause goes to control and it goes to personal choice. did mr. gafney -- mr. sales: excuse me, your honor, that misstates the jury instruction. the court: ladies and gentlemen, rely on the instructions. go ahead, mr. maguire. 5709 maguire: yes, your honor. did mr. gafney control his smoking, did he choose when he wanted to smoke and when he wanted to stop? or did addiction to nicotine take away his control and his personal choice to smoke? so this is why did mr. gafney smoke, why did he develop lung cancer? the plaintiff tried to prove that mr. gafney did not make a personal choice, that an addiction deprived him of his ability to stop smoking, it took away his control. plaintiff presented dr. burns to tell you an addiction can take over someone's life. he said you have a compulsive need for the next dose of nicotine. and dr. cummings described addiction as a relapsing brain disease that involves compulsive drug seeking. to be a legal cause, that is what addiction had to do, it had to deprive mr. gafney of his personal choice, to take away his control. let us take this right out of the instructions. "addiction to smoking cigarettes containing nicotine is a legal cause of," in 5710 this case mr. gafney's lung cancer and death, "if it directly and in natural and continuous sequence produces or contributes substantially to producing lung cancer and death so it can reasonably be said that but for the addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine, such lung cancer and death would not have occurred." but for the addiction, he would have quit. so what does that mean? it means the plaintiff has to show that addiction caused mr. gafney to continue to smoke against his will, caused him to smoke when he did not want to, and not just by a little bit. mr. sales: excuse me, your honor, that misstates the instructions. the court: again, ladies and gentlemen, you have been given the instructions, and you will be able to rely on the instructions that you have been given by the court. thank you. mr. maguire: and your instructions have the word "substantial." substantial. it has to be so substantially that without addiction, he would have quit and quit in time to avoid getting his lung cancer. it had to prevent him from quitting. that is a heavy burden. 5711 so heavy the plaintiff brought you three witnesses to talk about it. but every single one of them admitted that addiction does not prevent a smoker from quitting. i asked dr. burns, "in fact, do you believe that the vast majority of smokers who have quit were addicted?" and he answered, "i believe that is correct." dr. cohn agreed. i asked dr. cummings, "true or false, even addicted smokers can quit smoking?" and he answered, "true." he agreed that of the 60 million americans who have quit smoking, ninety percent of those smokers would meet his definition of highly addicted. and they still quit. so can addicted smokers quit? absolutely. even plaintiff's experts, dr. burns, dr. cummings and dr. cohn all agree. so even if you think that mr. gafney was addicted, did that mean he could not have quit? no way. that is why the plaintiff in this case could not meet her burden of proving legal cause you to, that addiction, any addiction to 5712 nicotine was a legal cause of mr. gafney's lung cancer or death. addicted or not, mr. gafney showed that he was able to stop smoking, to quit, when he was motivated to do so. at various points in his life, he proved that. earlier we showed you a timeline of mr. gafney's life. we described how he was able to stop once for 40 days for lent, how he was able to stop smoking for as long as it took to win a bet with his smoking buddies, and how he was able to put his cigarettes down for an entire year in order to get better financial terms for life insurance. but each of these times, mr. gafney was not trying to quit permanently. each time, he was just stopping, pausing, for a while, for a particular reason. just long enough for his 40 days, just long enough to win his bet, and just long enough for his insurance application. each of those times, mr. gafney was able to control his smoking and to stop smoking without much difficulty. he chose when he wanted to smoke and when he did not want to smoke. and each of those times, he stopped 5713 without any assistance. he simply put the cigarettes down and stopped cold turkey and for exactly as long as he had set out to stop. we talked with dr. burns and dr. kaplan about lent. you heard from jerry riegelsberger about the bet. it was for $20, and mr. gafney held the money for the winner. the bet started immediately, and mr. gafney did not use any smoking cessation aids. again, he stopped cold turkey. mr. riegelsberger, who lost the bet, remembers the bet, remembers seeing mr. gafney at the club when he was not smoking, that he was his same old good-natured self, and he remembers that mr. gafney held out the longest until he won the bet. his recollection was that it took mr. gafney a good part of the summer to win. but no matter how long it took, whether it was weeks or months, the point was mr. gafney was motivated to beat his buddies and win the bet, and he showed that he was the kind of guy who could go for as long as it took to win that bet. that was the kind of man that mr. gafney was. 5714 now, in the 1970s, mr. gafney made the decision to stop smoking for a whole year. again, he did not stop for the good of his health. mrs. gafney was quite clear about that. she acknowledged he stopped for financial reasons. at that point in his life, mr. gafney was not motivated by his health. just like he did not want to exercise. doctors apparently told him he should exercise for the good of his health. he did not want to do that. now, mrs. gafney did not remember exactly what year that was, but she did clearly remember that mr. gafney was able to stop, that he did not smoke for the year, that he quit cold turkey, and that he did it for better terms on an insurance application. we know that mr. gafney never intended to stop for good, because mrs. gafney told us about how he was joking around as it came to the end of the year about lighting up right in front of his insurance agent. so he had already decided that he was going to start smoking again even before he finished filling out his application. and when the year was up, he signed the 5715 application, he went right back to smoking. but both dr. burns and dr. kaplan told you what would have happened to mr. gafney during that year that he did not smoke. after just a couple of days, maybe three days, all of the nicotine would have been out of his body. so mr. gafney's body did not have any nicotine in it for almost 12 months. there was a lot of talk about withdrawal. dr. kaplan explained to you that mr. gafney did not have withdrawal systems, but even if he had withdrawal, it would not have lasted more than a couple weeks or month or so. dr. burns and dr. cummings told you that even addicted smokers who suffered withdrawal symptoms get the worst symptoms within three or four days, and they agreed that withdrawal generally does not last more than a couple of weeks or a month. you may remember dr. cummings explained that in his smoking cessation clinic, he has people sign a little contract and they make a ten-dollar bet that they will stay off cigarettes, and they do not get the money back unless they stay off for a month. 5716 and he explained, he tells all this to them when they get everybody together and they throw out all of smoking ashtrays and cigarettes and they play eye of the tiger or rocky, or whatever it is, and they make the commitment for motivation, and he said the critical period is a month. that is when you sort out who -- because most people have difficulty in that first month. making it past that first month is the toughest. well, mr. gafney made it past 12 of those months. likewise, dr. burns and dr. kaplan both testified that mr. gafney's nicotine receptors would have returned to normal within a month or two. there was a lot of talk about nicotine receptors. but you also heard that eating chocolate or drinking coffee also affects the receptors in our brains. that is just a description of how our brains work. that is not an injury. in any event, both dr. burns and dr. kaplan agree everyone has nicotine receptors, whether we smoke or not. 5717 the change in receptors is not permanent, and within a month or two of stopping smoking, the number of receptors goes right back to normal. so in that one year, mr. gafney proved to all of us that he could control his smoking. for the entire year, he did not smoke. according to dr. burns, when he stopped for a full year, that put mr. gafney in the top most successful 3 to 5 percent of people who quit. he was motivated. he wanted to save money on his application. so he exercised strict determination not to smoke. he controlled his smoking. and he did it all by himself. no help from anyone. by the time of that one year, mr. gafney knew full well about the dangers of smoking. he had lost his father back in 1954, some 20 years before. he lost his father the day before his 18th birthday, and he knew that he lost his father to smoking. that is what he told mrs. gafney when they first met, that his father smoked all the time and had a heart attack from it, and he told her that he was concerned about his own health because of what 5718 had happened to his father and because he himself was a smoker. the year he stopped in the 1970s was also about five to ten years after mr. gafney had received a very personal warning from his stepfather. after the death of his father, his mother had remarried, and in around 1967 or 1968, mrs. gafney tells us mr. gafney's stepfather was diagnosed with severe emphysema. at that time, he was very vocal and he told mr. gafney, do not let this happen to you. and mr. gafney acknowledged to his wife that the surgeon general's warnings were truthful. he acknowledged the dangers of smoking. when he stopped for that one year, that was about ten years later. so at the end of that year, mr. gafney knew that smoking was dangerous, he knew it was addictive. he had no nicotine in his system. he was over any withdrawal symptoms that he might have had. all that remained, after all his years of smoking, was the memory of how enjoyable it was to smoke a cigarette. so as a man in his late 30s or early 40s, fully aware of the health risks and the effects 5719 that smoking had on his father and stepfather, mr. gafney made an adult decision to go back to smoking. we may not agree or like that decision, but it was an informed and personal choice that mr. gafney made. you may remember we covered with dr. cummings his stop smoking pamphlet, smart move. dr. cummings described that his pamphlet has a little test about whether you can quit smoking. it asks people, do you have what it takes? and it is three pretty simple questions. skipping to question 2 is: are you willing to make some changes in your daily routine? for one year, mr. gafney was prepared to check that box and make whatever changes were necessary to stop smoking. the third question is: are you willing to put up with some uneasy moments after stopping? well, whether mr. gafney had to put up with some uneasy moments or not, he was prepared, if necessary, to do so for that full year. he was prepared to check that box. and for that one year, for financial reasons, he also wanted to stop. he did not 5720 want to quit, he wanted to go back as soon as he signed his application, but for that one year, he wanted to stop. for that one year, he was able to check all three boxes. and if you can answer yes to all three questions, you could stop smoking. at the end of that year, however, it was pretty clear mr. gafney did not want to quit. so he made the decision to go back to smoking. because that is what he wanted to do. now, dr. burns testified that if mr. gafney had quit smoking for good, instead of just for one year, he has not made the decision to go back and start smoking again, his risk of getting lung cancer would have been very similar, about the same, as someone who had never smoked. if he had continued to stay off the cigarettes, having stopped for one year sometime in the 1970s. that was mr. gafney's choice, to go back to smoking after that one year. it was also mr. gafney's choice to continue smoking every day from then on. mr. gafney, every day, continued to smoke and did not try to quit. every one of those 5721 days, thousands of americans chose to quit. they put the cigarettes down and they stopped. they tried to stop. and they kept trying to stop and they succeeded. millions and millions of americans, just like him, chose to quit. mr. gafney chose not to try. his wife testified about that. you may remember her testimony. she testified that he talked about it, but he never did it. mrs. gafney was asked specifically, other than the ash wednesdays and other than the one year, were there any other times before january of 1995 when your husband tried to quit, and she said no. he talked about it, but he never did it. think about that. he never tried to quit in all of those years. in january of 1995, mr. gafney made the decision that he did want to quit. he did not need hypnosis, he did not go to a stop smoking clinic, he did not ask anyone for help. again, he just stopped cold turkey. but this was the first time in 35 years that mr. gafney had made a decision that he was going to not stop, he was going to quit. and he did. until then, he did not try to quit, not 5722 once in that whole 35 years. he told people he did not want to. and that is how mr. gafney lived his life. he did what he wanted to do. the doctors may have told him to exercise; he did not want to exercise. his wife may have told him to stop smoking; he did not want to quit. and he did not stop smoking earlier than january of 1995 because that is not what he wanted to do. when he did finally choose to quit smoking, he did not need help from anyone, he stopped just the same way he did for the bet, just the same way he did for the one year, he just put the cigarettes down and stopped. in january 1995, for the one year, for the bet, each time that mr. gafney made the decision, he stopped right away. it was not what you heard from dr. burns or from dr. cummings, that people who are hooked on cigarettes need many trials, and we all know that. people who smoke a lot oftentimes cannot stop on the first try. it is not like flipping a switch for a lot of people. they need to try and try again and then they succeed. with 5723 mr. gafney, he got it right the first time. he stopped in january 1995 and he never smoked again. that was it. for the one year, he stopped. that was it. for the bet. it was not like mr. gafney had the opportunity to try a couple of times before he stopped. this all happened at the club. he was with his buddies. he had to stop right there. and he did it. he stopped right there. and he did not smoke until he won that bet. that is willpower. that is discipline. dr. burns talked a lot about other types of smokers who are addicted, including smokers who could not stop even after they became ill with a serious disease and they still could not stop smoking no matter how ill they were or how ill they became. i mentioned the person with buerger's disease. dr. burns admitted that was not frank gafney. dr. burns mentioned a smoker who had severe emphysema, who could not breathe and still kept smoking even though he was getting sicker and sicker. even he mentioned a smoker on his deathbed, still could not stop smoking. and he admitted, and that was not mr. gafney. 5724 mrs. gafney told you that her husband quit in january 1995, months before he was diagnosed with cancer. for the next nine months, he traveled on his own to cleveland, he drove his car, he went out in his boat. by august, after his radiation therapy, his doctor was saying he could increase his daily activity, but he did not smoke. mr. gafney was not like any of those other smokers who could not quit. he could. he did. now, step back and ask yourself, what is the pattern here? when the plaintiff says that mr. gafney stopped for a year with strict determination, for the entire year he quit, mr. gafney used strict determination to do it day by day. "question: and he used strict determination, correct? "answer: yes, he did." on cross-examination here, mrs. gafney was asked: "question: and that kind of determination is something that mr. gafney always had? "answer: yes." when the plaintiff tells you that 5725 mr. gafney had -- that was part of who he was, that he had that strict determination, that ability to stop smoking. when dr. burns tells you that he had discipline and willpower, the pattern here is that mr. gafney was in control. he had the ability to decide when he would smoke and when he would not smoke. he called the shots. everyone agreed that mr. gafney was extremely successful professionally. he worked his way through law school, and within five years of graduating, he bought the business where he worked. he built the business. he had a large group of employees. he had offices in three different cities in ohio. he was so successful, he was able to retire at 50 years of age. dr. burns told you that for the well-educated and successful, it is the ability to control your own behavior to accomplish things, to move forward in life successfully, that also predicts that you would move forward successfully with a cessation attempt. well, mr. gafney had all of that. if he had wanted to stop smoking, he could have 5726 applied his discipline and his determination to quitting at any time. this is a free country. a person has the freedom to engage in any legal behavior, even risky behaviors, if he wants to. mr. gafney did not try to quit because he enjoyed smoking and he wanted to smoke. in all his years of smoking, there is no time when mr. gafney ever asked his family for help quitting. or his doctors or his friends. he did not want that help. he did not want to quit. he told mrs. gafney he enjoyed the whole experience of smoking. he enjoyed the flavor. he found it relaxing. it helped him deal with stress at the office or at home. mr. gafney enjoyed smoking so much, he told his wife he did not want to quit and she told you he said that to her more times than she could count. let us briefly look at her testimony on video on page 131 of her deposition, which you saw this morning, lines 12 through 23. (a videoclip was played and transcribed as follows:) "question: did your husband ever tell you that 5727 he did not want to quit smoking? "answer: several times. "question: what did he say? "answer: i do not want to quit. i enjoy it too much. "question: did you ask him what about it he enjoyed? "answer: he said he enjoyed the whole -- he enjoyed the flavor, he enjoyed just the way it made him feel. "question: you said several times he told you that he did not want to quit. how many times did he tell you that he did not want to quit? "answer: innumerable." (thereupon, the video ended.) mr. maguire: so mr. gafney was not that smoker who wants to quit, who really tries to quit, tries and tries again and is simply not able to do so. he was very clear, he did not want to. dr. burns, dr. cummings and dr. cohn each admitted that even an addicted person can make a personal choice to quit or at least try to quit. all three also agreed that the smoker is responsible for trying to quit in making the 5728 effort. in 1995, mr. gafney was one of those millions of americans who quit, and if he had only chosen to quit earlier in his life, he would have avoided his lung cancer because mr. gafney was able to stop smoking when he wanted to. so addiction is not a legal cause of his lung cancer or death. the legal cause was mr. gafney's personal choice to keep smoking instead of staying off the cigarettes after he stopped for that one year, or instead of quitting on one of those days when he kept smoking after that one year. no one was stopping mr. gafney from using -- from quitting, from using his strict determination to put the cigarettes down. mr. gafney was an adult. he could make his own decisions and it was his choice to smoke. the legal cause was his decision to smoke because if he had made a different choice, as dr. burns explained, if he had stopped smoking earlier in the 1970s, even in the early part of the 1980s, even up to, i think dr. burns put it, at 1986 or 1987, most of the risk would 5729 have been avoided. and that is the answer to the legal cause question. mr. gafney smoked as a matter of choice because that is what he wanted to do. so the answer to the second part of question 1 on legal cause, was addiction to the nicotine and cigarettes a legal cause of his lung cancer is no. and if you determine that addiction to nicotine and cigarettes was not a legal cause of mr. gafney's lung cancer, then the answer to question 1, the whole question, is no. you do not need to answer any other questions. you stop, sign, date the form, you are done. if you do decide that mr. gafney was addicted and that addiction was a legal cause, then there is a third part. so let me just deal with that very briefly. and that is whether -- and that is whether mr. gafney's death -- was such addiction a legal cause of his death. and on this, the evidence is mixed. mr. sales: excuse me, your honor. misstates the verdict form question revealed by the slide itself. 5730 court: you can rely on the slide, which is an accurate representation of the verdict form. you may go ahead, mr. maguire. mr. maguire: thank you, your honor. none of the doctors who diagnosed and treated mr. gafney's lung cancer testified in this trial. the death certificate lists lung cancer as the cause of death. but it also lists pulmonary emboli. and you have heard the instruction, the death certificate, in and of itself, does not answer question. so you need to determine this third part, whether the plaintiff was able to carry her burden, because mrs. gafney herself said on the stand that the cause of mr. gafney's death was pulmonary embolism. there is no question that mr. gafney had lung cancer. and his lung cancer was not cured. no question about that. and there is no question that his lung cancer was caused by his smoking. no question about that. but the medical records show that mr. gafney had been responding well to treatment. you heard mrs. gafney said that his 5731 doctors told him by august of that year that he would been responding well to treatment, that the tumor in his brain could not even be seen on a ct scan, and the tumor in his lung had shrunk and his doctors told him he had another seven years. at the time he developed his dvt in september, mr. gafney was not even supposed to see his doctors for his lung cancer for another couple of months. just two weeks after hearing that his cancer was responding well to treatment, mr. gafney was admitted to the hospital with a dvt in his left leg. dr. cohn told you mr. gafney did not need lung cancer to get a dvt in 1995. and that is because mr. gafney already had a prior history, he would been suffering from dvt for years. so you may find that mr. gafney would have suffered his dvt attack even if he had never smoked or never suffered from lung cancer. you may remember the history from 1990, february in aspen, in july 1990, in july of the following year, in each of these times, mr. gafney had suffered attacks of dvt. and you heard from dr. cohn that once 5732 somebody has suffered from dvt, they are prone to a further attack. dr. burns and dr. cohn could not say whether the previous dvt has ever fully resolved between 1991 and 1995, so it could have even been the same dvt. bottom line, mr. gafney had a history of dvt long before he developed lung cancer and none of the doctors said that his earlier history of dvt was caused by cancer or was caused by smoking. there was some question as to how mr. gafney was treated for his dvt and pulmonary emboli in 1995, and the medical records that could settle the issue just are not available. dr. cohn testified that he treated mr. gafney with blood thinner. i asked him specifically and he said yes. both mrs. gafney and dr. burns said that pulmonary embolism was the immediate cause of his death, a pulmonary embolism as a result of a dvt in his leg. so you may find that the plaintiff has not met her burden that mr. gafney's lung cancer, as opposed to an unrelated dvt, was the actual cause of his 5733 death. so those are the three parts of question 1. and i submit to you that the answer to all three parts is no. but if you find that any part of that is answered no, then the answer to that question 1 is no. question 1, the plaintiff must prove that without an addiction, mr. gafney would have been able to quit and avoid his lung cancer, that an addiction took away his control and prevented him from quitting. and how could the plaintiff prove that here when her own witnesses admit that an addiction did not prevent mr. gafney from quitting and where she admitted that he always had the determination, the character to quit. so let us move -- so the answer to question 1 is no. and if you answer that no, then you are done with the form. just fill it, date it, sign it, and you are done. if you answer yes to question 1, then you go to question 2. so let us take a look at question 2. was smoking cigarettes manufactured by one or both defendants a legal cause of frank gafney's lung cancer and death? 5734 now, i do not think you are going to get to the remaining questions on the form, but i have to -- mr. sales: excuse me, counsel's personal opinion, your honor, i object. the court: sustained. mr. maguire: and the answer to each of the remaining questions on the form as we will go through should also be no because nothing -- anything that the defendant said or did was the legal cause of mr. gafney's lung cancer or death. this next question, question 2, asks you to determine whether smoking cigarettes made by lorillard or r.j.r. was a legal cause of frank gafney's lung cancer and death. and once again, the issue is legal cause. why did mr. gafney get lung cancer? and as we discussed, it was mr. gafney's decision to go back to smoking and to smoke and to continue to smoke every day, that was the cause of his injury. mr. gafney started smoking with his friends. he bought single cigarettes. he bought whatever was available. he never picked 5735 up a lorillard product in his life until 1959. at that time mr. gafney was 23 years old. he was married, he was going to law school, all that by the time he smoked his first lorillard cigarette. and this question asks you to find whether smoking lorillard or r.j.r. cigarettes was a legal cause of mr. gafney's death. the question is not did the defendants make the cigarettes. we all know that. no dispute about that. the question again is legal cause. and again, mr. gafney was in control, he made his decisions, he could have made different decisions. smoking was his personal choice. there is no dispute that the cigarettes that r.j.r. and lorillard made were a legal product. r.j.r. and lorillard's decision to make a legal product did not cause mr. gafney's lung cancer and death. it was up to mr. gafney to make the choice, to choose to smoke a legal product or not to. mr. gafney knew there were risks but he enjoyed smoking and he decided -- until he quit in 1995, he made clear to everyone that he 5736 wanted to smoke and that was his decision. so once again, answering number 2, the legal cause of mr. gafney's lung cancer and death was his decision to smoke and not to quit until 1995. so in filling out question 2, again, the answer should be no. if we go to question 3. this asks you to state the percentage of any fault that was the legal cause of frank gafney's lung cancer and death that you charge to each of r.j.r., lorillard and frank gafney. now, this question is not asking you to compare mr. gafney's conduct to the conduct of lorillard or r.j.r. reynolds. this assignment applies only to the conduct that was a legal cause, back to that again, a legal cause of mr. gafney's lung cancer and death. if you get to the percentage question, you should put one hundred percent to mr. gafney's name. and here is why. the plaintiff has admitted that mr. gafney has fault. the plaintiff has admitted fault here, has admitted that mr. gafney is a legal cause, was a legal cause of his own lung cancer and death. 5737 let us just think about what that means, the fact that the plaintiff admits mr. gafney was at fault. mr. sales: excuse me, your honor. misstates the instruction and plaintiff's admission. the court: okay, mr. maguire. i will listen to your explanation and if there is an objection, you can restate it, mr. sales. mr. maguire: thank you, your honor. when you think about that, you cannot be at fault if you did not have any information. how could you be blamed for something you did not know? and you certainly cannot be at fault if you did not have any control. how could you be at fault for something that was outside your control? mr. gafney has fault, that is admitted. the reason he has fault is because he did know. of course he knew. he knew the risks. and this was in his control. of course it was within his control. he showed to all of us he had the ability to stop smoking. so mr. gafney knew the risks, he was able to stop, and he made the decision, nonetheless, 5738 to smoke and to keep smoking. and that is why mr. gafney is at fault. let us talk a little bit about the evidence that you heard on those subjects, specifically about how mr. gafney knew that smoking was dangerous. well, he was warned many times. he heard -- we talked a little bit about the passing of his father just around his 18th birthday. mrs. gafney testified about that. she told him -- she told us that the very first time she met mr. gafney, he described to her how he had just lost his father. and he told her how he was worried about his own health. he was worried about his health because he, mr. gafney, was smoking. and the reason was because his father had died just recently. why do not we look at that testimony from the plaintiff's deposition you saw this morning at 125, lines 11 through 22. (a videoclip was played and transcribed as follows:). "question: did your husband ever express to you that he was worried about his health because he 5739 was smoking? "answer: yes. "question: and what would he say? "answer: he knew his father had died when he was 54, he was overweight and he was a smokeaholic, he smoked all the time. "question: and do you recall the first time that your husband expressed his concerns to you about his health because he was smoking? "answer: the first time he ever mentioned was when i first met him. his father had just died." (thereupon, the video ended.) mr. maguire: eighteen years of age, mr. gafney had the most personal warning any of us could have about the dangers of smoking. in the late 1950s when his wife -- future wife was in nursing school and working as a surgical nurse, she told him, she brought him pictures of the cancerous lungs. later in their marriage they discussed the surgeon general's report. in 1966, the warnings came out. let us take a quick look at those warnings that started in 1966. this is the first ones, the first four years. 5740 then in 1970, they changed, from 1970 to 1985. and then you may remember starting in 1985 there were four different rotating warnings. mrs. gafney described, told you how she and her husband discussed the warnings on the surgeon general's -- surgeon general's warnings on the packs. in 1967 or 1968, mr. gafney's stepfather, stuart newkirk, was diagnosed with severe emphysema. mrs. gafney told you how he was very vocal about that, telling mr. gafney do not let this happen to you, i do not want to leave you my breathing machine. and she testified how at that point mr. gafney acknowledged to her, admitted, that she was right with everything she said about the dangers of smoking and that he understood it was bad for his health. that was in 1967 or 1968. let us look at mrs. gafney's testimony on that subject from her deposition at page 146, lines 6 through 20. (a videoclip was played and transcribed as follows:) "question: so when his stepfather was 5741 diagnosed with emphysema, that is when your husband admitted to you that he was aware of the health risks of smoking? "answer: yes. "question: and finally recognized to you that he had been right all those years? "answer: right. "question: correct? "answer: correct. "question: and so that the point he understood that the surgeon general warnings were not just garbage, that they were truthful? "answer: i think he knew before that. he just did not want to talk about it. (thereupon, the video ended.) mr. maguire: and, of course, he had known before that because he had known since he was 18 when he met mrs. gafney and told her at that point and told her in 1954 that he knew about the dangers of smoking. mr. gafney had friends who were doctors. dr. calinan, almost every time he saw him with a cigarette in his mouth, warned him, what are you doing smoking? your father had a heart attack. 5742 and from around the time that the gafneys' kids were around ten years of age, mr. and mrs. gafney told their children not to smoke because it was dangerous and because it was addictive. when mr. gafney caught his daughter mary kay smoking in high school in the late 1970s, he told her she knew better, it is dangerous, that it is addictive. these are all warnings that mr. gafney got and that he personally gave to his own daughter. we use warnings for a reason. you may remember the public service announcement from the american cancer society that you saw a little earlier in the trial. if we can play that. (a videoclip was played and transcribed as follows:) (sound of sirens.) (sound of crying infant.) (sound of automobile horn.) (sound of buzzers.) announcer: we receive many warnings in our life and sometimes they can save our life. (sound of fire siren and bells.) 5743 (sound of whistles.) (sound of a boat whistle.) (sound of a man coughing.) announcer: this message is brought to you by the american cancer society. (thereupon, the video ended.) mr. maguire: with all of the warnings, the very personal warnings that mr. gafney got, he absolutely knew the risks. he knew the dangers and so mrs. gafney acknowledged that at her deposition. let us show that at page 132 of her deposition, lines 21 to 133, line 9. (a videoclip was played and transcribed as follows:) "question: you told us that he told you innumerable times that he did not want to quit. i'm trying to understand what you mean by "innumerable." how much is that? "answer: three, four, five times a year when the subject would come up and we would get in a serious discussion of it. "question: and the serious discussions that you had three, four, five times a year would also include the discussion about he should quit, it 5744 was not good for his health? "answer: that is right. "question: and he understood that it was not good for his health? "answer: absolutely." (thereupon, the video ended.) mr. maguire: so mr. gafney absolutely understood the risks, that it was not good for his health. of course, mr. gafney did not know that it would happen to him, but he certainly knew that there was a risk and he knew that he was taking that risk. with all of these warnings, mrs. gafney could not possibly carry her burden of proof. but you may remember there was some inconsistent testimony where she was asked when mr. gafney was aware of the dangers of smoking. and mrs. gafney testified: "question: okay. at some point you believe mr. gafney absolutely understood that smoking was not good for his health? and after the question was repeated she said, "yes, in 1995." well, of course he knew in 1995. but 5745 remember, mrs. gafney also testified that he knew much earlier than that. when his stepfather, stuart, was diagnosed with emphysema, and we all know that was back in 1967 or 1968, that was when mr. gafney admitted that he was aware of the health risks of smoking. and that is when he finally recognized that she had been right. all those years. and mrs. gafney said correct. and at that point he understood that the surgeon general warnings were not just garbage, that they were truthful and mrs. gafney said, "i think he knew before that, he just did not want to talk about it." and, of course, he did know before that. he knew certainly from his 18th birthday. then you may remember the testimony we just saw where mrs. gafney talked about the innumerable times that mr. gafney said he did not want to quit. she said it was three, four, five times a year. this was not just in 1995. this was throughout their marriage, throughout their relationship when these serious discussions would occur three, four, five times a year, there would be serious 5746 discussions. and when they happened, they would also include the discussion about he should quit. it was not good for his health. that is right. and he understood that it was not good for his health. mrs. gafney confirmed, absolutely. so mrs. gafney's testimony is clear that mr. gafney absolutely understood that smoking was not good for his health and he understood that throughout their marriage. now, mr. gafney knew that cigarettes were dangerous. he knew that cigarettes were addictive and he knew he had the ability to quit because he had stopped smoking himself for an entire year. he made the informed decision to go back to smoking after that and every day that he made the decision after that to continue smoking, that was his decision. we mentioned how quitting smoking greatly reduces risks. that is called declining risk, and a number of the witnesses here testified about it. you heard from dr. burns that if mr. gafney had quit smoking permanently in 1985 when he was 49 years of age, he would have reduced his risk of lung cancer by 63 percent. 5747 if he had quit smoking in 1983, i think you heard this from mr. gustafson too, according to dr. burns, he would have reduced his risk by 73 percent. if mr. gafney had quit smoking as late as the mid-1980s, he would have avoided most of his excess risk of lung cancer. dr. burns testified that if mr. gafney had stopped in 1959 when he first met mrs. gafney, told her about the cancerous lungs -- i'm sorry, in 1954, or in 1964 when the surgeon general report came out, his risk of lung cancer would have been essentially the same as the risk of someone who had never smoked. mr. gafney could have quit in 1966 when the warnings went on the packs or in 1967 or '68 when his stepfather, stuart, urged him to quit. or simply at that time in the 1970s when he already stopped for a year, instead of going back on to the cigarettes again. he if he had taken any of those opportunities to quit, he would have greatly reduced the risk and avoided his lung cancer. we would not be here. but mr. gafney never tried to quit in all of those times. he chose to stop a couple of 5748 times, for some particular reason, unrelated to his health, but he never wanted to quit and he never tried to quit. and that was his choice. and that is why i say, you should put "one hundred percent" next to mr. gafney's name when you fill out that question 3 on the verdict form. before i move away from that, let me also just point out to you that those percentages there apply to the first couple of questions on the verdict form, but there are more questions on the verdict form, including the next couple of questions that i'm going to move on to, which are questions 4 and 5 and question 6. and there is an instruction on your verdict form i'll put up here. if i can move over to the elmo. mr. philipson: i'm sorry. mr. maguire: so we have not gotten to question 6 yet, but i just want to point out to you on the bottom of question 6, you will see an instruction that says -- it is in italics and it says, "in determining the total amount of damages, you should not make any reduction because of the responsibility you charge to 5749 frank gafney. the court will enter a judgment based on your verdict and will reduce the total amount of damages by the percentage of responsibility which you charge to frank gafney in accordance with the requirements of the law." i want to emphasize the next sentence, and you will see that i just highlighted it on my copy. "however, there will be no such reduction if you answered yes to either question 4 or question 5. that is why i'm going to spend some time with you on question 4 and question 5. because if you answer yes to question 4 or question 5, even if you put 99 percent of responsibility on mr. gafney and only 1 percent responsibility on the defendants, if you answer yes to those questions, one hundred percent goes to the defendants. that is why question 4, question 5 are particularly important. thank you. that is why you heard weeks of testimony and evidence in this case that had nothing to do with mr. gafney. and that is why it is so 5750 important that when you get to those later questions, the answers to questions 4 and question 5, the answer is no. so for question 3, you should put one hundred percent next to mr. gafney's name. and then we should go to the next question. before i do, let me just say one other thing. you heard a little bit from plaintiff about concurrent or intervening cause and you have instructions on that. and you can see from your instructions that concurrent cause, intervening cause use the same word as legal cause. "an addiction must contribute substantially to producing lung cancer and death." so there is no concurrent or intervening cause here because mr. gafney, again, was able to quit and it was his personal choice not to quit. so let us put up questions -- question 4, "did frank gafney reasonably rely to his detriment on any statement of material fact made by each defendant after may 5, 1982 that intentionally omitted material information concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes and if so, was 5751 such reliance a legal cause of mr. gafney's lung cancer and death?" and question 5: did frank gafney reasonably rely to his detriment on any statement of material fact made by defendants or other tobacco companies after may 5, 1982 in furtherance of the agreement to intentionally omit material information concerns the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes; and, if so, was such reliance a legal cause of mr. gafney's lung cancer and death? so, there is some multiple parts to these questions. so let us just break it down a little bit. one part is the date, 1982. and that is an important date. and you see that in your instructions, may 5 of 1982. if you determine that the plaintiff has proved -- has failed to prove that there is any statement that mr. gafney could reasonably have relied on after may 5, 1982, then the answer to this question is no. and second point is any reliance must be reasonable. and the answer to that question again is no. 5752 how could mr. gafney have reasonably relied on any statement if he already knew that smoking was dangerous and addictive? and he knew that before 1982. so let us start with the statement. let us start with the date. the instruction: in determining whether frank gafney reasonably relied to his detriment on a statement by each defendant that omitted material information, you may not consider evidence of alleged statements, concealment or other conduct that occurred before may 5, 1982. the plaintiff did not produce any evidence of any specific act or statement by lorillard or r.j. reynolds after 1982 that had any impact, any connection to mr. gafney. the plaintiff spent weeks showing you hundreds of ads, internal company documents and videos from the past. there was a lot of talk about advertising and, in particular, youth marketing. a lot of exhibits, documents, material from surgeon general's reports, a lot of that stuff. a bulk of that stuff was from the '50s, the '60s, the '70s, before may 5th of 1982. 5753 a lot of what drs. burns and dr. cummings were talking about -- everything that dr. cummings was talking about had nothing to do with mr. gafney. they talked about ads, articles, internal company documents, and they never applied any of that to mr. gafney. not once did the plaintiff demonstrate that mr. gafney saw or heard a single tobacco company ad, a single internal tobacco document or any of the videos that they showed you. what you were provided with was little clippings from the cleveland plain dealer and the wall street journal and various other newspapers. but there is not one cleveland plain dealer or wall street journal article that the plaintiff has provided to you that even postdates may 5th of 1982. and for the videos and press releases and other materials that the plaintiff has shown that come after may 5, 1982, there is no evidence that mr. gafney ever saw or ever heard any of those. that is talk about a couple of cleveland plain dealer articles that we have seen. one is lor-010157. that is from january 12, 1964. 5754 it is announcing the surgeon general's report. "lung cancer laid to smoking." mr. gafney, anyone subscribing to the cleveland plain dealer that day had it right there. "surgeon general luther terry of the u.s. public health service said, 'i would advise anyone to discontinue smoking cigarettes.'" the plain dealer -- lor-010233, the plain dealer from january 12, 1964, same edition, you saw the cartoon, "the new danger signal." cancer. there was a lorillard statement postdating 1982 that plaintiff provided to you was the testimony of lorillard's ceo during the 1994 waxman hearings, but the plaintiff failed to give you any evidence that mr. gafney ever saw or heard even about that. and it could not -- anything that happened in 1994 could not possibly have influenced mr. gafney to continue smoking, because he did not. it was right after that in january of 1995 that he stopped smoking. he quit. plaintiff showed you ads for kent and true, both of which are lorillard brands. but plaintiff has not provided any evidence that 5755 any of those ads postdate may 5, 1982. in fact, the latest date on any of the ads they showed you was 1976. again, no witness. not even plaintiff testified that mr. gafney ever saw or heard of any of those ads. and all of the ads after may 5, 1982, each and every single ad came with the surgeon general's warnings. let us see those post-1979 warnings, if we have them again. first from '82 to '85, it was a single warning. then from '85 on, they had the rotating warnings. a quick word on true cigarettes. you saw the stipulation about true cigarettes. the parties stipulated that the four brands at issue in this case were lorillard brands, kent, true, and r.j.r. brands camel and lucky strike. but that is the extent of the stipulation. at trial, mrs. gafney told that you her husband smoked true cigarettes for 20 years. you might think that would be something that mrs. gafney would have remembered very clearly if her husband has smoked true cigarettes for 20 years, but before trial, in her interrogatory answers and in her depositions, 5756 mrs. gafney did not say that her husband ever smoked true. in fact, she never mentioned true. so mrs. gafney testified at her deposition that her husband's primary brand was kent from 1959 all the way to 1995. he tried other brands, but kent was his primary brand. nothing else of note. you may have wondered why there were a number of questions for mrs. gafney about how that could be. and it does seem odd if her husband was actually smoking true for 20 years, then why did mrs. gafney say he was smoking kent? in any event, none of this really matters in terms of the burden of proof here because the more important issue is her husband knew, mr. gafney knew the danger and he knew the addictiveness of smoking. so in any event, the answer to that part, the statement of 1982 in both question 4 and question 5 is no. there is no statement. no evidence that mr. gafney ever heard or saw or relied on any lorillard statement after may 5 of 1982. 5757 the second part is reasonable reliance. and even if there was something, how could mr. gafney reasonably have relied on anything that lorillard said, anything that anyone said after may 5 of 1982, if he already knew by that point? he would already known since 1954 about the danger. he would already known by the time stuart newkirk had got his emphysema in 1967 or 1968. and by 1982, how could he possibly be relying on any statement? by 1982, mr. gafney was 46 years of age, a successful lawyer at the very top of his profession. the boss and an owner of industrial advisors bureau, a take-charge guy who had shown the world he could achieve anything he set his mind to. by 1982, mr. gafney absolutely knew the dangers of smoking. mr. gafney also knew that smoking was addictive. in 1979 and 1980, mr. and mrs. gafney talked with their children about the addictiveness of smoking. their daughter, mary kay, started smoking as a teenager. they confronted mary kay and told her that she knew better and that once you start smoking, it is 5758 hard to quit. and mrs. gafney testified specifically that mr. gafney warned mary kay about the addictiveness of smoking right back then, 1979. so mr. gafney clearly knew about the addictive nature of smoking before 1982. mrs. gafney also told you during her testimony that her husband thought filtered cigarettes were safe. but when mr. gafney found out that his daughter mary kay was smoking, he did not tell her it is okay to smoke filtered cigarettes; he told her, you know better. he told her that cigarettes were dangerous and addictive. so from the 1950s to 1982, mr. gafney was surrounded by warnings of risks of smoking. by 1982, he had been a smoker for about 30 years. and every cigarette he smoked for 16 years had a warning on the pack. for over ten years, there had been no advertising for cigarettes on tv or radio, and every print ad had the warning. if mr. gafney had any doubt about those warnings, he only had to ask his wife, a registered nurse, and he admitted to her in 1967 or 1968 that the surgeon general warnings 5759 were right. none of the warnings that he received and none of the warnings on the packs said filters or low-tar cigarettes were safe. his wife kept telling him he needed to quit smoking long after, long after he switched to smoking a filtered cigarette. his stepfather did not say, it is okay as long as you smoke a filtered cigarette. mr. gafney knew better. he knew better. he told his kids they knew better. and every single pack that he bought after 1966 had a warning on the label, whether it was filtered or not. the exact same warning. now, everyone agrees that mr. gafney was a highly intelligent man. this man was no fool. how could mr. gafney have reasonably relied on anything that lorillard said after may 5, 1982 if he already knew that smoking was dangerous and addictive? that is why i say the answer to the second part of question 4, reasonable reliance, is also no. you have been shown a lot of ads. i will not say too much more about ads. some of those ads 5760 were from brands like old gold, which were done 20 or 30 years before mr. gafney ever smoked a lorillard brand cigarette. those ads had nothing to do with why frank gafney chose to smoke 20 or 30 years later. plaintiff also argues that these ads were designed to get kids to smoke. but remember, mr. gafney was 23 years old when he switched to kent cigarettes in 1959. he had graduated from college. he was married and he was in law school when he made the decision to smoke kent cigarettes. he was an adult and making adult decisions. and when lorillard ran its ads, its kent ads in the 1950s, you heard dr. burns admit that the reader's digest was reporting that lorillard's kent cigarettes performed best in independent tests by independent labs, not connected with lorillard. that was in 1957 and again in 1959. that was lor-000528, 1957. you will see kent was at the very lowest for tar and for nicotine. that was in 1957. and 1959 was lor-005298. and this is where lorillard, just in the space of two years, reduced the amount of tar in its kent 5761 cigarettes from just over 30 milligrams to just over 17 milligrams, just more than forty percent, the very amount that dr. wynder, dr. ernst wynder had called for the cigarette companies to do. and lorillard did it. remember that reader's digest was antismoking. it took no advertising from any cigarette company. reader's digest was completely independent. and it found that lorillard's kent had the best filter. that did not make kent cigarettes safe. and reader's digest, of all people, never suggested to anyone that filtered cigarettes or kent cigarettes were safe. it was clear there is no such thing as a safe cigarette. but remember, mr. gafney had been smoking cigarettes with no filter at all, cigarettes that allowed all of the nicotine and all of the tar to go through without anything. he wanted to keep smoking his nonfiltered cigarettes. mrs. gafney admitted she was the impetus for his changing over to filtered cigarettes and she said she knew the lorillard cigarettes he was smoking were not safe and that she told him so. 5762 and you heard mr. riegelsberger's testimony that mrs. gafney would tell mr. gafney that his smoking would kill him. the reader's digest was not the only independent voice that was saying that filters were less hazardous, and that is all it was saying. the public health community recommended filters. they said the best thing you can do is quit altogether. that was the message from the public health community consistently, quit. they said, if you are not going to quit, only if you are not going to quit, then you should smoke the bad cigarettes, and that is how they described filtered cigarettes, not as safe, but as bad. the only reason that "bad" is a compliment is because the other cigarettes, the unfiltered cigarettes, were worse. let us take a look at lor-016200. (a videoclip was played and transcribed as follows:) "the cigarette world is divided into the bad and the worse. this is bad. this is worse. this has twice as much tar and nicotine. there is as much tar and nicotine in 5763 one of these as in two of these. that is quite a difference. as a matter of fact, you can buy as much as 34 milligrams of tar in a cigarette or as little as 2, as much as 2.1 milligrams of nicotine or as little as 0.2. with 130 different cigarettes on the market, you can certainly find one with a lot less tar and nicotine than the one you are smoking. not a good cigarette, just one that is not as bad. the public health service has a free tar and nicotine list that shows them all. send for it. look them up. if you must smoke, at least bad is better than worse." (thereupon, the video ended.) mr. maguire: the public health community made very clear there was no safe cigarette, only a choice between the bad and the worse. what lorillard did was what dr. wynder and the public health community was asking them to do, design filters and make other changes to reduce the amount of tar and nicotine in cigarettes. the public health community made clear, though, that these cigarettes were not safe. they were just a step in the right direction. 5764 you have heard about the key scientists and public health researchers who studied the risks of smoking. one of the great scientists was dr. hoffmann. he was quoted in the banbury report recognizing the work the tobacco companies were doing. he said, "i do think the tobacco industry, voluntary or not, adjusts very well to the demands of the logical reasoning of the scientific community." public health community had an enormous impact on the marketplace and an enormous impact on lorillard and the other companies. dr. hoffmann recognized that the cigarette companies were doing what the scientists in the public health community wanted, make better filters and lower-tar cigarettes. remember what you heard about dr. ernst wynder. everyone you heard from in this case agrees that dr. wynder was a giant in the public health community. he was a great man. dr. burns told you that dr. wynder was a giant in smoking and health research. a scientist who discovered that if you paint tobacco tar on the back of mice, it causes cancer where you paint the tar. his 5765 mouse-painting experiments were so famous that they were in a huge spread in life magazine. and in 1957, dr. wynder said if you reduce the amount of tar in cigarettes by forty percent, that would be a good thing. and that is exactly what lorillard did and what reader's digest reported in 1959. you heard that the public health community was recommending filters. again, nobody was saying that filtered cigarettes were safe. they were simply saying that bad was better than worse. let me talk just a little bit about addictiveness and nicotine, because you have heard a suggestion that there was some controversy, some dispute about the addictiveness of nicotine and that lorillard and r.j. reynolds lied or denied that smoking could be hard to quit. absolutely not. no way. now, how could they? everybody has known forever, for a hundred years, that smoking can be hard to quit. let us take a look at those florida health notes, lor-015444. you saw these earlier. 5766 this is from the state board of florida, back in 1906. "today the cigarette is looked upon by all smokers as the very worst form of tobacco addiction." that is 25 years before mr. gafney was born. everyone knew. plaintiff claims that mr. gafney smoked his first cigarette in 1950. three years before that was the tex williams song which you saw, "smoke, smoke, smoke," talking about nicotine slaves. it was so well known that smoking could be tough to quit. that was not the debate. that was never the debate. the only debate, the only question was what word do you put out. do you use the word, the label "addictive" or do you use the word "habit"? is smoking a habit or is it an addiction? and people have used different definitions over the years. that is all. if you go to 1964, the surgeon general looked at this issue and he asked the question: is smoking addictive? and he gave an answer. and the answer was no. he said smoking is not addictive. and he said so for a pretty clear reason. in order to 5767 be addictive, he said it has to be intoxicating. smoking cigarettes does not intoxicate you and, therefore, smoking is a habit. it is not addictive. does that mean it is easy to quit? of course, not. and the surgeon general was very clear, smoking is difficult to quit. it is difficult to stop. he just said, you do not use the word "addiction" because that is not the proper use of the word. the word "addiction" includes intoxicated. a couple decades later, 24 years later, the surgeon general changed his mind. and he said, yes, it is addictive. had smoking changed in that time? no, it was exactly the same. it was just as difficult to quit. but he changed and says it is addictive because the definition changed. and instead of just calling it a habit, he said now you can call it addictive even if it is not intoxicating. so that is all that was going on. there was just a change in the verbiage. but that did not mean that smoking had become easier or more difficult to stop. it was difficult to stop and everybody knew it was addictive. everybody knew it was difficult to stop. 5768 when the surgeon general changed his mind and took a different definition, not everybody agreed with that change and it took cigarette companies another number of years to catch up and use the same terminology and say that cigarette smoking was addictive. but there is no evidence that the cigarette companies were saying to anybody or that lorillard was saying to anybody it is easy to quit or that smoking is not difficult for people to quit or that people can always stop their smoking without any difficulty or anything of that kind, whatever. as you saw from the state of florida health notes, that has been known for over a hundred years. now, in questions 4 and 5, the plaintiff must prove to you that frank gafney reasonably relied to his detriment on a statement of material fact after may of 1982 that intentionally omitted material information about the health effects or addictive nature of smoking. mr. sales: excuse me, your honor. the word "intentionally" is not in that 5769 instruction. i object. mr. maguire: i'll rephrase, your honor. the court: thank you, mr. maguire. mr. maguire: when you step back and look at questions 4 and 5, plaintiff has not met her burden. plaintiff has shown you no statement that lorillard makes since 1982 that caused mr. gafney to continue smoking. and finally, from 1982, no one was denying that smoking could be hard to quit. as i say, that had been known for 100 years. for all of those reasons, the answer to questions 4 and 5 is no. now, there is one additional feature to question 5, and that is the question about the agreement between the tobacco companies. and there is a phrase there which talks about agreement. let me just finish with question 5 here. in furtherance of the agreement to intentionally omit -- i'm sorry, it should be in furtherance of the agreement to omit the material information. what does that mean? we talked about the agreement. did an agreement have any impact on 5770 frank gafney when you think about it? how could it? the evidence here is that mr. gafney smoked because he wanted to smoke, not because of any agreement. there was not any agreement that you heard about that prevented mr. gafney from marrying the daughter of sledgehammer mike blackwell, a registered nurse who warned him all his life about smoking. and there was not any agreement that -- no agreement here to prevent mr. gafney from telling his future wife when he is 18 that his father had died from smoking. any agreement here did not prevent his stepfather from warning mr. gafney about the dangers of smoking. and any agreement did not stop the surgeon general from putting the warnings on the packs. all these things happened. any agreement had no impact whatever on mr. gafney of stopping any of these things, all those things happened, and all those things told an informed mr. gafney so that he knew, he absolutely knew the dangers and the addictiveness of smoking. and he absolutely had the ability to stop that 5771 smoking when he chose to do so. mr. gafney made up his own mind. he did not let anyone make decisions for him. not his wife. not his children. nor his friends, several of whom were doctors. not the surgeon general. not the public health authorities. and certainly not any agreement among companies, most of which you may not have heard of. he did what he wanted to do. so how can any agreement have any impact on mr. gafney when he already knew? let me move to question 6. again, the response to question 5 is no. question 6 then is, what is the total amount from one hundred percent of any damages sustained by plaintiff, kathleen gafney, for the loss of frank gafney's companionship and protection and for her pain and suffering as a result of frank gafney's injury and death? your instructions tell you that any damages must be fair and just in light of the evidence, not be based on speculation or sympathy. they have to be proven to you. obviously, it is very tragic what happened to mr. gafney. his illness and his death and 5772 the loss of a spouse is obviously a tragedy in mrs. gafney's family. but to mrs. gafney's credit, she did move on with her life. and she was lucky enough to be able to do so and to continue to enjoy her life and her family. in 1997, she began dating mr. hanners. she married him in 1999. they were married for almost ten years. while they are no longer married, during those ten years, mrs. gafney told you that she had a lot of fun. you have seen some photographs of her and mr. hanners. here is one. she and mr. hanners had a lot in common. they enjoyed boating and traveling together. he helped her around the house. her children accepted him as part of the family. even after she and mr. hanners had broken up, she told you that she would have gone to counseling to save the marriage, if she could have. at the time, for those 11 or 12 years, from 1997 to 2008, that was a relationship that was important to her. and mrs. gafney has been able to move on with her life again. she continues to spend time with her children, her grandchildren, her 5773 close friends, and her dogs. she enjoys her activities, her home, and her garden. she travels with her family and friends and she describes herself as satisfied and content. considering all of the evidence here, you heard that mr. gafney was retired. there was no claim for lost earnings or any expense of any kind. if you were to award any damages to mrs. gafney, i would suggest a number in the hundreds of thousands of dollars would be more appropriate than the millions and millions of dollars that you heard about from plaintiff's counsel. but based on the evidence that you have heard, on all of the evidence that you have heard, we submit that the appropriate award of damages would be zero in this case. now, let me turn to question 7. and that is concerning punitive damages. "please state as to each defendant below for which you answered yes to question 4 or 5 whether you find, by clear and convincing evidence, that punitive damages are warranted against that defendant under the circumstances of this case." 5774 this is the final question. and you will have to decide whether additional money damages should be awarded to mrs. gafney on top of fully compensating mrs. gafney for her claim. question 6 talks about full compensation. question 7 is additional damages on top of that. you will see on the verdict form that punitive damages can be awarded only for concealment or agreement to conceal that was a legal cause of mr. gafney's death, and that means if you answered no to question 4 or 5, you never get to punitive damages. it says that on your verdict form. you are also instructed that the engle findings we have talked about throughout this trial do not establish that mrs. gafney is entitled to punitive damages. a finding of punitive damages has to be based on conduct linking concealment and an agreement to conceal to mr. gafney's death. mr. sales: excuse me, your honor. i object. that is an incorrect statement of the law applicable to this case and the court's instructions. 5775 court: again, ladies and gentlemen, you will have your instructions with you in the jury room and you should rely on those instructions. thank you. mr. maguire: punitive damages are an extraordinary award. they are not automatic. they have to be proved. they have to be related to mr. gafney, not to other smokers. mr. sales: i object. that is contrary to the law as previously argued before closing arguments. the court: sustained, mr. maguire. mr. maguire: as you can see from the instructions, the burden is much higher for punitive damages than it is for any other question in this case. as you can imagine, to get damages that are over and above full compensation, to get more than that is an extraordinarily high burden. it is different from the burden of proof for compensatory damages. the plaintiff has to prove punitive damages to you by clear and convincing evidence. evidence that is precise, lacking in confusion, and of such weigh that it produces a firm belief for conviction without hesitation. 5776 if you have doubts, the answer has to be no. for this question, the plaintiff has to prove to you that lorillard and r.j. reynolds acted with conscious indifference and with reckless disregard and punitive damages can only be awarded for conduct that caused mr. gafney's lung cancer and death and not based on the fact that the defendants made cigarettes or for the acts of defendants that did not cause mr. gafney's lung cancer or death. bottom line, there is no conscious indifference or reckless disregard here and no reason to punish lorillard or to deter bad conduct. in fact, the evidence you heard shows that lorillard had every business reason to work with dr. wynder and the public health community in doing what it could to make cigarettes less harmful. you heard the testimony from dr. burns about how lorillard worked with dr. wynder, supported his groundbreaking research. you saw that lorillard gave its products to dr. wynder for its research earlier today. you saw a letter sending 35,000 cigarettes to 5777 dr. wynder's lab. lorillard helped dr. wynder with a whole process of getting tar from cigarette smoke. a complicated process called fractionation. breaking up smoke to identify the different components. lorillard helped dr. wynder with that important research. lorillard did exactly what dr. wynder and the public health community was asking for. dr. wynder told the cigarette companies, get improved filters that reduce the amount of tar by forty percent. starting in the 1950s, lorillard worked with dr. wynder on how to reduce phenols in cigarette smoke. dr. spears, one of lorillard's top scientist, helped dr. wynder develop a way to analyze the amount of phenols in cigarette smoke. phenols were a suspected form of cancer. you may remember dr. burns describing how they interfered with the cilia in the lung, those little things that go swishing back and forth. dr. wynder was investigating phenol as a cause of cancer. lorillard shared its research on phenols with dr. wynder. lorillard published its phenol research and lorillard came up with a 5778 filter to reduce the phenols in cigarette smoke. lorillard supported dr. wynder's outstanding research at the sloan-kettering cancer institute and at the american health foundation and with lorillard's help, dr. wynder and his science transformed the way we think of smoking and health today. that is not reckless disregard. that is not conscious indifference. it was working with one of the preeminent cancer researchers and investigators of all time. when lorillard cooperated with dr. wynder, there was no law that required it to do so. there was no law that said lorillard had to give its products or its money or its science or its technology or its research to help dr. wynder's investigations into smoking and cancer. lorillard did that voluntarily. and beyond that, lorillard shared its research on phenols with the surgeon general. lorillard helped the surgeon general and the surgeon general thanked lorillard. that is not reckless disregard. you heard dr. burns admit to me that there 5779 were many studies, some 50 scientific studies finding that filtered or low-tar cigarettes reduce risk. independent scientists not connected in any way with any cigarette company. science that in 1997, dr. burns accepted as proving beyond a reasonable doubt that filters reduce risk. well, lorillard followed that science, that independent science. and lorillard did the very research that the public health community asked it to do to try and reduce the danger of smoking. researching nicotine. that was an attempt by lorillard to make a less hazardous cigarette. you heard from dr. cummings on cross-examination that trying to lower the level of tar while maintaining the level of nicotine, that was not lorillard's idea. that came from dr. russell and the public health community. back in the 1970s, scientists at the national cancer institute, the federal government national cancer institute were asking cigarette companies, including lorillard, to do that exact research. the 5780 objective of the government, the national cancer institute's tobacco working group was to see if it was possible to develop a less hazardous cigarette and that is what lorillard tried to do. the national cancer institute did research. it looked at filters. they looked at reconstituted tobacco. they looked at paper porosity. they looked at ventilation holes. this is, again, the federal government. national cancer institute. they were going for ten years. they looked at nicotine manipulation. higher nicotine to tar. again, if you lower the tar, keep the nicotine higher, they break that relationship so you can give the smoker the nicotine without the tar, that was what they were trying to do to find a cigarette that would be acceptable to people who would not quit. so if people would actually use it, it would be commercially acceptable, and they would be able to get the nicotine without the tar. and you heard dr. cummings admit it made sense, it made sense to give smokers the nicotine without the tar. that is what the 5781 federal government, the national cancer institute was looking at. higher nicotine to tar ratio, a relationship, you heard dr. cummings talk about that, high nicotine tobacco, freebase nicotine, all this in the minutes of the national cancer institute. they looked at the ph, they looked at additives. we can look very briefly at national cancer institute, november 7, 1976. lor-000647. cigarette variant should manipulate filters, paper, tobacco blend, additives, specific smoke components, and flavor additives. design considerations should include nicotine manipulations. that is not lorillard, that is the federal government. let us look at lor-000642. national cancer institute, may 5, 1976. nicotine may play a significant role as a determinant of smoking behavior. suitable quantities of the removed nicotine are added back to a modified tobacco sheet. nicotine has the greatest pharmacologic activity when it is in the freebase form. the base form is also the distillable form, which readily transfers 5782 to cigarette smoke. a lot of science. a lot of research by the federal government, the department of agriculture, the health departments. people from washington, d.c., government scientists, independent scientists, dr. wynder, dr. hoffmann, all working to try to find a less hazardous cigarette by looking at all the different components to see whether there is something that makes sense. dr. russell, from the united kingdom, was one of the world's leading nicotine researchers and he was the one who subjected maintaining the higher nicotine yields while lowering the tar as a way of producing an acceptable and less hazardous cigarette, because nicotine does not cause disease. it is the tar that causes the disease. and that idea was picked up in 1976 by consumer reports, and we can see that at lor-000640. consumer reports, medium nicotine, low tar, that is exactly the same idea. breaking the ratio, the relationship, so the nicotine stays in a higher relationship to the tar could 5783 produce significant health benefits. such research should begin as soon as possible. that was the message from the public health community. let us do this research into nicotine. and you heard from dr. cummings that at the time, lorillard had not done that research. lorillard did not have the technology. they had to do a new program. so lorillard set up a new program. nicotine augmentation program to see if they could make a commercially acceptable cigarette in response to the recommendations, the pressure from the public health community. so what lorillard was doing was exactly what the national cancer institute and the public health community had been suggesting, come up with a cigarette that has lower tar, but enough nicotine that it could be a less hazardous alternative to the full-flavored cigarettes with the higher nicotine and higher tar to people who were already smoking. if we take a look a lor-000641, minnemeyer memo, we see that memo which starts that program. recommendations from health-oriented agencies. well, that is the national cancer 5784 institute and that is dr. wynder and dr. hoffmann and dr. russell and the independent scientists who were saying this might be a good idea. why do not you do it? lorillard is simply responding to pressure to put resources, research into nicotine to see if there was a way in which a less hazardous cigarette could be designed. responding to public health agencies from health-oriented agencies and the federal government's national cancer institute is not conscious disregard. it is not reckless disregard. it is not conscious indifference. the government and the public health scientists knew that nicotine was important. in fact, they said if nicotine in a cigarette was too low, no one would smoke the cigarette. let us look at lor-000681. and this is dr. russell. he said, in 1980, in the banbury report, "it is technically possible to produce a cigarette that will smoke and burn but deliver little more than warm air in the mainstream. but obviously no one would smoke it. this is the problem with the current low-tar, low-nicotine approach. inevitably 5785 there comes a point where acceptability is so low that a cigarette, though less hazardous, is useless. only non-inhalers would be likely to smoke it, and it makes little difference what they smoke." lorillard thought that dr. russell and the other government and public health scientists might be right. and you have seen that in a -- pt02056, an exhibit from a lorillard document from 1980, same year as dr. russell's statement in the banbury report. "we hypothesize that below some very low nicotine level, diminished physiological satisfaction cannot be compensated for by psychological satisfaction. at this point, smokers will quit or return to higher tar and nicotine brands." it is useless to produce a less hazardous cigarette if nobody is going to use it, if they are just going to go back to smoking the higher tar and nicotine brands. so lorillard followed the public health community and all the various improvement that lorillard made over the years. does any of that involve adding any more nicotine than is already in the tobacco leaf? no. 5786 remember dr. cummings admitted that he was not contending that lorillard added more nicotine back than was there originally. he said that. now, dr. cummings and dr. burns are not against reducing tar in cigarettes. actually, they think that is a good thing. they criticize filters. and dr. burns says the public health community changed its mind about low-tar cigarettes, and he says low tar cigarettes do not work. some smokers, he says, compensate. they find a way to smoke more cigarettes or to suck more nicotine out of the cigarettes to get the same amount of nicotine as before. but that issue has nothing to do with mr. gafney. there is no evidence that mr. gafney smoked any more or smoked any differently when he smoked a filtered cigarette or a low-tar cigarette. in fact, mrs. gafney testified that she was not aware of any change in his rate of smoking before and after he switched to kent in 1959. and she said when he retired, mr. gafney reduced his smoking because he no longer had the stress of running his company. so his 5787 smoking was more related to stress, not to compensation. and the witnesses you heard from go too far when they suggest that there was a compensation, a compensation was any kind of secret. there was no secret. in fact, lorillard talked about compensation more than a dozen years before, back in 1963 when lorillard made its admissions to the surgeon general. that was lor-000561. lorillard expressly said, "any reduction in tar content of the smoke is accomplished only if the consumer does not smoke more than formerly." no secret. lorillard is telling that to the surgeon general. and how could compensation be a secret when it is published in the consumer reports? let us take a look at lor-000640. consumer reports says, "there are also other ways to compensate" -- they even use the word -- "for a drop in nicotine yield by drawing the smoke deeper into the lungs, for example, or by holding it there longer before exhaling." it is common sense. that is in 1976. so compensation was no secret. it was 5788 written up by consumer reports. a very brief word on youth marketing. you heard a lot of that throughout the course of the trial, but i just ask you to remember, in 1959, when mr. gafney started to smoke lorillard's kents cigarettes, he was in his 20s. he was an adult. and while we are on the subject, also, you did hear that lorillard did not place its products in motion pictures. you remember you heard from dr. cummings that lorillard had a policy of telling movie producers that lorillard would not do that. that lorillard would tell movie producers, we do not want our product in your movies, in any movies. that is not reckless disregard. that is not conscious indifference. what company would refuse a movie producer who says, we want to put your product in our movie? well, lorillard did. and that was not the law. that was not required. there was no law at the time in the 1970s and 1980s and afterwards, there was no law that said lorillard had to do that. that was something that lorillard did because lorillard wanted to 5789 do it. that is not conscious disregard. that is not reckless indifference. punitive damages. punitive damages simply are not needed to prevent the folks from lorillard from concealing the dangers of smoking. you heard they are on the website. lorillard does not dispute the dangers of smoking. and let us not forget, there is no conduct by lorillard that was a legal cause of mr. gafney's lung cancer and death, because mr. gafney knew his smoking was dangerous, he knew it was tough to quit, and he was able to quit any time before he ultimately did in january of 1995. if there is one thing that is clear and convincing in this case, it is that mr. gafney was able to stop smoking when he was motivated to stop smoking. so the answer to question 7 is no. the court: mr. maguire, you have five minutes remaining. mr. maguire: thank you, your honor. so the bottom line, question 1, the class membership question, the gateway question, you 5790 do not answer any question until you answer that question first, the answer to that question and every other question is no. this case comes down to, quite simply, to mr. gafney's control. mr. gafney and his control of his smoking decisions during his life. his choice to smoke a legal product, his choice as an adult in a free country to start smoking after being smoke-free for one entire year in the 1970s and his choice every day after that to continue smoking and not to try to quit. and his responsibility for his decisions that were within his control. ladies and gentlemen, thank you for your attention and for your patience. after the defendants finish closing arguments, the plaintiff will do a rebuttal. under the rules, i do not get to talk to you again. after mr. bassett sits down and he is finished, he will not get a chance to talk to you again. we will not have an opportunity to come up to talk to you about anything that we hear from plaintiff on rebuttal. this is my last word to you. so i ask you if you hear anything in 5791 rebuttal that is new to you, which i've not had a chance to talk about, you might just think to yourself, what would the defendant say if they had a chance to respond to that? what is the other side of the story? and remember when you retire to the jury room, you can ask for any evidence that you were shown or told about. and thank you so much again for all of your attention in this case. thank you. closing argument mr. bassett: may it please the court? the court: yes, sir. mr. bassett: counsel, mrs. gafney. good morning, ladies and gentlemen. i'm going to start kind of where i left off when i got to speak on the opening statement and give that on behalf of reynolds, and that is that you are going to hear less of me than you heard from counsel yesterday, both for plaintiff and for lorillard. my issues i want to address are going to be the issues concerning reynolds, and in this case, involving frank gafney. i agree with what mr. maguire said and talked about the evidence yesterday, but for my purposes, rather than repeat what mr. maguire said, i want to focus your attention on some of the reynolds specific issues and the plaintiff's claims and how they relate to r.j. reynolds. and what i want to do is walk 5825 you through kind of the facts, the evidence, and then the questions that you are going to be asked to answer as they relate to r.j. reynolds. all right? so, of course, first, let me say this. the evidence here shows that plaintiff has failed to meet her burden of proof as to her claims against r.j. reynolds. and remember, we talked about that at the beginning of the trial, that on every claim plaintiff has brought, she bears the burden of proof. she has to prove with evidence that she is entitled to recover under her claims. and when it comes to the claims against r.j. reynolds, there are really only four facts from the evidence you need to know to answer the questions. first, reynolds did not cause mr. gafney to become a smoker. second, smoking reynolds' cigarettes up to 1959 did not cause mr. gafney's lung cancer and death. third, mr. gafney knew the risks of smoking for 25 years before 1982. and i put "1982" out there because remember in openings, i talked to you about the importance of that date, may 5, 1982 for this specific concealment claim, but 5826 i'll talk to you about that. but the evidence clearly shows that mr. gafney knew those risks a full 25 years before 1982. and then in this case, the case of frank gafney, plaintiff has not proven that reynolds should be punished for anything it did or did not do as it relates to frank gafney. and it is important to think about and remember when i also talked to you in opening, that this is the case of frank gafney, because i predicted that when the evidence started coming out, you were going to see a lot of other information that had no connection to frank gafney, documents that would have been created years after frank gafney smoked reynolds cigarettes in this case. and remember i asked you to keep in mind, i'm not going to be here to defend all those documents, but look for what the evidence is that connects that information and those documents back to frank gafney, and sure enough, plaintiff's proof has nothing to do with mr. gafney smoking here. you saw letters from the sales department of r.j. reynolds back in the 1920s, years before mr. gafney was even born. you were 5827 presented with advertisements for reynolds cigarettes during times that mr. gafney, before he was born and well after he was smoking reynolds cigarettes. and, of course, you saw internal company documents from reynolds, the majority of them from the '60s, '70s, 1980s, years after mr. gafney last smoked a reynolds cigarette. now, part of the reason you saw that, those internal documents, because one of the witnesses plaintiff chose to call was dr. cummings, but remember what dr. cummings admitted on cross, he was there as a generic witness, he was not there to talk to you about frank gafney. he was not there to discuss with you frank gafney's smoking of reynolds cigarettes. he was there to talk generally about issues of tobacco and smoking, and that is why you saw all these documents that had no connection to frank gafney that had been created, in fact, years after frank gafney last smoked a reynolds cigarette. so with that in mind, let us turn to each of those four points i just raised with you that will answer the questions on the verdict 5828 form for you. first is reynolds did not cause mr. gafney to become a smoker. no. what the evidence was, mr. gafney started smoking loosies, individual cigarettes out of the baskets at hecks at the corner store. he went there with his friends because his friends were smoking as well, trying those cigarettes, those individual loosies. there is no evidence here of when mr. gafney became a regular smoker of lucky strikes and camel cigarettes. the evidence is that mrs. gafney testified when she started dating mr. gafney in 1954, those were the brands he smoked. but there is no evidence of how much earlier, if at all, he started smoking those brands. you will remember the testimony of even his friends, judge corrigan, mr. mcginnis, mr. porter, they all talked about mr. gafney smoking in high school. and they all acknowledge that at some point he was smoking lucky strikes and camel, but they talked about it as being high school, college, law school, even practicing as a lawyer. so there is no evidence of exactly when mr. gafney became a regular smoker of lucky 5829 strikes and camel cigarettes. in fact, you will remember judge corrigan even talked about not only were those loosies bought individually at hecks, but they really did not know what the brand was, and mrs. gafney told us that mr. gafney did not know what brand it was, it was whatever was in the basket at the time. but also, judge corrigan talked about ops. remember he had to define what op was, "other person's," other person's cigarettes. in other words, during those years, mr. gafney was also bumming cigarettes from others. nothing reynolds said or did prevented mr. gafney from quitting smoking. and we heard a lot of that evidence yesterday that mr. gafney smoked because he enjoyed smoking. he did not want to quit, and even when i talked with mrs. gafney about it here in the courtroom. when he moved away from reynolds cigarettes in 1959, remember i asked her, "well, at that time, he really did not want to quit, did he, mrs. gafney? and she acknowledged, "probably not," because she also acknowledged he enjoyed 5830 smoking, and i'll talk to you a little bit further about that as well. nothing that reynolds -- excuse me. and then the last is between 1954 and 1959, mr. gafney switched between the lucky strikes and camel cigarettes based on price, based on convenience, certainly not based on any sort of advertising or anything else that reynolds did. and mrs. gafney told us that. she told us that in her conversations with mr. gafney, he went back and forth between those two brands for no other reason than what was convenient, what was cheapest at the time. he was working at the grocery store earning money and used some of that money he earned to buy cigarettes that were sold at that grocery store. nothing more. in fact, there is not been any evidence that there is advertising for cigarettes at hecks or at the grocery store or anywhere else where mr. gafney would have been working where he would have seen and been affected by or somehow lured into smoking those brands by advertising. so that comes to the very -- the second question on the verdict form i want to talk to 5831 you about. and the bottom line is where plaintiff bears the burden of proof, plaintiff has not proven that lucky strikes and camel cigarettes caused mr. gafney's lung cancer and death. and i'm skipping the first question, because in the first question, you will recall from yesterday, is the question about class membership, whether mr. gafney is, in fact, a member of the engle class. and i agree with what mr. maguire told you yesterday about that. the evidence does not support that plaintiff has carried her burden of proof that mr. gafney is a member of the engle class. but i do not want to repeat and go back over what mr. maguire talked about yesterday. so i'm going to skip forward to the next question, question no. 2 on the verdict form. i agree that you -- based on the evidence, you should mark "no" to the question of class membership. but if you are going to go further, and we have to talk about these other issues, i want to make sure you understand what the evidence is and how those questions relate to the reynolds cigarettes that mr. gafney smoked. so on this question, this question asks, 5832 "whether smoking cigarettes manufactured by each defendant was a legal cause of mr. gafney's lung cancer and death." and then, of course, "legal cause" is defined and what you heard yesterday is that legal cause is something that acts directly in a natural and continuous sequence to produce or contribute substantially to producing such lung cancer and death so that you could say, but for smoking a defendants' specific cigarette, the lung cancer and death would not have occurred. in other words, the question is, has plaintiff proven that mr. gafney's smoking of lucky strikes and camel cigarettes, that but for his smoking of those cigarettes, he would never have gotten lung cancer in 1995 when he did. that is what plaintiff's burden is. and the evidence is they have not -- the evidence shows they have not carried that burden. now, yesterday i was a little surprised because what i heard -- mr. sales: excuse me, your honor. i object to counsel's statement of personal opinion. the court: sustained. 5833 bassett: i heard argument that part of the plaintiff's burden of proof and part of their evidence of carrying their burden of proof is a stipulation, a stipulation concerning other cigarette brands. mr. philipson, can you put the elmo up for me, please. and this stipulation no. 14, right here on the side, "to the extent that mr. gafney may have smoked cigarette brands other than camel, lucky strikes, kent, or true, such smoking was minimal and did not directly and in a natural and continuous sequence produce or contribute substantially to producing any injury to mr. gafney, if any, that was caused by smoking cigarettes." thank you, mr. philipson. well, that stipulation does not support the proof on this claim because, otherwise, you would not be asked to answer that question. mr. sales: excuse me, your honor. mr. bassett: plaintiff still has to prove -- mr. sales: i object to counsel's -- counsel's statement negates the court's 5834 instruction with respect to the effects of the stipulation of the parties. the court: overruled, mr. sales. go ahead, mr. bassett. mr. bassett: thank you, your honor. the stipulation does not reach the burden of proof that plaintiff must carry on this. they have to prove the evidence on this. in fact, you heard from testimony mr. gafney was smoking loosies, he was smoking ops, other person's cigarettes, cigarettes that we do not know what the brands were. that is what that stipulation goes to. it did not go to proving up that somehow plaintiff's smoking -- or mr. gafney's smoking of lucky strikes and camel cigarettes met that "but for" requirement for answering that question too. in fact, let us talk about what the evidence was about those lucky strikes and camel cigarettes that mr. gafney smoked, because you got a lot of evidence over the course of the last four or five weeks about highly engineered cigarettes, about cigarettes that had their nicotine manipulated, their ph manipulated, but that was not camel and lucky 5835 strikes cigarettes that mr. gafney smoked, not the cigarettes he smoked in the 1950s. the cigarettes he smoked in the 1950s were unfiltered cigarettes, and when i got a chance to talk to dr. cummings about it, remember what he said? he talked about those roll-your-own cigarettes and, in fact, there is no evidence that the lucky strikes and camel cigarettes that mr. gafney smoked were any more dangerous than roll-your-own cigarettes. no evidence that the camel, lucky strikes cigarettes that mr. gafney smoked were any more addictive than roll-your-own cigarettes, cigarettes that were loose tobacco, rolled up in a paper and smoked. and, of course, there is no evidence that those lucky strikes or camel cigarettes contain any type of manipulated nicotine or manipulated ph. in fact, what was dr. cummings' testimony on this? "question: okay. you mentioned ammonia as an additive during your direct, correct? "yes. "and you recall discussing a document from dr. teague entitled 'research planning 5836 memorandum on effects of ammonia and its assaults on smoke quality,' a document from june of 1973, right? "answer: that is right. "and it is your testimony that reynolds began adding ammonia to its products shortly after the work outlined in dr. teague's memo was done, correct? "answer: correct." so all this evidence about some highly engineered cigarette with all these additives or ingredients that were intended to manipulate the nicotine, manipulate ph, and enhance somehow addictiveness, that does not apply at all. the cigarettes that mr. gafney was smoking in the 1950s were lucky strikes and camels. and dr. cummings told you, the roll-your-own cigarettes, just as dangerous, just as addictive as those lucky strikes and camels from the 1950s. what else did you see? evidence also showed, of course, mr. gafney made a complete switch away from those lucky strikes and camels in 1959 and never again did he smoke a reynolds cigarette. and, of course, dr. burns, in 5837 offering his opinion, the plaintiff, that mr. gafney was addicted also conceded that it would have been easier for mr. gafney to have quit smoking in 1959 than at some later time. and, in fact, when pressed, he made the comment that he thinks mr. gafney was addicted sometime between age 13, 15, and 25 and 30. it could have been during the time he was smoking camel, lucky strikes, it could have been after he had switched away from those two brands of cigarettes, but in any event, it would have been certainly easier for him to quit at the time he switched away from those two brands of cigarettes. but more importantly, dr. burns testified that when it came to the smoking of lucky strikes and camel cigarettes, that had he stopped smoking in 1959, that by 1995, his risk of cancer would have been essentially that of someone who had never smoked, never smoked. this is dr. burns' testimony about the fact that after 1959, he never smoked another reynolds cigarette again. and then as part of my questioning of dr. burns, i asked him this question: 5838 "question: and, likewise, if mr. gafney had quit smoking at the time he stopped smoking camel and lucky strike cigarettes and stayed quit, his lung cancer risk would have essentially been that of someone who had never smoked by 1995, correct, sir? "answer: if he had quit in 1959, is that what you are asking? "question: yes, sir. "answer: yes, that would be -- it would be very close to that of someone who had never smoked if he had quit in 1959." and so when we are looking at this question, question no. 2 on the verdict form, "was smoking cigarettes manufactured by one or both defendants a legal cause of frank gafney's lung cancer and death?" and you are to answer the question of but for the smoking of lucky strike and camel cigarettes, would mr. gafney have gotten lung cancer when he did in 1995. plaintiff has not met their burden of proof, because we know that taking that smoking alone, his risk of cancer in 1995 would have been essentially that of someone who had never smoked. that is not a substantial contributing 5839 factor. that is certainly not a but-for cause of mr. gafney's lung cancer and death in the case. so when you come to this question 2 on the verdict form and you are looking at that evidence and you are remembering the testimony that you heard from dr. burns, the evidence is no -- or the answer to the question is "no," the plaintiff has not met her burden of proof on that question. and you should answer it "no" and move on. now, the next question you are asked, question no. 3, deals with the allocation of fault in the case, and you heard argument about that yesterday and, again, i'm going to focus in on the reynolds-specific discussion of the evidence for that. where is the best -- question 2 only deals with the amount that mr. gafney smoked of reynolds cigarettes and whether that was a legal cause of his lung cancer and death. this question also deals with what mr. gafney knew about the dangers and addictiveness of smoking and what he did with that knowledge, okay. 5840 and so you heard yesterday that somehow reynolds should be forty percent responsible, lorillard forty percent, mr. gafney himself 20. i do not want to start by going back into what the court has instructed you on that particular question, but i am going to remind you of this one point, that based on the court's instruction, the assignment of fault relates only to the conduct that was a legal cause of mr. gafney's lung cancer and death. so what that means is r.j. reynolds cannot be assigned fault for conduct that was not a legal cause of mr. gafney's lung cancer and death. so when you hear that forty percent of the fault should go to reynolds, what they are saying is they think they have proven that forty percent of reynolds' conduct was a legal cause -- mr. sales: excuse me, your honor. that misstates the engle findings and your honor's instructions to the jury. douglas, engle. the court: again, ladies and gentlemen, you will rely on the instructions that have been given to you by the court. 5841 go ahead, mr. bassett. mr. bassett: thank you, your honor. we start with this one proposition mr. maguire brought to your attention yesterday. plaintiff has admitted fault already on behalf of mr. gafney. i'm not going to go over this other than just to remind you of two points. that admission of fault has to mean two things: one, that mr. gafney knew about the risks of smoking; and, two, that mr. gafney had the ability to quit and could have quit smoking, okay. and when it comes to this verdict form question, you are going to have to assign some fault to mr. gafney in the case as a result of that very admission. but what we know from the facts of the case and from the evidence presented is mr. gafney did not want to quit smoking, and that is what we heard directly from mrs. gafney about her husband. "question: mr. gafney told you he did not want to quit smoking because he enjoyed smoking too much, correct? 5842 "answer: that is right." well, that question -- when it is put in quotes, what that means is you will remember at times mrs. gafney had to be reminded of prior sworn testimony she had given in the deposition. and so here at the trial when we see it in quotation marks, that just means she is having to be reminded of that prior testimony she had given, so . . . "question: you said several times he told you that he did not want to quit. how many times did he tell you that he did not want to quit? "answer: innumerable." innumerable. so we know mr. gafney did not want to quit smoking, he enjoyed it. what do we know about what he knew about the dangers of smoking at the time he was smoking those reynolds cigarettes, lucky strike and camel up to 1959? well, we know in 1954, mr. gafney's father died suddenly, unexpectedly, because he was overweight and he was a smokeaholic. i'm going to touch on that a little bit further. we also know that in 1954, when 5843 mrs. gafney and mr. gafney began dating, that mr. gafney relayed that information to her and expressed concern about his own health based on knowing what had just happened with his own father. and, of course, we know in 1958, mrs. gafney is going to nursing school and she is learning about the dangers of smoking, she is communicating that with mr. gafney. we know in 1959 when she is practicing nursing and she is in the operating room, she is bringing home pictures of diseased lungs from smokers to show to mr. gafney, to talk to him about the dangers of smoking. this is the testimony of mrs. gafney at the trial discussing the fact that her husband had expressed to her his concern over his own smoking, his own health because his father died and that that discussion took place when they first met. and you will remember i came back in my questioning of mrs. gafney, and i asked her, i wanted to be very clear, "you never met mr. gafney's father, right?" and i said, "and so when you said that 5844 mr. gafney's father died because he was overweight, he was a smokeaholic and he died of a heart attack, that would be something that mr. gafney would have told you, too?" and the answer, of course, was "yes." the important thing is that those are the words coming from mr. gafney's own mouth to mrs. gafney that, one, he understood that his father died from smoking and, secondly, he described his father's smoking as being a smokeaholic. folks, we do not use terms like "aholic", "alcoholic," "chocoholic," "shopaholic," "smokeaholic" unless we are talking about addiction. so when mr. gafney is relaying to mrs. gafney that his own father was a smokeaholic, he was saying that he understood that his father was addicted to smoking, and not only that, but the addiction to smoking led to his death unexpectedly, suddenly, a day before his 18th birthday. i cannot -- there is not a more personalized warning that he could have received that early in 1954 that would have told him "smoking is dangerous" and "smoking is addictive," and he 5845 relayed that fact to mrs. gafney the first time they met. plaintiff has not proven for allocation of fault that reynolds was a legal cause of mr. gafney's lung cancer and death. again, the evidence does not support that reynolds caused mr. gafney to start smoking. there is no evidence that mr. gafney smoked a reynolds cigarette after 1959. there is no evidence that anything reynolds said or did prevented mr. gafney from quitting. we know that from the evidence. his ability to stop smoking, start smoking, nothing reynolds did prevented that. and nothing reynolds could have done would have prevented mr. gafney's lung cancer and death on the facts of this case involving frank gafney. so when you come -- if you get to this question on the verdict form, if you get to question 3, in assessing what the evidence is for fault to r.j. reynolds, i would tell you plaintiff has not carried its burden of proof and the answer should be zero, 0 percent as to r.j. reynolds. that is question 3. let us go to the question 4. and that is 5846 this question about concealment, fraudulent concealment. and i highlighted what i think are the things that are important for you to consider as you are looking at the evidence and you are back there deliberating these issues. first off, "you may not consider evidence of alleged statements, concealment or other conduct that occurred before may 5, 1982." we mentioned that to you in opening. so as you see all this evidence coming in, for this question, you cannot consider any of that unless it is happened after may 5, 1982. and also at the very bottom, you will see what the court has instructed. "frank gafney cannot be found to have reasonably relied upon a statement if he knew it was false or its falsity was obvious to him or the facts allegedly concealed were already known to him." that means if he already knew smoking was dangerous and addictive, there is nothing to be concealed from him that he can reasonably rely on. mr. sales: i object, your honor. it misstates the jury instructions and verdict form. 5847 court: again, ladies and gentlemen, you will rely on the instructions and the form as given to you by the court. thank you. mr. bassett: plaintiff has not carried their burden of proof on that. mr. gafney, simply put, did not die because information about the dangers of smoking were unknown to him after may 5, 1982. mr. maguire went over this about what had been known for many, many years before mr. gafney began smoking and throughout the time he smoked. i'm not going to go over that, other than to point out that when it came time for our opportunity to question their own experts, their own experts about those issues, dr. burns, dr. cummings, they acknowledged that for years, the type of information about the dangers of smoking, that people smoked for nicotine, that was known. you remember i had to -- i talked to dr. burns about a study done by the new york department of health in the 1880s on manufactured packaged branded cigarettes. and what did that study conclude? that study concluded that cigarettes as a product are 5848 inhaled and that inhalation of the product did certain things, including having a different effect on the nicotine of the tobacco because it went straight into the lungs. that was not a secret. that was being discussed back in the 1880s. remember this? back in 1914 -- i talked with dr. burns about an early study by the surgeon general in 1914 looking at the smoking of cigarettes and its effects, including its addiction. 1914. let us talk more specifically, because this is the case of frank gafney, let us talk about what we know from the evidence frank gafney knew. and certainly he knew that smoking was dangerous 25 years before this critical date, may 5, 1982. he already knew smoking was bad for him when his father died of smoking in 1954, and he conveyed that information to mrs. gafney. beginning in 1958, mrs. gafney and mr. gafney had numerous discussions about what she was learning in nursing school. 1959, she starts pleading with him to quit smoking. 1968, mr. newkirk, frank gafney's 5849 stepfather, comes down with emphysema and he -- that is caused by smoking, and he, again, provides a personalized warning to mr. gafney about the dangers of smoking at that time. 1970s, mr. gafney warns his own children about the dangers and addictiveness of smoking. also in the 1970s, his children start warning him back and asking him to quit smoking and, again, throughout his life, as mr. maguire explained yesterday, you see time and time again that discussion about the dangers of smoking occurring with mr. gafney and his friends, his doctors and, as you heard, some of his doctors who were also his friends. and, in fact, yesterday morning, when you heard additional testimony from mrs. gafney, you heard about dr. calinan going back to that seminal event, that singular event in 1954 when his father died of smoking and reminding him years later that the fact that his dad died of smoking, not at more -- i cannot imagine a more personalized warning to tell someone that smoking is dangerous and addictive than that. dr. burns even testified on cross that he understood from the evidence that mr. gafney 5850 knew by the 1960s that smoking was dangerous. "question: i understand that is your position, doctor, but you are not denying that in 1968, the testimony of ms. gafney is that her husband was aware of the health risks of smoking? "answer: as of that point in time, he accepted that it caused emphysema, yes." that is related to his stepfather coming down with that disease. then the next question: "question: mrs. gafney testified that as of this date, 1968, at that point, mr. gafney understood that the surgeon general's warnings were not just garbage, that they were truthful. that is what mrs. gafney testified to? "answer: that is what he understood and accepted as of that moment in time, yes." 1968. what was the warning on every cigarette pack beginning in 1966? "caution: smoking is hazardous to your health." you saw dr. maguire discuss that with you yesterday. dr. burns admitted that by 1968, mr. gafney understood the health risks of smoking. the evidence shows he understood that 5851 much sooner. now, when it comes to this date in 1982, what i saw from the evidence, what the evidence suggested is there was this single ad by r.j. reynolds, can we have an open debate? and plaintiff's argument came to be that this single ad by r.j. reynolds somehow has mr. gafney forgetting all that he had learned in the past 25 years or more about the dangers of smoking, that somehow this single ad caused him to forget more than 25 years of warnings from media, more than 25 years of warnings from the public health authority, over 25 years of warnings from family and friends, over 25 years of warnings from the surgeon general and the over 20 years of warnings from every pack of cigarettes that he would have smoked beginning in 1966. but think about the evidence they presented to you about that ad, that one ad, the open debate. no evidence that he saw this specific ad. no evidence he made any smoking decisions based on the ad. he smoked before that ad came out, he smoked after that ad came out. he certainly did not switch back to 5852 another reynolds product. he stayed -- he never smoked another reynolds cigarette after 1959. and there is no evidence that had this specific ad not been published that mr. gafney's decision would have been any different. plaintiff's theory simply seems to be that, hey, somehow mr. gafney reasonably relied on an advertisement, ran one time, to continue smoking with no proof, no proof that he ever saw or caused him to do anything. that does not carry the burden of proof in this case, the case of frank gafney. in fact, the other testimony is to the opposite. remember when i asked mrs. gafney what conversations she and her husband had? i said. "question: and, likewise, you would never heard of the tobacco institute, correct? "answer: correct. "question: that is not something that mr. gafney brought to your attention, right? "answer: no. "question: you had never heard of the council for tobacco research, had you? 5853 "answer: no. "question: he did not bring home articles discussing statements from the council for tobacco research? "answer: no." this is the same questioning, of course, in the quotes which she had to be reminded of at the time about the testimony she had previously given about what her husband knew about the surgeon general's warnings at the time mr. newkirk got his emphysema from smoking. and then also during her testimony, here's what she said about the confrontation with her daughter mary kay, over mary kay's own smoking. "question: and you and mr. gafney confronted mary kay together about her smoking? "answer: yes. "question: and mr. gafney told mary kay again -- 'again' -- about the health consequences of smoking? "answer: yes, he begged her not to smoke. "question: and mr. gafney told mary kay, when she began smoking -- again, we are talking 1979 or 1978. he told her that smoking -- she 5854 was foolish to start smoking because it was almost impossible to quit? "answer: that is right. "question: and he told her that? "answer: that is right. he knew." he knew. he knew by '78, '79, but he actually knew much earlier than that. he knew going all the way back to when his father died being addicted to smoking and smoking-related disease. personalized warnings throughout his life. when it comes to a question of whether plaintiff has proven that some information concealed by r.j. reynolds after may 5, 1982 could have caused any -- could have been a legal cause of mr. gafney's lung cancer and death, there is no connection. they have not presented any evidence to meet their burden of proof on this. and, of course, as i told you on that instruction, he cannot conceal something that is already been known anyway. so when it comes to this question on the verdict form, question 4 about concealment, i would tell you based upon what the evidence has been, plaintiff had not met their burden of 5855 proof and answer that question "no." and based on all the evidence, the next question, question 5, on that agreement to conceal, answer that "no" also. i want to turn now to this claim for punitive damages, winding it down to the last question. i do not think you ever even get this far, but i have to -- mr. sales: your honor, i object to counsel's statement of personal opinion again. the court: sustained. mr. bassett: the evidence will not let you get this far, but i need to address it with you for my client. as mr. maguire said yesterday, punitive damages are different than the other damages plaintiff are seeking in this case. they are damages in addition to damages to compensate mrs. gafney for the loss of her husband. and as a result of that, the law requires that plaintiffs prove more than what they are otherwise obligated to prove for these other claims. they have to prove by clear and convincing evidence -- and you heard that being read out, that "clear and convincing evidence has to be 5856 precise, explicit, lacking in confusion and of such weight that it produces a firm belief or conviction without hesitation about the matter in issue." it means that if you go back there and you are looking at the evidence and you deliberate and you hesitate, there is not clear and convincing evidence there. it is a higher burden of proof, precise, explicit, without hesitation. the other thing to keep in mind is if you get to this question, punitive damages here can only be awarded for the concealment or agreement to conceal that was a legal cause of mr. gafney's lung cancer and death. this issue does not go to some sort of the referendum on smoking generally, whether smoking should be legal or illegal, it only is limited to whether or not there was a concealment or agreement to conceal to mr. gafney that was a legal cause of his lung cancer and death. so what did you hear from the testimony on this issue? what was the evidence? well, you heard testimony specifically from dr. cummings. dr. cummings talked about the council for 5857 tobacco research, said a lot of things on direct. but on cross he said some other things about the work that was being done by the ctr, during the time that reynolds and other tobacco companies were providing funding to it so that it could provide funding to others. hundreds of millions of dollars spent on research. thousands of ctr studies published, ctr funded research that, in fact, published in peer-review journals that the surgeon general cited over 600 times in surgeon general reports. funding that went to researchers who went on to win nobel prizes and, of course, funding of research that included research specifically finding that smoking is addictive. you saw this published in 1963, the american journal of psychiatry, funding from ctr, which the study concluded that for heavy smokers, smoking is addictive. what else did dr. cummings tell you about when i was questioning him? he told you about how ctr had spent money funding the collection and summary of all the known research on tobacco. what did that research include? it included chapters on smoking-related disease. 5858 it included lung cancer, heart disease, copd, nicotine, addiction. and, in fact, that was -- that research, that -- i should say summary of thousands and thousands of articles was relied upon by the surgeon general's advisory committee in preparing that very first 1964 surgeon general's report that concluded that lung -- smoking was a cause of lung cancer in men. and even after that, even after that conclusion in '64, ctr continued funding this larson and haag, continued making these summaries of the thousands and thousands of articles. four different volumes. the original green monster and three other volumes, funded all those summaries. all those summaries are available to anyone who wanted to look them up. and remember, this is happening in the '60s and '70s. it is before the internet. it is before there is a ability to use google to go search out this type of research. so ctr was funding these scientists from medical college of virginia to compile summaries of all that research, one easy place 5859 to be located by anybody that wanted to look it up. when it came to the 1964 surgeon general's report, the advisory committee itself acknowledged its appreciation for the cooperation and assistance provided by tobacco companies and r.j. reynolds, including r.j. reynolds. mr. maguire also talked to you about this tobacco working group that spent ten years looking for ways to reduce the hazards of smoking. r.j. reynolds participated in that through two of their top scientists and you remember in my questioning to dr. cummings, i showed him a letter from the president of r.j. reynolds going to dr. murray senkus, the head scientist at the time of the company, saying, look, cooperate with the company. if there is a safer cigarette to be found, let us find it. and that led to this ten-year cooperation with the government, the public health authorities, known as the tobacco working group. remember who else participated in that, 5860 dr. rodgman. you have seen some of his documents during the case, but what did dr. cummings tell us about dr. rodgman? well, dr. rodgman spent his career looking for ways to reduce and eliminate the carcinogens in tobacco smoke, the carcinogens that dr. cummings acknowledges was no secret in the 1950s. dr. rodgman spent a career trying to do that and it was very, very difficult work and what he found, dr. cummings agreed, the problem with eliminating the carcinogens from tobacco smoking is when you burn tobacco or any organic material, any leaf, at that high temperature, the smoke it creates contains carcinogens. and, in fact, through dr. rodgman's work, what he also learned if you remove one carcinogen, another one pops up. so it is very difficult work, but that did not mean that dr. rodgman or r.j. reynolds stopped trying to reduce and eliminate the carcinogens in tobacco smoke. in fact, we know after the tobacco working group disbanded in 1978, reynolds continued that work, spending over a billion dollars, over a billion dollars looking for alternatives to burning tobacco and they came 5861 up first with the premier. you heard dr. cummings talk about premier, which is a heat tobacco, not burning tobacco, less mutagenic, safer than conventional cigarette. but the problem was it smelled bad and it did not taste right, so consumers rejected it and reynolds pulled it from the market. but they did not give up. they went back, took technology they learned from premier, took more money and they came back out with eclipse, another form of this heat, not burned tobacco. and, of course, eclipse is still on the market and here's what dr. cummings had to say about premier. "question: you agree that premier was a safer product than conventional tobacco burning cigarettes, right? "answer: yes. "question: premier was less mutagenic than conventional cigarette, was not it? "answer: yes. "question: and you believe that eclipse is safer than a conventional cigarettes, right? "answer: yes." the clerk: counselor, 45 minutes. 5862 bassett: thank you. so when it comes to this question on the verdict form, has plaintiff proven by clear and convincing evidence, evidence that is clear and precise that causes you without hesitation to say reynolds should be punished in this case, the case of frank gafney? based on the testimony, the evidence you have seen, all the efforts and the work that they have put in to trying to reduce the hazard of smoking, put out a product that is, in fact, according to plaintiff's own expert, a safer product, i think the answer to that question is "no," the plaintiff has not carried its burden of proof in this case. so at the end, what this case really comes down to is a case of frank gafney and what we know from evidence you have seen, the testimony you have heard, as mr. maguire went over in detail yesterday, mr. gafney had the ability to quit smoking. he was intelligent, he is well educated, he is well informed. in fact, you also even heard mrs. gafney talk about his education before he went to law school as an actuary. as an actuary, he used 5863 statistics to assess risks. he is a very bright, successful man. we also know with that, when he had the need and he had the desire, mr. gafney showed the willpower to stop smoking, smoking to win a bet, smoking in order to qualify for life insurance for a full year. when it comes to the question of mr. gafney continuing to smoke, mrs. gafney tells us in answer to that. "question: your husband enjoyed smoking, correct? "answer: yes, he did. "question: he told you he enjoyed it? "answer: yes, he did. "question: in your opinion, he thoroughly enjoyed every cigarette he ever put in his mouth, correct? "answer: correct." that is what this case really boils down to is frank gafney enjoyed smoking, he enjoyed what it provided him and he never really wanted to quit until january of 1995, when he finally realized it was time to quit and he did quit. that was his choice and no one is here to criticize him for that choice. but with choice 5864 comes a certain responsibility and while mrs. gafney is here admitting that her husband bears some fault for that choice, for what he knew about the dangers of smoking and for what he knew about his ability to quit smoking. she is here saying there is only partial responsibility for mr. gafney. from the weeks of evidence you heard and the testimony you have seen, the evidence shows that there is certainly no liability to r.j. reynolds and as a result, i'd ask you as you go through back there to deliberate, that you return a verdict in favor of r.j. reynolds in this case. again, i want to thank you for your time and your patience during the process. and as mr. maguire noted too, we as defendants do not get the last word because the plaintiff has the burden of proof and mr. sales will have an opportunity now to give a rebuttal and because we do not have the last word, what i'd ask you is as he brings up additional arguments and new evidence that may not have been discussed previously, ask how that goes back to the case of frank gafney and how i would have responded 5865 if i could of on behalf of r.j. reynolds. again, thank you very much for your time and very much for your patience. thank you, your honor.