closing statement mr. gustafson: good afternoon. the panel: good afternoon. mr. gustafson: frank gafney, medical records say that he started smoking when he was 14 years old in 1950. as you know, this photograph was taken when he was 15 years old. tobacco company documents that are in evidence that you have seen and heard about in this case tell you that they intended to sell their addictive product to children. they knew if you get a teenager addicted, that if you get them addicted to nicotine as a child, you get a lifetime of profits, and that is exactly what they intended and it is exactly what they got in frank gafney. he was a teenager, and like all the others that were being marketed to, they enjoyed 5599 nearly 50 years of profits off his lungs. and as you all know, and as you saw in this trial, peer pressure is real. whether it is your brother, your friends, the priests where you go to school, the movies, radio, television, athletes, peer pressure gets to you. and the defendants, they knew that. and they exploited it in their search for replacement smokers, children. you add a little marketing, you add a little nicotine, just the right amount, because they control that in their product design and, lo and behold, seventy percent of the people, frank gafney's generation, his age cohort, as dr. burns called it, seventy percent of them smoked. it would have been odd if frank gafney did not smoke. and it would have been really unusual given the design of these products, these cigarettes, that if he were able to just put them down and walk away without any difficulty. that would have been really, really unusual. and you know now, you know now why that is. they engineered cigarettes to be addictive through technology, through additives, through 5600 design changes, they engineered cigarettes to be hard to give up. and they spent the next few decades perfecting ways to make cigarettes as addictive as they could. they put in just the right nicotine. they wash out it when they are processing the tobacco and they put it back in, just the right amount. they changed the ph to make it more inhalable. they add ammonia compounds that freebase nicotine to the brain. they controlled the nicotine content to enhance nicotine kick. and increasing the ph of smoke above 6.0 causes other changes, particularly when the increase in smoke ph is achieved by adding ammonia to the blend. they have tried to make quitting smoking as difficult as they can. and they have been doing it and they did it for frank gafney's whole life. and despite that evidence, they say that it was frank gafney's free, unfettered choice to smoke cigarettes. not just the first one, but the ones after six years and seven years and ten years and 20 years and 30 years and 40 years, it was his unfettered, free choice. 5601 and despite the evidence that you have seen in this case, they say that his death, which was caused by an addiction to nicotine and cigarettes, is not one bit their responsibility. and there is strong evidence of his addiction in this case. there is no question about that aspect of it, which i'm going to get to in just a minute. and there is no question that they designed and intended cigarettes to be addictive and hard to give up, exactly what you saw in this case. and there is no question that they lied and concealed it to keep that going, and there is no question that it worked and that they profited from it working. and the only question that is facing you now, after sitting in here for a month, is what are you going to do about it? because you are going to have to decide whether you are going to tolerate lies and liars because it is just business. because it is wrong to design something to be addictive and then lie about it and then market it as safe and then exploit addicted people to keep doing what they are addicted to, 5602 all the while knowing that your business plan is going to result in people dying. and things are not going to square up until your verdict speaks that you are not going to let the defendants profit from lies and deceit. until your verdict makes it known that you are not going to stand by and allow that kind of business plan to rob people of their lives and their health. every lorillard employee, every r.j. reynolds executive who testified in this case, whether it was on video or on documents you saw here, every single one of them, their own statements show that what they did was intentional. what they did was intentional. it was something they knew was false, and they did it for money. and that is it, money. that is what matters to them, money. they knew that what they were doing was wrong. and we found out that what they did was wrong. and now, after being here for a month, you know that what they did was wrong. and the question you are faced with is, what are you going to do about it? ask yourselves, why is it? why do people 5603 smoke? all of you know the answer to that, that is nicotine. nicotine addiction is why people smoke. even though they have known for decades how to take nicotine out of cigarettes, even though they have known for decades that they are able to grow tobacco with no nicotine in it, they not only choose to keep the nicotine in it, but they engineered the cigarettes to maintain that addiction. "the additives and chemicals that tobacco companies put in cigarettes may have helped make them more addictive because once inhaled, nicotine races from your lungs to your heart to your brain." they were doing all they could to take choice away. they were doing all they could to take choice away. and yet their defense is that frank gafney chose to smoke and that he was somehow immune to nicotine addiction, which they lied about cigarettes being addictive and they lied about cigarettes causing cancer. and all those lies were designed to keep smokers like frank gafney to continue smoking. that is what the whole program was designed for. you have got to take yourself back in time 5604 to understand the different time, you know, when we were kids and our parents would take us on those long trips in the car and we would crawl up in the back window and we could warm ourselves in the sun, we could play with our brothers or sisters, you can ask your dad a dozen times how long until we get there. and if you saw somebody riding their kids up in the back window of the car today, you would wonder what was wrong with them. because we know more now. it is a different time today than it was years ago when we had wonderful parents who loved us but let us ride up in the back window because people did not know. you have to take yourself back in time to a place where we could all be smoking in here. you could all be smoking. i told you in opening statement, they had ashtrays lined up, this place would be full of smoke. it was a very different time. it was a time where they promised, these defendants promised if there is anything bad in cigarettes, we will take it out. and they promised, your health is of primary paramount concern to us. and we accept it as our responsibility to look out for you. 5605 trust us. we are going to work with the public health authorities. that is what they said in that time back then. they were going to be the first to let everybody know. and in the meantime, use these filters, you will feel better about smoking a kent. and then what did they really know to be true? the illusion of filtration is as important as the fact of filtration. that is what they knew to be true, but that is what they kept to themselves. and then years later, use these low-tar and light cigarettes, they are better for you. "considering all i've heard, i can decide to either quit or smoke true, and i smoke true." and what did they know about low tar as they are marketing cigarettes like that? what they know is it was important to have those filter traps. "some claimed to possess the least tars. in those cases, however, the smoker of a filtered cigarette was getting as much or more nicotine and tar as they would have gotten from a regular cigarette. he had abandoned the regular cigarette, however, on the ground of reduced risk of health." 5606 that is intercepting people on the way to quitting. that is speaking to addicted smokers in a way that only addicted smokers really understand. provides them with a reason to keep doing what it is they are doing despite what it is that they hear and see. because that is what the companies did is gave them public statements to rely upon. and you saw them in this case. we cannot bring you everything. we cannot bring you the 20th century. we darn sure tried. preying on addicted smokers who do not know the truth is what these defendants were doing, that these cigarettes that they knew were just as deadly as your old brand that we told you was not harmful to you. and they knew it was a powerful message for addicted smokers, and they designed it to be that way. and the interesting thing about this whole idea about cigarettes not being addictive because of some 1953 world health organization definition, you know, the truth is that the difference in cigarettes and their addiction and these other, you know, street drugs and narcotics and things like that is that -- is 5607 that cigarettes, they are not intoxicating. they keep saying that, the defendants said that the whole trial. and people -- people can smoke cigarettes. you can be like frank gafney. you could be a model son. you could be a wonderful husband. you could be a great father. you could work yourself really hard and you could make your way in life. you can be a good breadwinner. you could be responsible, a good citizen. you could be all those things, and you could be an addict. typically folks that are using alcohol and narcotics and all that, they have other problems, you know. but people that smoke cigarettes, they do not have those problems until they are 59 years old and have a spot on their lung. so there is a difference that they preyed upon that you could do this and you could still be an accepted member of society. they love to say they sell a legal product and it is the legality of that product that makes it so darn ubiquitous, it is everywhere, and it is so easy to get. 5608 you give up smoking, you are done for a week or two weeks or a month or year, whatever it is, and you needed gas and there it is, right behind the register. you go by the winn-dixie, get a carton of milk, and there it is, right there at the register. it is everywhere you go. it is different than being addicted to something that is illegal. frank gafney was one of those people that could be preyed upon. think of the words that you heard to describe frank gafney in this trial. he was friendly. he was intelligent. he was determined. he was strong-willed and goal-oriented and god-fearing and loyal. he was a fantastic guy. he was kind. he was honest. he was trustworthy. you heard all these wonderful things. he was someone you would want as a friend. frank gafney was. and he was addicted. addiction to nicotine is why frank gafney smoked. that is why he smoked a carton a week for 45 years. addiction to nicotine is what caused the smoking that caused the lung cancer that killed him. and what did lorillard and reynolds bring 5609 you to dispute that? they brought you dr. kaplan. and you saw him. he was the whole case. as the plaintiff here, we have to prove certain points. we have to prove that frank gafney was a member of the engle class. we have to prove that by the greater weight of the evidence, not by -- not by beyond all reasonable doubt, like a criminal case, but we have to prove it by the greater weight of the evidence. the more persuasive and conclusive force and effect of the evidence, did we tip the scales in our favor, did we provide the greater weight of the evidence. and i think the evidence is clear in this case that we did. first question you are going to answer on that verdict form, was frank gafney addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, and if so, was such addiction a legal cause of his lung cancer and death. now, it is important for you to look was such addiction a legal cause of his lung cancer and death. we talked about this in opening statement, it is not the legal cause of his lung cancer, it is a legal cause of his lung cancer 5610 and death. addiction does not have to be the only cause of his death. it can operate in combination with other things. you will see that repeatedly in the jury instructions that you have and you see it repeatedly in the questions that you are asked to decide on that verdict form. every one of those claims, whether frank gafney was a member of the engle class, his addiction to nicotine, was it a legal cause of his death. was use of the defendants' cigarettes, we will get to that in a minute, was it a legal cause of his death. was the concealment, the fraudulent concealment by the defendants, was it a legal cause of his death. none of them are legally the cause because the law recognizes that these things all act together. the law recognizes the complexity of life. very few things, especially tragedies like what happened here, very few of those things happen because of one thing. most of the time, we have all experienced this, the world's complex and sometimes more than one thing operates to create something that is bad 5611 that happens. same things that happen that are good, that the law recognizes all these things can work together to create something. so addiction was a legal cause. and the jury instruction reflects that. in order to be regarded -- in the second paragraph there, in order to be regarded as a legal cause of lung cancer and death, an addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine need not be the only cause. an addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine may be a legal cause of lung cancer and death, even though it operates in combination with the act of another, some natural cause. you have heard this instruction about four or five times in your jury instructions that you are going to take back there with you. you get them in every case, not just tobacco cases. because the law recognizes that things work together. what was the evidence that you heard here about frank gafney's addiction to nicotine and cigarettes? well, you heard dr. burns testify to you that mr. gafney was addicted. dr. cohn, his treating doctor, said he was addicted. 5612 mrs. gafney testified that he was addicted. the deposition that was read to you yesterday, mr. riegelsberger said mr. gafney was addicted. i'm going to go through the testimony of each of them to remind you because we have been here for so many weeks. dr. burns testified, "there is no question in my mind that he was powerfully addicted." dr. cohn was asked whether mr. gafney was addicted. "i think that is definitely the case," and he had no doubt whatsoever. and then we have mrs. gafney who said, consistent with the interrogatory they published to you today, "i'm a layperson, but i observed frank had to have a cigarette to get through his day. there was no way he could get through without it. if that is addiction, as far as i'm concerned, he was seriously addicted all those years." then you have mr. riegelsberger. "yes, he was addicted." and then you were taught about the fagerstrom test. dr. cummings came and talked to you about it. and i'm going to go over the evidence on that to show you just how addicted 5613 mr. gafney was. how soon after you wake up do you smoke your first cigarette? you get three points if it is within five minutes. and mrs. gafney testified, when i heard the alarm go off, i hear click, click, and sucking in on that cigarette before he ever got out of bed. it was immediate. the second prong of fagerstrom, do you find it difficult to refrain from smoking in places where it is forbidden? well, he smoked everywhere he went. in the car, in his home, the movie theater, in restaurants. there was no place he did not smoke. even in the hospital. when he was admitted to the hospital in colorado, the doctors entered those orders in the chart that he could smoke if he was off oxygen. and you heard dr. burns testify about it and you heard dr. cohn testify about it, that that is the kind of orders that doctors would put in the chart back in those days when smoking was allowed in hospitals, that they would actually enter an order to allow you to smoke inside the hospital. and the third prong of the fagerstrom is 5614 which cigarette would you hate most to give up? well, mr. gafney's not here to ask him that question. we cannot offer you that testimony, but the jury instructions allow you to weigh the evidence and what you have heard about mr. gafney, who smoked first thing when the alarm goes off, he smoked two before getting up. he would smoke if he woke up in the middle of the night. you can use your own common sense and reason to determine which one was the first one and which was the one he would least want to give up. you decide that on your own. i do not have testimony, but you can decide that with testimony that you have. the fourth one, how many cigarettes a day do you smoke? 31 or more gets three points. well, one and a half packs a day is in the medical records, all over the medical records. and then we get to question 5, do you smoke more frequently during the first hours after awaking than during the rest of the day? well, he would go to work after he got up in the morning and smoked some cigarettes, and so mrs. gafney did not know if he smoked more in the morning versus more at night because he is 5615 at work and she would come and see him at lunch, so we cannot answer that question for you. but again, you can use your common sense and your reason based on all the facts and evidence that you have heard in this case. question number 6, do you smoke even if you are so ill that you are in bed most of the day? and mrs. gafney testified that he would smoke when he had the flu or was at home. and as you know, when he was confined to the hospital, they entered an order to allow him to smoke there. what happens when you add those up, the score of eight to ten points, he is got at least eight. a score over seven says your level of dependence is high, you are not in control of your smoking, it is in control of you. mr. gafney was serially addicted and you see when we get to the issue of whether lung cancer caused his death, you have, again, dr. cohn, dr. burns, and the death certificate that dr. cohn wrote up, all of them testified that lung cancer was the cause of his death. and the defense did not bring you anybody to say that lung cancer did not cause his death. they 5616 brought you nothing, nothing. and we have dr. cohn said that mr. gafney smoked 40 or 45 years, a pack to pack and a half a day, more than enough to have been responsible for his lung cancer and his ultimate death and there was no doubt about it in his mind. dr. burns testified, "there was no question in my mind that his nicotine addiction led to his death from lung cancer." the question on number 1 on the verdict form, he was addicted, his addiction caused his repeated exposure, and that repeated exposure to the carcinogens in cigarette smoke is what caused his lung cancer. and the surgeon general tells us on how nicotine addiction causes death. now, the defendants' websites tell you to rely on what the surgeon general says about smoking and health, yet, they brought you dr. kaplan to tell you that the surgeon general was wrong. what do the medical records say about mr. gafney's smoking history? a pack a day for 40 years. that is in february 1990. well, you do the math, that means he started in 1950, he 5617 was 14 years old. every one of those records, pack and a half a day for 40 years. 59 year old white male, ex-smoker, may 10, 1995, pack and a half a day for 45 years. you do the math, he started in 1950 when i was 14 years old. what does that mean in the context of nicotine addiction and how nicotine addiction causes someone to die? well, you go through what it takes to smoke the way frank gafney smoked, the way an addicted smoker goes through that many cigarettes, you get eight to ten inhales, withdrawals per cigarette. just for the sake of easy math, we just did eight puffs per cigarette is being conservatism, and there is 20 cigarettes in a pack. so if you smoke a pack and a half a day, that is 30 cigarettes a day, 8 draws or inhales off those cigarettes, each of those cigarettes, that is 240 hits of nicotine every day. do you that 365 days a year, that is almost 90,000 hits of a highly addictive drug throughout the year. 45 years of it, you come to almost 4 million hits of a highly addictive drug. now, that is day after day after day for 45 5618 years. and the defendants are going to say that frank gafney was somehow immune to that. that this highly addictive drug did not make him addicted. and their expert's book says differently. their expert's book says 80 -- between 80 and ninety percent of regular smokers have nicotine dependence. almost one fourth of the united states population. and all the more than eighty percent of the individuals who smoke express a desire to stop smoking and 35 percent try to stop each year, less than 5 percent are successful in unaided attempts to quit. so when you get the verdict form, question 1, is frank gafney addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, and if so, such addiction a legal cause of his lung cancer and death, you know, the issue that you are faced with is not whether frank gafney had free choice. the issue is not whether frank gafney was unable to control himself or whether addiction took over his life. it is whether addiction was a substantial contributing factor, one cause among many, that is what your jury instruction tells you. 5619 ask yourselves, based on the evidence that you have heard here, if frank gafney were not addicted to the nicotine in cigarettes, as a 14 year old, do you think he would have planned to expose himself to the dozens of carcinogens every day, hundreds of times a day for 45 years if he was not addicted? would that make any sense? were lorillard and reynolds, were they wrong in their internal documents when they told themselves that people smoke for nicotine? that nicotine is the sine qua non? a cigarette, without which it would not be? that if we take the nicotine too low, people are going to quit? and that most people cannot quit, were they wrong when they said those things to themselves? and we all know they were right what they said to themselves. of course, their internal documents were right. they were right about nicotine being addictive. they were right about why people cannot stop. they were right about it causing cancer. addiction is what causes people to smoke until they get sick from it and die. without addiction, that does not 5620 happen. now, if you answered yes to question number 1 on the verdict form, frank gafney's a member of the engle class. if you answer no, mrs. gafney loses. and lorillard and r.j. reynolds win and you left him the blue ribbon on lorillard and reynolds. mr. bassett: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. mr. bassett: move to strike. the court: granted. mr. gustafson: a yes answer, though, a yes answer means that the engle findings will apply. smoking cigarettes causes lung cancer, nicotine in cigarettes is addictive, the defendants, both of these defendants place cigarettes on the market were defective and unreasonably dangerous. both these defendants concealed or omitted material information not otherwise known or available, knowing that the material was false or misleading, or failed to disclose a material fact concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes or both. and that both of these defendants agreed with the other 5621 engle defendant to conceal or omit information regarding the health effects of cigarettes or their addictive nature with the intention that smokers in the public would rely on this information to their detriment, and it lists the other engle defendants, a couple of whom are now part of r.j. reynolds, brown & williamson tobacco corporation and american tobacco company. it lists the council for tobacco research and the tobacco institute. and you heard a lot of comments from them during this trial. and finally, both these defendants were negligent. now, those findings, when you answer question 1 yes, which the evidence shows you should, those findings become binding on the court, the parties, and on you all, the jury. now, this is one of those stories that has only one side. what they did and why they did it, the things they went about doing it for, there is no other side to this story about what they did. agreeing to lie to smokers, agreeing to conceal what they knew to be true about the dangers of the product they were making and selling to people. to carry out a scheme to 5622 lie to an entire nation for 50 years. all that for money. it did not matter how many died, it did not matter if anybody did it to them. they just wanted more money. question 2 on the verdict form was: smoking cigarettes manufactured by one or both of the defendants a legal cause of frank gafney's lung cancer and death. this is another one of those questions where not only have the parties agreed, but the evidence is undisputed. stipulated facts in the case, as you have been shown them a couple of times now, that frank gafney was a citizen of florida, and they were married on august 22nd, and he had lung cancer, and camel cigarettes are made by reynolds and lucky strike cigarettes are made by american and reynolds is responsible for american and their brands. and all the cigarettes that frank gafney smoked that we agreed on in 9, 10, 11, and 12, all of them contain nicotine. and what is -- and then smoking cigarettes can cause lung cancer, including large cell cancer. look at number 14. number 14 says, to the extent mr. gafney 5623 may have smoked cigarette brands other than camel, lucky strike, kent, or true, that smoking was minimal and not directly, in a natural and continuous sequence, to contribute substantially to producing any injury sustained by mr. gafney, if any, that was caused by smoking cigarettes. now, the undisputed, unrebutted evidence in this case is that smoking cigarettes caused his lung cancer. the stipulation, the agreement between the parties is the only four brands that would have done that is camel, lucky strike, kent, and true. that is an agreement. what was in the evidence? the evidence was that he smoked a pack a day since he was 14, and not just his wife told you the brands, but his buddies from high school, the judge and the hospital administrator, that he smoked lucky strikes. he also smoked camels. and then it changed and he smoked kent. and then he smoked true. and he smoked heavily, sometimes up to two and a half packs a day. that is unrebutted and undisputed evidence in this case. and so those are the brands of 5624 the two defendants. then we go to the next one, please, baron. what did dr. burns tell you about that? each of the brands from reynolds and lorillard caused and contributed to his addiction in proportion to which he used them. reynolds for the first ten years or so, and then lorillard for the 35 years after that. and did each and every one of those brands of cigarettes cause his development of lung cancer? yes. they brought you nothing to oppose that. it is undisputed evidence. question 2 has to be a yes based on the evidence in this case. and again, like question number 1, if you answer no to this question, mrs. gafney loses and r.j. reynolds and lorillard win. now, as mrs. gafney said all along, her husband shares in the responsibility for what happened to him, and she came here to court insistent on that. it is in the jury instructions that you get at end of this case. but neither of the defendants, even though they promised in the frank statement way back in 1954 that they accepted responsibility for the 5625 health of their customers, and they wanted to cooperate with the public health authorities, even though they lied about that for years and years and had broke those promises, they tell you they bear no responsibility at all in this case. and that is where you all come in. comparative negligence instruction you are going to get is the defendants have raised that instruction -- that claim that frank gafney was himself negligent and his negligence was a legal cause of lung cancer and death. and in this regard, the plaintiff has admitted that the acts of frank gafney relating to the duration and frequency of his efforts to quit were a partial legal cause of his injury and death, in combination with the fault of these two defendants. now, lorillard and reynolds, they deny here in court that their lies and deceit contributed to causing frank gafney's death. but behind closed doors, in boardrooms and in laboratories where they celebrated how successful their program of deceit was in keeping people smoking, see, what they say here is very different from what they do out there. 5626 maguire: your honor, if i might approach. the court: yes, sir. (sidebar discussion held.) the court: yes, sir. mr. maguire: your honor, i believe plaintiff has completely crossed the line here by saying what we do here in defending ourselves is inconsistent to what we do out there disparaging the defense. we started by saying that even though -- the court: i cannot hear you, mr. maguire. mr. maguire: i'm sorry. plaintiff's counsel started by saying even though they accepted responsibility, they tell you here they have no responsibility, directly saying that the defense in this case, juxtaposing that specifically with plaintiff's claims and against the conduct of the defendants outside, and then linked it in the last statement so i think we have completely crossed the line. the court: mr. sales. mr. sales: i disagree, your honor. and if your honor goes back and looks at the transcript, you will see that counsel changed 5627 what mr. gustafson said when he started his argument about "in here." where he put that in mr. gustafson's argument is not where it was, and the record will reflect that. we are entitled and one would be entitled in any lawsuit to draw distinctions between the positions that the parties take through their lawyers in court and the internal documents in those companies outside of court. inside of court, it is going to be what we present, and your honor can expect that it would be right that they will say that there is no responsibility on the part of the manufacturers for what happened here. but internally when they had it to themselves to speak privately, they take a very different view. and, in fact, your honor, the documents that have been admitted into evidence speak to that very thing. it is lawsuit 101 to draw distinctions between the positions of the parties taken inside court and out of court. we are not attacking the lawyers. we are not attacking their arguments. what we are saying is that the positions that are taken by the parties in the case are inconsistent with 5628 what they say outside of court. the court: all right. mr. gustafson, i do not have complete recollection or recall of exactly what was said, so i'm going by the comments that have been made here. instead of saying "in here," which can be argued, at a minimum, that you are referring to the presentation of the case as opposed to the evidence, what i suggested previously is that you refer to the evidence brought into court, and if you want to refer to what is going on in the courtroom, you can say the evidence brought into court as opposed to "in here." i'm not granting the motion for mistrial, but i'm just cautioning you let us not set up any particular grounds so we have to hear this again. mr. gustafson: the very next thing that i'm going to say is that i'm talking about the documents and i'm talking about the witnesses. it is -- i can show you -- the court: if you made that clear from the beginning, we would have saved a sidebar. mr. maguire: in terms of the objection, is the objection overruled? 5629 court: i'm sorry? mr. maguire: just for the record, you are overruling my objection? the court: i thought you had moved for mistrial. i could not hear you. i denied the motion for mistrial. all right. thank you. (sidebar concluded.) the court: all right. we are ready to continue. mr. gustafson: may it please the court. the court: yes, sir. mr. gustafson: the evidence that you saw in this case and documents that you have seen and the testimony that you have heard from the people who work for lorillard and reynolds tells you that what they said in their testimony was very different from what they actually do in the business. what we know is that cigarettes are designed for addiction. and we know that it changes, it changes permanently a smoker's brain when they are addicted to nicotine. and it shows up in radiology studies. go to the next one, please. it shows up in the radiology studies. and 5630 you compare a smoker and a nonsmoker with the effects of nicotine. and we know, and you know, that lorillard designed their cigarettes for addiction. we know that the way tobacco is grown, mixed and processed today has made cigarettes more addictive than ever before and that the powerful addicting effects of commercial tobacco products remediated by diverse actions of nicotine and multiple types of nicotinic receptors in the brain, which is what you see in the radiology study, then what is described in the very documents authored by lorillard and reynolds. after discussing -- this is lorillard in november of '76 -- "after discussing the fifty percent lower nicotine project with dr. spears, i agree we should discontinue work. it is our judgment that a cigarette with substantially lowered nicotine could not deliver the smoking satisfaction to sustain customer purchase." and what does reynolds tell us? reynolds tells us that "most of those that have smoked for any significant time would like to stop. 5631 many, but not most, of those who would like to stop smoking are able to do so." they tell us that people like frank gafney, most of them cannot stop even though they want to. they designed cigarettes to be as addictive as they could. you heard testimony about the ingredients and the additives, how they take the nicotine out and they put it back in and they control the amount of nicotine to maintain addiction. they use ammonia to make smoke easier to inhale. all of that -- mr. maguire: may we approach? the court: no, sir. just continue. mr. gustafson, you can continue. mr. gustafson: all of that was to make cigarettes more palatable for smokers, was to make it more deeply inhalable. it was to keep smokers smoking, to make quitting as hard to do as they could. it was to take away choice, is to take away choice. now, you compare the parties. you have mrs. gafney, who accepts her husband's partial responsibility here, even though frank gafney 5632 was an honest and trustworthy and loyal person who did not lie and he did not cheat, you did not hear anything like that about frank gafney. and then reynolds and lorillard get together and plot and scheme and engineer cigarettes to be addictive, and then they congratulate themselves how about successful their plan was and how much money they made. and despite that evidence, they claim they are not responsible. what did the defense bring you on that? they brought you dr. kaplan. and you know now that the tobacco companies recognize, internally they recognize it, but the witnesses would not recognize it here in court that "the entire matter of addiction is the most potent weapon a prosecuting attorney could have in a lung cancer/cigarette case. we cannot defend continued smoking as free choice if the person was addicted." but consistent with their practice of saying things internally that are different from what these executives testified to you in the trial of this case, and what they say in their documents when the rest of us people 5633 ain't looking, they are going to tell you that he had unfettered, free choice to stop smoking whenever he chose and that addiction had nothing to do with it. now, to the defendants, it did not matter what frank gafney did. if he quit, they would tell you he should have quit sooner. if he never quit, he just chose to smoke. heads they win, tails we loose. heads they win, tails everybody else loses. when we get to question 3 on the verdict form, which i do not have a slide for you, but i've got it here. when you get to question number 3 on the verdict form, it is going to say, please state the percentage of any fault that was the legal cause of frank gafney's lung cancer and death that you charge to reynolds, then a percentage, then lorillard and a percentage, then frank gafney and a percentage, and you add them up, it has to be one hundred percent. all three of them added together has to equal one hundred percent. now, keep in mind -- it is important, i think, to keep in mind that r.j. reynolds is three companies. the engle defendants include 5634 companies that r.j. reynolds bought or merged with, american tobacco made lucky strike, they brought out brown & williamson. mr. bassett: objection, your honor, misstatement of the law as this has been argued. may we approach? the court: no, sir. you can continue mr. gustafson. and, ladies and gentlemen, you will rely on the law as i've instructed you. go ahead. mr. gustafson: you will see in the jury instructions, in the stipulated facts that we have shown you, that reynolds is all three of those companies, and reynolds is responsible for american tobacco and it is responsible for brown & williamson, and those were the companies that existed when frank gafney was alive. it was reynolds, brown & williamson, american tobacco, and lorillard. it was four of them, and one of frank gafney. four of them, and one of frank gafney. and ask yourselves, who knew more? who knew more about the dangers of smoking cigarettes? who knew more about what went into cigarettes? who knew more about the designs and the design 5635 changes and ventilated filters and ammonia and the other additives that they put in it? who knew more about taking the nicotine out and putting it right back in in just the right amount to maintain addiction? who knew more about those things? who knew more about cigarettes causing lung cancer? was it the folks that made it? was it frank gafney? everybody within the sound of my voice knows the answer to that question is the companies who made cigarettes knew all there was to know about those things, and they knew plenty more than frank gafney. and it was unfair for them to suggest to you that this is all frank gafney's fault. they lied to him every day of his life. now, this decision that you have to make is yours and yours alone. and i can make a suggestion to you. if you got four of them and one of frank gafney, that is twenty percent on frank gafney, forty percent on lorillard and forty percent on reynolds. frank gafney -- it is four to one and frank gafney is twenty percent of that one hundred percent. so i would suggest to you that you put 5636 twenty percent on frank gafney, forty percent on lorillard, forty percent on reynolds. as i said, this is a suggestion to you. this decision is yours and yours alone. i want you to think about this. the defendants told you in this case that frank gafney did not die from lung cancer, despite the unrebutted evidence that lung cancer killed him. they say he died from something that had nothing do with smoking. and then on the other hand, they tell you it is all frank gafney's fault. now, it cannot be both, because it is neither. both of their positions through the evidence and just logically are false. you get to question number 4 on the verdict form. and question number 4 is, did frank gafney reasonably rely to his detriment on any statement of material fact made by each defendant after may 5, 1982 that intentionally omitted material information concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes; and, if so, was such reliance a legal cause of mr. gafney's lung cancer and death? 5637 and you know now that reynolds and lorillard sold defective and unreasonably dangerous cigarettes. you know that. and you also know that this question is very similar to the first question, was it a legal cause, was it a legal cause to frank gafney's lung cancer and death, not the legal cause. this is one of those other causes that works in combination with his addiction. you know now that reynolds and lorillard knew their cigarettes were addictive and they designed them to be that way and they lied about it. you know that now. you know that lorillard and reynolds knew that the addiction to their cigarettes meant most of their customers could not stop smoking, and they lied about that, too. and you know now that lorillard and reynolds both knew that their customers would get addicted, and that addiction would lead to -- i think the document in evidence from reynolds -- or brown & williamson, which is part of reynolds now, says it would lead to unattractive side effects like lung cancer and heart disease and other things. unattractive 5638 side effects, they called it. and they lied about that, too. they knew what addiction would cause. so now you know that while the defendants say publicly in all this stuff -- in the evidence that you have seen in this case that smoking is a choice, you know now that they were doing everything they could, when none of us were looking, to make it as addictive as they could. you know that now. but did you know that when you came here when this trial started? ask yourselves, did you learn anything in this trial? because what the defendants are going to say is -- because this is 2000 -- we are almost to 2014, we are a couple of months from christmas. it was summer when we started this trial, and there is christmas ads on tv. we are almost to 2014. and i know that you learned things in this trial that you did not know about cigarettes and how they affect people. they are going to tell you frank gafney died in 1995. they are going to tell you that frank gafney should have known everything that you all have learned here in the last month. 5639 he should have known that way back in 1995. ask yourself if that makes any sense. they were fooling the public health authorities. they were withholding things from people like dr. burns and the surgeon general and everybody else about the dangers of the designs of their cigarettes. they were fooling professionals with ph.d.s and m.d.s, high top-rank government officials were fooled, and they are saying frank gafney should not have been. the truth is, the truth is, is they hid it from a lot of people that had a lot more knowledge about this kind of stuff than frank gafney did. he was a loyal, trusting person. what kind of people, who are the people who would do something like that to other people? who would -- who would think that anyone would do that? you all are going to have to decide whether you are going to tolerate that. the jury instruction you are going to get on concealment is long. i'm not going to show you the whole thing. you have got it in your lap. 5640 there is something i want to show you. it is the same kind of instruction that you got regarding addiction. "concealment or omission of a material fact need not be the only cause. a concealment or omission of a material fact may be a cause of lung cancer and death even though it operates in combination with the act of another, some natural cause, or some other cause." remember how i told you each one of these claims has that exact same instruction. because the law recognizes that there are more than one cause to lead to something like this. and it allows you to make that determination. and going to the verdict form on question 5. "did frank gafney reasonably rely to his detriment on any statement of material fact made by defendants or other tobacco companies after may 5, 1982 in furtherance of the agreement to intentionally omit information concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes; and, if so, was that reliance a legal cause of frank gafney's lung cancer and death?" this is similar to the fraudulent 5641 concealment except this one is conspiracy. a conspiracy is an agreement between parties to do something illegal or to do something legal by illegal means. it is an agreement where all of them are in it together. and they are all treated as the same whether you are driving a car or whether you are the shooter or if you are in a conspiracy, it is the same. and here, all of these companies got together and they created the tobacco institute and the tirc and the council for tobacco research, they were all in it together. what one did is equally applicable to any of the others. that is the way the law works and that is the law that you got here. so the question that you are going to have to answer is, did he rely on things after may 5, 1982, which is set forth in both of those questions, questions 4 and 5. and the issue here is not whether the defendants could have said something that would have made frank gafney stop smoking. it is not like claude teague got up one day and picked the most sinister document he had ever written and mailed it to frank gafney and let us see what he 5642 does. that is not the issue here. the issue is whether information on the harms of smoking was available or whether frank gafney ever saw a warning on a pack of cigarettes. the issue is whether their false controversy was a substantial contributing factor. one cause among many, a legal cause, just like you have been seeing on every one of these questions on the verdict form, they all work together. they all act in combination. so what was the evidence? what was the evidence on questions 4 and 5? the reliance on the concealment? well, it started when frank gafney was young. september 15, 1964, kent was marketed as a safer cigarette for the smoker who was concerned about smoking and health, and lorillard exploited this advantage so that within a short period of two years, the kent volume grew from less than 4 billion cigarettes to 38 billion annually. frank gafney was smoking kent cigarettes at that time because he thought it was better for him. what did they say in 1964 about the reason for the false controversy? they knew it 5643 caused cancer and they knew it was addictive and they lied about it. why are they lying? because we must, in the near future, provide some answers which will give smokers a psychological crutch and a self-rationale to continue smoking. tell them it ain't proven, tell them it is all nonsense, it is just the government. it is all nonsense. we are looking out for you smokers. we are going to cooperate with public health. and it continued his whole life. what was the testimony on this? mrs. gafney testified whether he continued to rely on what the cigarette companies said about how cigarettes were not harmful from the '80s up until the '90s, yes, he did. dr. burns from -- you know, did lorillard do this health reassurance message with true by saying, "from everything i heard, i can either quit or smoke true, and i smoke true." dr. burns said, yes, that message clearly demonstrates the people they were targeting were not the long-term, confirmed smoker, but rather the people that were thinking about quitting. that is who was being targeted. and 5644 did mr. gafney begin smoking true around '81, '82? the answer was i believe he did. and the defendants, they admit, they admitted here, their own executives admitted that it was reasonable for frank gafney to rely on what they said. not just back in the '60s, but in the '80s and '90s. dr. figlar testified before you about this very issue. katie gafney testified just this morning. they played the video. play what mrs. gafney said, baron. (a videoclip was played and transcribed as follows:) "answer: we would be talking about just general things and the subject of smoking would come up and we would have the discussion what was proof, what was not. and he did not believe, until the very end, that there actually was a connection because he had read too many things that said there was not. (thereupon, the video ended.) mr. gustafson: what did dr. figlar say, in 1984, they had run that can we have an open debate campaign. it was a nationwide, full-page newspaper ad. they went on national tv news and he was asked specifically, do you 5645 think it was reasonable for your customer, the smokers of your cigarettes, to believe what you said and rely upon what you publicly said, including these advertisements? and that is 1984, can we have an open debate? and he said, i would say it would be reasonable, yes. that is why they put them in. and then what did dr. heimann say? the fellow that testified back in the video in 1986 about advertisements, he was american tobacco, now r.j. reynolds, would you expect a consumer to rely upon your advertisements? yes. our advertising is truthful and we would anticipate that they would rely on it. and then what did lorillard's people say? kristy leung is their marketing person. "lorillard told the public in its advertisements in 1952 that kent had health protection, that it was the first cigarette with a filter that really works and they had the greatest health protection in cigarette history. it wanted people to believe those statements. remember that? "yes, we did. "and people were entitled to rely on those 5646 statements and take them as true? "yes. i believe so." and then ed robinson, their science guy. "can you give me any reason why -- and i'm talking from lorillard's perspective, not the perspective of the listener. any reason why it would be unreasonable for a consumer of lorillard's products to rely on a statement that lorillard made about the health hazards associated with its products? "answer: no. there is no reason why it would be unreasonable." frank gafney relied on the statements by the industry, and the jury instructions will show you it does not have to be an affirmative statement because the findings say they kept things to themselves. they concealed things. they do not have to come out and say something. they can tell you, here, smoke true. from everything i heard, i can either quit or smoke true. i smoke true. they do not tell you true is every bit as dangerous as the old golds we used to make. we have design changes in true to make it so that you inhale the stuff more deeply into your 5647 lungs and makes it more inhalable. just as bad for you as any other cigarette we sell. they did not say those things. they kept it to themselves in the hopes that people would keep buying their cigarettes. and frank gafney relied on these. he relied on them to justify continued smoking, and that was after 1982. and you heard dr. burns tell you what a difference it made, because if he had quit smoking in 1983, he would have had a 73 percent decreased risk of lung cancer by 1995. 73 percent risk he would have lost. if he quit in 1985, he would have lost 63 percent. it matters that he still believed them in the '80s. the program of deceit made a difference. and it started when frank gafney was a child and he continued his whole life. we know that lorillard and the industry targeted children. that is their advertisement in the '50s, and then we have them in the '70s saying the base of our business is the high school student. and what did reynolds say? reynolds, american tobacco, now part of reynolds 5648 advertising prongs in 1952 for lucky strike, and then reynolds saying in 1974, let us look at the growing importance of the young adult in the cigarette market. in 1960, this young adult market, 14 to 24 age group, represented 21 percent of the population. and they represent tomorrow's cigarette business. in 1960, the 14 to 24 age group was frank gafney. he was born in 1936. he was 24 years old. he was right near the wheelhouse. he was right exactly the kind of person they were targeting back then in the 1950s. they concealed, lorillard did, the use of ammonia and ph manipulation in this trial. dr. burns, will you play that, baron. (thereupon, the video clip was played and transcribed as follows:) "question: first as to ammonia, does lorillard add ammonia to its cigarettes? "answer: no, it does not. "question: has it ever? "answer: no. "question: does lorillard alter the ph of smoke? "answer: no, it does not." 5649 (thereupon, the video ended.) mr. gustafson: what you know, you know, from the evidence you heard, that lorillard tobacco company ingredients include ammonia and phosphate. they do put ammonia in their cigarettes, unlike what mr. robinson told you under oath. mr. maguire: objection, your honor. may we approach? the court: no, sir. mr. gustafson: and we know from the reynolds documents, we know from the reynolds documents that ammonia increases the ph. it is in the lorillard documents too. they were manipulating ph. they were putting ammonia in cigarettes. but you know how it all began is in 1953 -- baron, if you can circle the drop in 1953. we know that in 1953, cigarette sales dropped precipitously that year because of some scientific articles that got some press in the paper. we all know that now. 1953, please. mr. philipson: i'm sorry. 5650 gustafson: and what did they do? they decided to meet at plaza hotel up in new york and they hired a pr firm and they hired scientists and public health people to try to look out for their customers. they hired a public relations firm and they met there and they all decided to agree to lie and use the public relations company to head their efforts. so the public relations company went to work and went to interview everybody from these companies that were participating and what does the forwarding memo tell us? the forwarding memo says it finds some interesting opinions. one of the men said it is fortunate for us that cigarettes are a habit they cannot break. said another: boy, would not it be wonderful if our company was the first to produce a cancer free cigarette? what we could do to competition. they knew. they knew clear back then. frank gafney was 17 years old. then they agree that when they issue the frank statement nationwide, the frank statement says they are going to promise to accept responsibility. we accept an interest in 5651 people's health, we believe the products we make are not injurious. we always have and always will cooperate with those who safeguard the public health, and make all these promises. and then they tell you in more than 300 years, they have been given tobacco and every time, every time those claims have been dropped and that is planting the seed for what they are fixing to do, and that is that they are going to lie. and how do the lies work? well, they knew what they were doing was a lie because the tobacco institute, in 1968, says, "our basic position in the cigarette controversy is subject to the charge and may be subject to a finding that we are making false or misleading statements to promote the sale of cigarettes." they were reflecting on what they were doing and they still kept it to themselves. 1968. and then they attack -- in 1968 they start attacking the surgeon general and the government for getting the word out, trying to get the word out about their product. "the report is a shockingly intemperate defamation of an industry" -- which is a lie -- that led 5652 the way in research to seeking answers. there was no controversy, and they knew it caused cancer and it was addictive and they kept it to themselves. then february 26, 1972, they attack the surgeon general and they call him a liar, publicly. "the surgeon general insults the scientific community and the number one health problem is not cigarette smoking but is the extent to which the public health officials may knowingly mislead the american public." how did this program work out for them? i do not have to tell you, they tell me. 1972, the roper proposal, they brag about how well it works. "for nearly 20 years, this industry has employed a single strategy to defend itself on three major fronts, litigation, politics, and public opinion. while the strategy was brilliantly conceived and executed over the years ..." they love how it is working out for them and they love patting themselves on the back about how good they were about it. and then we learn -- in the 1981 ftc report, we learned that cigarettes -- not just 5653 that they are the most heavily advertised product in the united states, but the national commission on smoking and public policy reported in 1978 that the tobacco industry spent more on advertising cigarettes in one day than the united states government spent on that area in an entire year. and they tell you they were not getting the message out? they spent more on one day getting their message out than the government did in a year. 1959. r.j. reynolds, alan rodgman, "the physiological requirements of the smoker with respect to nicotine can be met by the application of the optimum amount of nicotine to the extracted tobacco." they are not talking about growing some sweet little plant out of the ground and chopping it up and rolling it up in paper, they are extracting the tobacco and they are applying the optimum amount of nicotine on that thing to make sure they could maintain addiction. 1963. brown & williamson, now part of reynolds, "we are in the business of selling nicotine, an addictive drug." here we go, the unattractive side effects 5654 of lung cancer, cardiovascular disorders, emphysema. they kept it to themselves and they lied about it. 1976, lorillard: it is known that the higher the ph of the smoke is; i.e., the more basic, the more nicotine exists in the freeform. dr. cummings talked to you about freebase nicotine. "free nicotine has a greater physiological effect and it is this effect we want to achieve without sacrificing taste." they agree to conceal that they experimented with freebasing nicotine in cigarettes and they agreed to conceal -- the next document, baron. -- that the nicotine addiction made their customers like rats in a cage, just pushing the lever for another cigarette. yet, they say -- they are going to tell you that it was frank gafney's choice to quit smoking, that addiction had nothing to do with why he smoked. but this continued into the '80s. because we have reynolds with can we have an open debate, "you may assume the case against smoking is closed, but this is far from the 5655 truth. studies which conclude that smoking causes disease have regularly ignored significant evidence to the contrary." and when an addicted smoker tries to quit smoking and they cannot give it up and they are having a hard time and they are miserable and all they need is a cigarette, they run up to the winn-dixie to get a pack, when they see something like that, that is license to smoke. and it continued into the 1990s even, because they all showed up, reynolds and lorillard and philip morris and the others, they all showed up and they lied to the united states congress. i believe nicotine is not addictive. we do not know what causes cancer in general right now. the evidence is frank gafney relied well after 1982 on the things that these companies were doing and saying, on the things they kept to themselves. when you get to question number 4 on the verdict form whether frank gafney reasonably relied, well, the defendants' own people told you he reasonably relied on what they said. and they know what happened after may 5, 1982, and we know that his 5656 reliance was a legal cause of his lung cancer and death. the evidence shows you that. you should check yes on both defendants on question 4. and when you get to question number 5, did he reasonably rely to his detriment on any statement of material fact made by the defendants or other tobacco companies after may 5, 1982, in furtherance of the agreement, the conspiracy to conceal, the answer to that should be yes as well, based on the evidence that you have seen in this case. when you get to the last question on the verdict form -- i'm going to skip question 6 because mr. lewis is going to discuss question 6 with you. but question 7, "please state as to each defendant below for which you answered yes to question 4 or 5 whether you find by clear and convincing evidence that punitive damages are warranted against that defendant under the circumstances of this case." and i can tell you we are going to ask you to answer yes to both of those. the entire time that frank gafney smoked from the first draw he ever took as a 5657 14-year-old boy to the last one he took in early 1995, every single day of his life they lied about things that mattered. but behind closed doors, when the rest of us were not around to hear, they were bragging to each other about how smart they were, about how successful their plan was. and we know that it was successful without even looking at the internal documents that tell us it was successful. we know that their plan worked. you can see the difference today. you can see the difference what their concealment and deceit made in this country. because in frank gafney's generation, as you heard from dr. burns, seventy percent of people in his age cohort, his age group born around 1936, seventy percent of them smoked. today, the evidence you heard is these companies are required to tell the truth and today, one in five of americans smoke. one in five. it used to be one in two back when they were lying. see, the truth -- the truth is powerful. lorillard and reynolds' deceit made them a lot of money. and it resulted in millions and millions of americans being 5658 addicted and dying from smoking-related diseases, and the result, as you heard from dr. burns, is 20 million americans dead from smoking-related diseases, and today, it is 443,000 of americans die every year from smoking-related diseases. you could -- you could fill this room with chairs and you could ask people -- you could fill the whole room with chairs and ask people to raise their hand if you lost a loved one to cigarettes, and most of the hands in that room would go up. and you could do that in every room in the united states of america and you get the same response. it was everywhere. they killed a lot of people, because this question number 7, this question number 7 is -- it is about frank gafney, but it is not just frank gafney. you get to evaluate this on the harm they caused to the public. you get to evaluate how you answer this question based on what effect, what consequences, what potential consequences that what they did, how did it affect the public. you get to evaluate that here. in phase ii, which is very short, you do not 5659 evaluate that. it is only -- you evaluate that issue only based on frank gafney and kathleen gafney. but for answering whether punitive damages are appropriate, you get to evaluate the consequences of what they did, to all those rooms across the country that filled them up and asked them that question. so the jury instruction you are going to get on this, you remember it has one, two, three and four. four prongs to this jury instruction. one, the conduct causing a loss so gross and flagrant as to show a reckless disregard to human life and the safety of persons exposed to the effect of such conduct. and then, this is important, only lawyers think these little words are important, but it says "or," not "and." there is an "or" between one and two and there is an "or" between two and three and there is an "or" between three and four. and that means the law recognizes that each one of these four things is reprehensible. we only need one of them in order for punitive damages to be assessed. only one, only -- a defendant -- you know, one of these things warrants punishment in punitive damages 5660 if it is based on clear and convincing evidence, which you have here. interesting thing, a special thing about the reprehensibility of their conduct, their client's conduct, not the lawyers, i'm talking about lorillard and reynolds, the thing that is special about it in a really bad way, is they did every one of those four things. you can wrap a blindfold around you and stick that jury instruction on the wall and throw a dart at it, and whenever that dart hit, they did it. they did all four of those things. that is the definition of "reprehensible" times four. the only acceptable question -- i mean the only acceptable answer here is yes. this is not a situation where they did not mean it and they did not know, you know, they were careless. they knew and they lied about it and they did it to make money, and they did not care how many people died and they did not care who they were. 20 million people. there was 20 million people, they had wives and husbands and children. 20 million people. mr. bassett: objection, your honor. the court: legal basis? 5661 bassett: not in evidence. the court: sustained. mr. bassett: move to strike, your honor. the court: denied. let us move on, mr. gustafson. mr. gustafson: they were real people, those 20 million. they were real. frank gafney was one of those people. the only truly acceptable answer on question number 7 is yes to both of them. mr. lewis is going to address question number 6. i hope i did not miss anything. i hope i did not go too long. but i want to say that what you do here, what you do here matters. closing argument mr. sales: good morning, everyone. the panel: good morning. mr. sales: i think this is the first chance that i've had to actually address you directly, look you in the eye and tell you a little bit about my perspective of this case, which is the case of frank gafney and kathleen gafney. and certainly it is a matter of interest at least to think about those many others who were described in the surgeon general's report as having lost their lives, as having suffered the same fate that mr. gafney suffered due to the ravages of tobacco, tobacco smoke and the addiction to nicotine. 5866 i want to begin -- because we are going to talk a lot about addiction to nicotine. i want to begin just a little bit because we talked in this case about things that happened before and after mr. gafney's lifetime. and mr. bassett referred you to one of those florida health notes from 1906 and you may recall that mr. gustafson asked that another part be read. was he really talking about -- was the document really talking about what happened in this case or what this case was about? no. the story -- and you have this in evidence if you choose to look at it -- is a story of a minister who had traveled to san francisco back in 1906 apparently and was in the basement of a building looking at an opium den where opium cigarettes were being mixed, as he described it and mr. gustafson brought out, excrement and tobacco. and they go in there and they say it is the worst form of tobacco. and the suggestion is being made to you that as early as 1906 -- and they have stuff they put up, letters from john quincy adams -- is that during mr. gafney's lifetime, everybody knew, everybody appreciated it, everybody understood 5867 it. well, let us just say this is in evidence as well. and, you know, are we going to spend a lot of time during my limited time with you this morning talking about 1909? no. but i want to talk about the 20th century because mr. gafney's life was limited to the 20th century. and if you look at another one of those florida health notes, which is in evidence, and can see what it says, what it says is the general consensus before mr. gafney lived, not from something that is mixed in an opium den in san francisco, but the general consensus back then of tobacco, of the kind of things that real people actually smoked, not drug addicts seeking opium, a big problem, different story for a different time. the real consensus was that it was not harmful and that is the century, the real 20th century into which mr. gafney was born. that is when he lived. and one of the things that is really important for you to understand in this case, is to understand the century that he lived in, from the time that he was alive until the time 5868 that he died and everything that happened. now, what can we do in a case like this where the parties -- and i do not have a lot of those slides. i'm going to try to show you mostly what i have in my stack here in an hour and two minutes now. i may have -- or i guess 12 minutes to deal with you. i'm going to try and get you out by a reasonable lunchtime. maybe i'll be done early. but i do not have a lot of those lawyer slides. i just want to show you some things that happened, that really happened in the 20th century and how they affected frank gafney in response to some of the arguments that the defendants were making. now, i know i'm going to run out of time. i know i'm going to run out of time. and i want to ask you -- i'm going to refer to these things a little bit. but, you know, we have witnesses, did they get paid for their time, yes. are some of them totally incredible, and we are going to talk about, that you should throw out their testimony -- and i think you know who i'm talking about -- yes. but we also have things that do not come 5869 from paid witnesses. we have doctors who treated people who expressed opinions about what really happened to them in the 20th century and we have documents that are not even authored by the defendants and they are certainly not authored by mrs. gafney, but they provide to you a window into what really has happened in the 20th century. and so i'm not going to get to tell you everything that is in those documents. i'm not -- mr. gustafson wants me to give you an opportunity, and i ask that you would, at least one of you who is a careful note taker, write down these exhibit numbers and take a look at them, if you would, please, because they provide you with a lot of information about the matters that i'm going to talk about right now. because, you know, mr. maguire spent over an hour talking to you about question 1 on the verdict form, which is the question of whether or not mr. gafney was addicted to nicotine contained in cigarettes and whether or not that was a legal cause, a contributing -- substantial contributing cause to his lung cancer and death. 5870 and this is an addiction case. it is not a choice case. the word "choice" is not in those jury instructions and it may be -- the word "choice" is not in those jury instructions. the word "control" is not in those jury instructions. what is in those jury instructions are things about what addiction does and does not do, and whether or not it makes a difference in the 20th century, in the life of somebody like frank gafney. and, you know, it is important for other reasons, not just to understand an answer to that first question on the verdict form, but it is important also because it sets up, if you will, the real dispute of the case, and if you wanted to have a window when the defendants, through the tobacco institute, were speaking privately, secretly among themselves, high-ranking officials of the tobacco institute, and want to know why the defense in these cases consistently tries to recast the jury instructions and the questions on the verdict form, you have information that helps you from one of their co-conspirators, and that is the tobacco institute, and here it is. 5871 maguire: objection, your honor. may we approach? the court: yes, sir. mr. gustafson: that is in evidence. that is staying up there. the court: yes, mr. maguire. (thereupon, the following proceedings were held out of the presence of the jury:) mr. maguire: your honor, if i understand the argument, mr. sales suggested or already suggested to the jury that the argument that the defense counsel has made in this case, that it was basically a continuation of the scheme that he is now proceeding to put in front of the jury about evidence and that link directly between defendants' conduct of their defense and his attack on the conduct of the parties seems to me to completely violate the whole principle that we are supposed to do, which is it is fair game to go into the conduct of the parties over the subject matter of the claims, but not to attack the defendants' conduct of their defense in this courtroom. the defendant, lorillard, would make a motion for mistrial on that basis. 5872 court reporter: i'm sorry, mr. bassett? mr. bassett: reynolds will join the motion. the court: mr. sales, i'm not sure exactly what i heard, but it sounds like you made reference to these attorneys seeking to modify the instructions and the questions on the verdict form, and then you talked about co-conspirators, which i hope you did not mean to suggest that -- mr. sales: the tobacco institute, that is the document itself. the court reporter: i did not hear, mr. sales. mr. sales: the tobacco institute. and i apologize for interrupting the court, that is the document that is up, and i will clarify that. the court: okay. i reserve on the motion for mistrial. you need to clarify, because as i heard it, it sounds like, whether it was intentional or not, you were making reference to the attorneys being involved in a conspiracy. that, as you know, is prohibited. 5873 sales: may i make my record? the court: yes, sir. mr. sales: i am seeking to draw a legitimate comparison between an admission of a co-conspirator as to what the issue is when someone is asked a question as to whether or not it is addiction or choice, and the arguments that were made here, i'm asking the jury to contrast evidence, matters in evidence with the positions taken by the parties. i will not suggest that mr. maguire, mr. bassett, or ms. tedder is a co-conspirator or that they are actively seeking to perpetuate any fraud on the public. that is not part of my argument. the court: okay. i'm going to ask the court reporter to note your comments so that if we need to go back to them, we can. but i just got to tell you it jumped right out at me, and maybe i missed it and did not hear it in proper context, but you may want to clarify. and i'm reserving on the motion. the court reporter: i'm sorry, i cannot hear anything. mr. bassett: the argument that mr. sales is articulating is an inference to the very 5874 violation that we have been seeking to prevent all along. i mean, what he is exactly arguing is, maybe not directly, that we, in this courtroom, have participated in that conspiracy, but that indirectly we are by presenting the defense we are presenting. so we are defending the case in a way that he is going to argue by inference is consistent with the conspiracy that is been ongoing for the last 40 years. the court: i understand your concern and the record will speak for itself. comment on the evidence is fair; comment on the attorneys is not. so let us go on. (thereupon, the sidebar conference was concluded and the following proceedings were held within the presence of the jury:) the court: sorry for the interruption, ladies and gentlemen. we will continue now. mr. sales: members of the jury, i want to make it completely clear that it is not the position of ms. kathleen gafney, mr. gustafson, mr. lewis or myself that these lawyers are participants in any conspiracy. there is no 5875 suggestion offered that way whatsoever. what i would invite you to do, however, is to consider the evidence in this case. the co-conspirator to which i was referring are -- is the tobacco institute and the document that you are looking, which is the 1980 memo from kloepfer to knopick or knopick to kloepfer, is that document that is the evidence that is in the case. and the comparison that i'm asking you to consider is the comparison between addiction and choice, as explained when no one was looking back in 1980 by a co-conspirator of r.j. reynolds tobacco company and lorillard tobacco company. and i apologize if i left anyone with any confusion on that regard. so that is why the issue of addiction is paramount in the case, but it is paramount for other reasons that were little discussed, slightly discussed by counsel in their arguments. and you know, because you have listened carefully to the instructions that have been given so far, that if you find for the plaintiff on the question of addiction, then the engle findings apply and perhaps they were referred to, but they have not been 5876 discussed by counsel in this case and i want to remind you that that is the consequence of a finding of addiction in this case that -- this is right off the instructions from -- mr. bassett: objection, your honor, misstates the law. the court: again, ladies and gentlemen, you rely on the instructions you have been given by the court as to the law that applies to this case. mr. sales: if you find that mr. gafney was addicted and that his addiction is a contributing cause of his lung cancer and death, these findings apply. nicotine is addictive, we should not have a lot more argument about that. that the cigarettes of these manufacturers are defective, defective and unreasonably dangerous, more on that in a moment. that they lied, that they hid the things that are described right before you, you can read it if you choose to, and that they entered into an agreement with those other defendants in engle, including the tobacco institute, to which i was just referring, and including the 5877 ctr which, by the way, it was not the public relations arm. it would be unusual for the ctr to be speaking on behalf of the industry. that was something that was mentioned just a few moments ago, and that they were negligent. but importantly, also not mentioned so far, is that the findings may not be denied or questioned by you. you have to accept them if you find that mr. gafney was addicted to nicotine and that his nicotine addiction was a contributing cause. now, i want to remind you of another instruction, because on behalf of mrs. gafney, i ask you not to be intimidated by lawyers', either side, suggestions about what your job is. because his honor is the -- is the person -- his honor, judge blanc, is the person that tells you what your job is, not the lawyers. and what his honor tells you is that your job is to determine what the facts are. you get to decide what addiction is and whether or not mr. gafney was an addicted smoker and his addiction caused his disease and death. now, certainly you have clues that have been provided to you in this case that are 5878 helpful to you, and one of them is that same surgeon general's report that i referred to from 2010. first, as we have seen a couple of times, nicotine is like other drugs, drugs of abuse, but importantly, and this is where your job is, actually, as the surgeon general has told us even in 2010, there is no established consensus on criteria for diagnosing, diagnosing nicotine addiction. now, mr. maguire told you this is all there is, this is the book, this is the medical book, and if it ain't in here and you do not fit what is in here -- more on that in a few moments -- perhaps you are not addicted. well, actually, the surgeon general talks about other factors. certainly the surgeon general talks about those criteria and others, but look at what the surgeon general tells us and i put checkmarks by the things that i would urge you apply to frank gafney. did he have compulsive use? yes. lots of times a day. we talked about that. mr. lewis has talked about that. did he have psychoactive effects? dr. kaplan admits that if you accept this -- 5879 that is up to you -- but that he used tobacco to relieve anxiety because the drug in tobacco, nicotine, made him feel better. so he had those effects. we would submit he smoked for other reasons, as i'll explain. did he have drug reinforced behavior, meaning did one drug lead to the next and the next? yes. and then additional criteria, stereotypic patterns of use, i smoke when get up, i smoke before i go to bed, i smoke in my office, i constantly have my hand in my pocket all day long, every day of my life, practically, yes. did he have use despite harmful effects? now, that is going to get us to the dsm-iv in a few moments, but did mr. gafney -- the whole point is you knew better, but they denied -- they denied that it was causing him any harm. and you know from the cross-examination of dr. kaplan that is just not true. he had difficulty walking upstairs and picking up a suitcase, which was attributable to smoking cigarettes. other criteria, did he have relapse? well, they do not deny that he had relapse 5880 because -- why do i say that? because part of their whole case about the word "control," which appears nowhere in the jury instructions, is that he started smoking again. so he relapsed. and finally, did he have recurrent drug craving? is there any question about that? is there any question about whether or not when mrs. gafney and mr. gafney would wake in the morning and you hear the click, click, she would hear the click, click, that she was referring to his lighter because he was lighting a cigarette? did he have drug cravings? sure, he did. he had them when he woke up because his nicotinic receptors in his brain were empty and he needed his drug. so you are the decider. you are the ones with the job. it is you. you get to decide, you get to decide whether when mr. riegelsberger that they read in their case that he was addicted, somebody knows what they are talking about, a close friend. you get to decide whether or not mrs. gafney could recognize an addict in her own husband. 5881 you get to decide whether dr. cohn, the only treating physician in this case, described. and you get to decide whether dr. burns, who has written the chapter in the two books, educated every physician coming out of medical school, probably even including dr. kaplan, on the subject of nicotine addiction, you get to decide whether they are right. and, again, you know, it is not -- it is not what the lawyers say in this regard, because it is your job, it is not mr. maguire's job or my job, it is your job, because his honor has already read to you this instruction, you get to consider, when you think about dr. kaplan and dr. burns, where they come from and why they are doing what they are doing, what their motivation is for testifying, whether they are influenced by the fact that they charge by the hour. you get to consider those things, and then you also get to consider the fact that dr. cohn, who is a man that would prefer that his door was locked to lawyers, said the same thing about mr. gafney's addiction. now, there is a bottom part of this about 5882 experts, because the top applies to all witnesses and the bottom applies to the experts. it is your job, it is your right, it is your privilege to reject the testimony of eric kaplan, m.d. and i urge you to do so, as i'm going to explain in a moment. i do not have the time to go through with you on this first question about addiction and whether or not mr. gafney was addicted, all the testimony of dr. cohn, which was totally consistent in that regard with dr. burns, but mr. lewis, you will recall, asked him, "was he one of the doctors involved? did he have a chance to make observations and write notes about the patient?" and answer to that is yes. and i want to spend very little time talking about this issue about the dvt, this alternative causation theory they spent little time on. i'm going to spend very little time on it. mr. gafney had a chronic dvt, sudden, recent, and a problem that threatened his life, and it was a result of lung cancer. there is no evidence in this case, none, zero, to support the idea that something that happened in 1990, 5883 that something was lingering around and stepped over the lung cancer that had already spread to his brain and caused his death. that is part of their argument. that is part of their case. there is no evidence to support it. it is not part of the greater weight of the evidence. and i urge you to reject, dr. cohn explained that to you, dr. burns explained that to you, it is nothing except a sideshow. what about the issue of addiction? dr. cohn, the unpaid witness, treated smokers for 22 years says in qualification that you all and others really need, in order to understand whether a smoker is addicted, addicted to nicotine, is to take a history. he understood because he had a history of mr. gafney's smoking life, started at 14, that he was exposed to nicotine in cigarettes very early. why do we talk about youth in this case? why do we show you things to show how they try to hook children? it is not just for the purposes of considering whether or not their conduct is outrageous, which it is. it is so that you can live in the 20th century and not in the 21st century and understand how could it 5884 be that a 14-year-old boy, young man, teenager, give him whatever label you will, could become addicted to an addictive drug, and the answer to that is not just one-phased, two-phased, or three-phased, it is many-phased. mr. gustafson talked about concurring causes, things that happen together and for a reason. and did mr. gafney live in a family with smokers? he did. but was he also exposed to a barrage of messages from the defense at a very early age, not the defense lawyers, their clients, that smoking was fun, sexy? they quit. these cigarettes and figures in comics, back when mr. gafney was growing up, and we put those for you in evidence, you can look at them. war heros, decorated war heros smoking in cartoon form, people at war smoking, pilots, athletes, everybody that you would admire if you were growing up as a young man in cleveland, ohio in the 1940s and '50s was doing this. and it is not just that they were responsible for that, that was part of the culture and the time that was contributed to in a way that these products were marketed. so if it matters what happened in 1906, i 5885 would submit to you that it matters what was happening in 1920 and '30 and '40 and '50 and '60 and '70 and '80. and in 1982, what do we know? we know from a memo of a senior management official at r.j. reynolds tobacco company that if we look back and think about these things, what really matters is how and whether we successfully appeal to children. they can say "young adults," they can say "14 to 24," they can say "14 to 17," but the documents show that for a period of 50 years, they wanted to know what children were doing, they wanted to know what people as young as 12 years old were doing. and that is why, going all the way back to the 1920s, it is important to know, to understand the life of frank gafney, to understand that he lived in a culture and in a place where r.j. reynolds tobacco company could walk up to a middle school and say "buy some, have some." and none of us were alive at that time, in the '30s and '40s, and it is difficult for us to turn the clock back and find answers to questions, and i ask you to consider that, talk to your fellow jurors about that, how can 5886 it be. because we are going to talk about this in a moment a little bit more, how can it be that a man who could be exposed to messages, somebody who loves him, public service announcements, how could it be that they would continue to do just what the defendants wanted them to do every day until they died? how could it be? well, getting back to dr. cohn, the younger they get you, the more likely it is you become addicted because your brain is still developing. and, you know, it is not a coincidence, it is not a coincidence in understanding the life of frank gafney in the 20th century that that is when he was smoking, that is when he became addicted to nicotine, and dr. cohn was asked the question in a way that only mr. lewis can ask and maybe more than once, "is there any doubt in your mind?" nope, no doubt in his mind. frank gafney was addicted to nicotine contained in cigarettes. the cigarettes they admit caused the lung cancer, they denied that the lung cancer caused the death, they brought you nothing in that regard, and if there were 5887 anybody around, anybody with a medical degree, because there are some who will take the price and come and say anything, we know that from this trial. mr. maguire: objection, your honor. may we approach? the court: no, sir, not at this time. continue, mr. sales. mr. sales: you have the right to reject the testimony of dr. kaplan. you have the right to consider when he is confronted with facts that are required to be deconstructed over and over again that he is not honest. when he says, i find half the people addicted; when he says, i cure eighty percent of the people by depression, although i've only sold two cassette tapes to lawyers; when he says, i cure fifty percent of the smokers, you have the right to conclude that that is at least an exaggeration. let us talk a little bit about dr. kaplan and the book because, you know, one of the things that happened in this case, that happened in the closing arguments, and it is just a choice about what the lawyers want to 5888 emphasize, one of the things that happened is that in saying that -- mr. maguire saying that dr. kaplan is the voice of addiction and the party with know-how and knowledge. he did not actually go over the criteria that are in there, and i want to do that with you in a moment, just like dr. kaplan did, so that you can, as the judge of the facts doing your job, make your own decision about whether or not mr. gafney was addicted and whether or not those findings will apply if you also find that the loss, the damage, the death were contributed to by that addiction. so let us talk a little bit more about dr. kaplan, if we can. and i just want to say two things about him and this -- before i forget, which are that when he first met ken reilly, a tobacco defense lawyer on an airplane, traveling to and from those hundreds of times that he gets $150, $100 a pop to preach to people about the benefits of antidepressants, why they should use them, why they should prescribe them, that is fine, nothing wrong with that. trying to make a little money, that is fine. but when he meets 5889 ken reilly in 1997, he is using in his practice the dsm-iv-tr for everything else, bulimia, anorexia, whatever, the "-imias," whatever i asked him about. and so he knows because he has a conversation, i would suggest to you, with mr. reilly, what the issues are, and you know, he says, "i'm going to stand toe to toe with ken reilly -- i suggest this is a reasonable inference from the evidence -- i'm going to stand toe to toe with ken reilly and with the tobacco industry and i am going to abandon my psychiatrist's criteria and i am going to instead apply a 1957, '6 -- mr. gustafson: 1953. mr. sales: -- 1953 who criteria. who? the world health organization, that is who. and why am i going to do that? i'm going to do that because it is a trick, i suggest the evidence allows you to conclude. and the trick is if i have an issue when i'm testifying as an expert in a case, i get to say nobody is addicted because, you know, world health organization in 1953 says it is not intoxicating. i'm going to stand toe to toe 5890 with the defense, with the tobacco industry, and that is my position. until guess what? in 1999, the paid expert in this case, maybe he did not find out, maybe he did, i suggest to you the evidence is since he continued for a long period of time as an expert hired by the defense, what he found out, i suggest to you, is that in 1999, as we showed him on the defendants' own website, and you know from the engle findings and you know from everywhere, including the defendants and their own documents going back to the '50s, they did not to wait for the world health organization to change its mind. they did not need to wait. you saw that big board, 1988, surgeon general. they did not need to wait for the surgeon general to say nicotine is addictive. it is. not "can be." they design their products around that. they knew that. and it is suggested to you you should ignore all that evidence, that it does not have anything do with mr. gafney. mr. bassett just told you we did not do anything to design -- well, there is an article -- there is document in evidence from 5891 lucky strike, american tobacco in the '20s or '30s, i do not remember, but dr. cummings talked about it. they have known how to take it all out from the beginning of the period of 20th century, in which cigarettes were sold by these defendants, not by people in a basement somewhere in san francisco, these defendants. and so what happened with dr. kaplan is that he learns that, you know, i cannot say nicotine is not addictive anymore, so what i'm going to do is i'm going to stand toe to toe with the defense again and i'm going to readopt the dsm-iv-tr, which by the way, you will recall it is a manual of mental disorders. he said something about that. they took that off of their slide, but it is a manual of mental disorders. it is a manual, by his own statement and by the document itself, for the dependence criteria applies to heroin and cocaine. the same witness who tells you, you know, the plaintiff, they are -- surgeon general, that is just scare tactics, like they said back in 1988. it is just scare tactics. it is not like street drugs, no. well, the book he uses is a book that 5892 applies to all those same street drugs. and one of the things that is perhaps the most amazing about this entire history is that if frank gafney, for some reason, had found himself in lutz, florida in the office of dr. kaplan, back in 1995, when he died, before he had his airplane conversion, and mr. gafney said, well, what should i do? if you believe dr. kaplan, he would have said, you are not addicted because it is not addictive, do not worry about it, you are fine. by the way, you should quit smoking because it causes lung cancer. that is the case we are here on. so what happens, dr. kaplan stands toe to toe, he tells us, i'm a reasonable individual, you know, i can change my mind, i can find everybody's never addicted, and so i'm going to go with the defense. and i'll use this manual, i'll use this book that i've been use my whole career for something i said was no good before. that is what happened in this case. that is what happened with dr. kaplan. so they do not actually show you the criteria. they do not actually show you the 5893 criteria. they did not need to consult dr. kaplan to find out why people smoked. these are documents all in evidence, your honor. they smoked for nicotine. it is in there because if you do not put enough in it, nobody will smoke. the industry -- claude teague. it is based on the sale of nicotine in an attractive dose -- excuse me, attractive dosage form, that would be your cigarette. it is the sine qua non of the injury -- of the industry. and in documents, none of these ever revealed, none of them ever coming out and saying that people like frank gafney into the 1980s or ever, way after 1982, not until 1999, you know, what we really believe -- this is from one of their co-conspirators, philip morris, what we really believe is that you are like pavlov's dog, and if we just push the lever, if we allow you to push the lever, you will get the pellet. what we believe is that the cigarette is the lever press. what we believe is that you are like lab rats. what we believe is that this is so addicting, that this is so important, you know what, because we are 5894 so concerned about public health in america -- oh, i'm sorry, without that compound, the market would collapse and we would all lose our jobs and consulting fees. that is why these documents are important, because they give a window into what the truth was, the truth that was never shared with frank gafney, never even until the day he died, because you heard from the evidence in this case that the revelations through these documents that have been managed and administered at the request of people like the attorney general for the state of new york, that is happened recently. by pure happenstance, it happened around the same time as dr. kaplan's second conversion in the late 1990s, or first perhaps. but the point is the same: frank gafney did not know that. he did not know that he was being manipulated. he did not know that they were using chemicals in tobacco. he did not know that they put ventilation holes over the filters to change the way that you smoke, so that you would get the same amount of nicotine and keep -- keep smoking every day, all the 5895 while believing that you were doing something to help your health, while you were exploiting those things and while i, frank gafney, would say, was trying to do something because i love my wife and i was listening to her, i was listening to her. i was aware. nobody comes into court in this case and says frank gafney never heard that cigarettes were bad for you. nobody says that. if we were to say that to you, we would be laughed out of court, and justifiably so. what we ask you to do is consider the entire history of the 20th century, the century during which mr. gafney lived in, to try and make judgments about whether or not it made a difference to him. so let me go over with you the criteria that dr. kaplan says mattered. guess it is up here somewhere. now, it may have been suggested to you that you have got to be a psychiatrist to know how to go through it. no, i want to suggest you it is not. i want to suggest to you it is like every other set of criteria that you have heard about in this case, whether it is the 5896 surgeon general document i showed you a few minutes ago, whether it is dr. cummings, whatever, fagerstrom. all of these things overlap, even though this applies to every substance, according to psychiatrists. so what do we know from the real criteria, when we look at it and think about it? well, the first part of it is "as manifested by." it is been suggested to you in this case, dr. kaplan suggests to you, you know -- and we do not want to insult anybody, but, you know, just in case, "manifested" is one of those words that professional people use that have meaning, just like other words in the english language have meaning, "as shown by," "as revealed by," "as demonstrated by," none of them any good for him. so let us stick with "manifested by" because we will understand that you all know what that means. and dr. kaplan says, you know, they do not even look at these criteria unless you smoke so much you get divorced, unless you smoke so much that you will not apply for a job -- you know, think about that. let us take two identical smokers, frank 5897 gafney and another fellow, we will call him hank cafney, and everything about him is the same, everything. they live in cleveland, they brought themselves up by their bootstraps, they read the paper, they were kind and loving, good and decent, fair and honest. they smoked exactly the same amount of cigarettes. and two of those people, hank and frank, are scheduled for appointments with dr. kaplan on the same day. their brains are the same. they are twins. and dr. kaplan talks to both of them and says, you know, frank, you are not addicted, and you are not addicted because your wife, despite her loving attention and the beauty of your marriage and the temple of your home and the decency of your character, she is going to stick with you. and then there is hank. and at the end of the hour meeting where dr. kaplan asks all the same questions, he looked at hank and he says, hank, i understand your wife is so upset with you about your smoking that she may divorce you. you are addicted to nicotine and you need to stop. 5898 that is the explanation when you put it in context of the first section, this whole "as manifested by." what does it say? if you have three or more of these things, you are dependent on nicotine according to this book. let us go through them just quickly. tolerance, we had a discussion about that. i went over the factors of tolerance that are in the book. most people have tolerance. it is on page 194. we looked at that. "tolerance to nicotine is manifested by a more intense effect of nicotine the first time it is used during the day and the absence of nausea and dizziness with repeated intake, despite regular use," and so on. there is no evidence in this case that mr. gafney, after starting cigarettes at 14, continued to get sick like people do when they try them. he had tolerance. next, withdrawal. well, dr. kaplan talked all about that 2(a) and did not talk anything about 2(b). and you know what? it is right on that same page 264. 2(b) is "the same or closely related substance is taken to relieve or avoid withdrawal symptoms." what does it 5899 say right here? "many individuals who use nicotine take nicotine to relieve or to avoid withdrawal symptoms when they wake up in the morning." and the suggestion is to you that there is no withdrawal in this case, when if you look at whole book, if you look at all of it, it is exactly what they are talking about. no. 3 -- well, let us just talk about the 20th century. dr. kaplan's refusal, sudden refusal to credit mr. gafney with not taking the substance in larger amounts and longer than he intended is nobody was there, it is not in the record and, therefore, i refuse to acknowledge that mr. gafney, more likely than not, did not intend to smoke himself to death when he was a boy. frank gafney has all three of those, and he was addicted. number 4, that was the only one he gave us. there is four of them. go to no. 7. go to no. 7. do you smoke -- even though you know you have got a problem, a physical problem? and dr. kaplan appeared -- even though he clipped the 5900 depositions of the witnesses in this case, even mrs. gafney, he appeared not to know that mr. gafney had trouble even walking the stairs, even lifting a suitcase as a result of smoking. so, you know, there is no direction that is pointed in this case to find an avenue where you can not say, most respectfully, by the greater weight of the evidence that a man who smoked so long and in such quantities, that he died from lung cancer, the greater weight of the evidence in this is that he was addicted to nicotine. all right. let us talk a little bit about how they did it. how did they do it? because mr. maguire and mr. gustafson -- mr. maguire and mr. bassett both suggested to you that they were not any good at this, that they really did not do a good job -- and, by the way, this is from a nordine study. it happens to be in 1982, which is a year of importance, as you have been told. why did they do what they were doing? why were they keeping this all to themselves about the design features and stubbornly refusing, fighting with the surgeon general? why were 5901 they doing it? because if people know the truth, most of them would quit. most people would quit. how did they do it? go out of business? they ain't done that. and so they needed to find a way to eliminate the desire of smokers to stop smoking. how did they do that? well, that is a 1982 document, and it is been shown to you to show you that these things were going on in 20th century, not in the '20s, '30s, '40s, but the whole century. this was fluid, it was not new, because in 1964, you remember this, this is from one of the co-conspirators, an officer, a george weissman who wrote to mr. cullman, became the head of the tobacco institute. that is the people who did the talking for the industry. and what did he say? we have got to find a way, got to find a way to give people a crutch to keep on smoking. and you are being asked that with all of the power and money that you have heard about that they exercised and used to deliver their messages 365 times more per year -- remember those public health messages, lights going off? 5902 more in a day than the government agency spent in a year communicating their messages. how did they do it? you know, again, you have got to turn the clock back to understand what the diabolical nature is of these businesses. because what they say -- and this is from 1970 -- but it is fluid during the whole time. what they say is, you know, truth for one is false for another, that sounds great. we deny what other people say is true. let us face it, what we really want is to try and find a way to show everybody else that cigarette smoking does not cause disease. how did they do it? they spent vast sums of money pretending, i would submit to you, to be cooperating with the surgeon general while their lawyers are writing letters saying, whatever you do, make it so irksome that they will not know what to do with them. that is the cooperation, by giving people free cigarettes to conduct research, bravo. where is the evidence? the green monster is here in the courtroom. where is the evidence? we asked dr. cummings about it, that all that money, all that work, all that 5903 research, all that good stewardship, where is the evidence that they ever once, before they came kicking and screaming in 1999, that they admitted what they knew to be true? how did they do it? this is from 1968. this is fluid. you know, this is an earlier time and we did not have the internet where people could race home -- you are not supposed to do that, you know, and i'm not suggesting that you do -- race home and check on things. so the industry, they were pretty smart people, so what we are going to do is we are going to have headlines, we are going to pay people all this research that we bought and paid for. they showed you one article, a nicotine -- some scientist somewhere could not be bought and said, you know, i guess nicotine is addictive. but what were they saying? remember that stuff about the constitutional hypothesis and the multifactorial hypothesis? what they were doing is sponsoring and paying for things that said it is based on -- this is what really happened in the 20th century, if you want to understand how frank gafney got to be where he was. they were going to tell people that it 5904 has something to do with baldness, it has something to do with whether you are married or not. you can read these. they are all in evidence. it has something to do with where you live. it has to do with air pollution. it has to do with viruses. it has to do with whether you are an extrovert. it has to do, in the case of heart disease, whether you are a white-collared worker. it has to do with your genes. statistics, they would tell you, just like they were telling everybody else, were all wrong. the papers were questioning things, talked about books that say it is not justified. talked about beer and dirt in the ground, that is what causes cancer. talking about animal tests. and there is one in here, you know, it just sort of typifies the whole thing. i do not want to spend too much time looking for it -- oh, it is this one. you know, carcinogens do not cause cancer. that is what we are talking about, that is the message, that is the kind of message. now, it is easy for us, as unaddicted 5905 smokers, perhaps, to, in the 21st century, say to ourselves, you know, these things did not make any difference, but we have real proof because frank gafney is, to some extent, speaking to us because we know -- we put a lot of these in evidence. we have not gone through hardly any of them, but you can look at them. what we know is that these things were reaching him. these are from the cleveland plain dealer, and they are across pages. it is mostly early because newspaper editors who were not addicted smokers, they could see through some of this stuff at some point in time perhaps. but they were saying that it had to do with diesel fumes. red, that is the old quaint way of referring to communists, right? they published every time somebody said it was doubt. there were reports in the papers -- this is what frank actually saw. there were reports that you should not worry so much, and the shock was fading. there were letters to the editor of the wall-street-journal, another paper that he read from prominent people. you can read it, it is in evidence. despite many efforts, i do not know of any 5906 experimental data proof of cancer in the lungs produced from experimental animals like tobacco smoke. there were others. he heard in the paper that filters were good, just like katie -- and there is lots of them. you can look at them. that was into the 1960s. and you have to ask yourself, because the defense does, why did we show you those things? why did we show you those things from the early era of the conspiracy? because that was part of his life, but there it was, even if they were using different media, even if they started to use television more, even if they started to use their representatives in public. we are going to show you some videos and it is in the 20th century, from the '50s to the '90s. that is the period of time we are talking about. and you will be able to ask yourselves, because they admitted that what they were doing was truthful, they admitted that what they were doing was righteous, they say, and they say, even today, through their own corporate representatives, that people were justified in relying on those things even until the period of time that we are talking about after 1982. 5907 go ahead, baron. these are all in evidence. (thereupon, the video clip was played and transcribed as follows:) narrator: we accept an interest in people's health as a basic responsibility paramount to every other consideration in our business. dr. dupuis: so far we have found none that would give us any cause for concern. if we do find any that we consider harmful, and so far we have not, we will remove these from smoke. mr. cullman: we want to be the detective just as much as the surgeon general and the ama and we will cooperate in any way. mr. hottelet: were you saying then, sir, that there is something toxic about tobacco which are removable by filter? mr. cullman: well, obviously a filter takes out certain tar and nicotine. i do not think the industry admits there are any bad elements. * * * * * * * * * * 5908 narrator: take the controversy about cigarettes. in the 91st congress, a house committee heard testimony from leading experts on smoking and health. the record shows that many of the country's most respected doctors openly challenge anti-cigarette claims. narrator: we have no program that i know of to try to help people to stop smoking. we do talk to the question of whether or not cigarettes are hazardous. we do not believe that cigarettes are hazardous. we do not accept that. narrator: we know that a rabbit runs through the briar patch, it is pretty hard for him to look back and see which briar stuck him. narrator: we do not know what causes the ailments that have been attributed to cigarette smoking. ann browder: the case is still open. the jury has not come in. mr. stossel: it may not be harmful. 5909 you are not convinced? ann browder: it may be or it may not be. we do not know. newscaster: earlier this week, the r.j. reynolds tobacco company took out this ad in a number of major newspapers and magazines, calling for an open debate about smoking. in brief, the ad contends that medical studies which show that cigarette smoking causes disease are ignoring significant evidence to the contrary. cigarette smoking does not cause cancer; yes or no? male speaker: it is not known whether cigarettes cause cancer -- newscaster: all right, sir. male speaker: -- it has not been causally established. newscaster: cigarette smoking, no causal relationship between cigarette smoking and emphysema? male speaker: despite all the research to date, there is no causal link established. newscaster: no causal relationship 5910 between cigarette smoking and heart disease? male speaker: no. as a matter of fact, there are studies that while we are accused of being associated with heart disease, there have been studies conducted over ten years that would say, again, that science is still puzzled over these forces. * * * * * * * * * (thereupon, excerpts of the videotape deposition of robert heimann were played and transcribed as follows:) q. throughout your tenure with american, it was not only american's position but your position that cigarettes were not injurious to health; is that accurate? a. through my tenure? q. yes. a. yes, i believe so. q. that is something that american tobacco wanted the public to believe; is that correct? a. yes. q. it is a statement that american tobacco placed great reliance on? a. we -- we issued that statement, yes. q. as far as -- 5911 a. we wanted them to believe it. q. as far as you are concerned, a person was justified in relying on that statement? a. yes. q. i'm going to show you what is marked as plaintiff's exhibit 17, which is simply a package of pall mall cigarettes that is currently being sold. would you identify that as a package of pall malls? a. yes, sir. q. would you read the warning that is placed on that for us, please? a. "surgeon general's warning: quitting smoking now greatly reduces serious risks to your health." q. that is not a warning that is voluntarily placed there by american tobacco, is it? a. no, it is not. q. would you put that warning there if congress did not require it? a. no. q. you do not think that harms smokers so there is no reason to put any warning on them, do you? a. we believe our product is not injurious to health. 5912 q. as far as you are concerned -- as far as you are concerned, is the surgeon general simply wrong in concluding that cigarette smoking causes lung cancer? a. i would use the term "misguided." q. okay. and if he is misguided, then i take it that your opinion is he is wrong? a. i was simply trying to be polite about it. q. okay. but not being polite about it, in your opinion, he is wrong, correct? a. dead wrong. voice: i believe nicotine is not addictive, yes. congressman wyden: mr. johnston? mr. johnston: congressman, cigarettes and nicotine clearly do not meet the classic definitions of addiction. there is no intoxicants -- congressman wyden: we will take that as a no. and again -- voice: i do not believe that nicotine or our products are addictive. voice: i believe nicotine is not addictive. 5913 voice: i believe that nicotine is not addictive. voice: i believe that nicotine is not addictive. voice: and i, too, believe that nicotine is not addictive. mr. waxman: do you or do you not agree with the surgeon general's estimate of over 400,000 smokers die? mr. johnston: i do not agree. mr. waxman: okay. do you know how many die each year? mr. johnston: i do not know. mr. waxman: okay. they agree that smoking causes lung cancer. do you agree? mr. johnston: it may. mr. waxman: do you know whether it does? mr. johnston: i do not. mr. waxman: the -- mr. tisch, i want to move to you for a moment. in a deposition last year, you were asked whether cigarette smoking causes cancer. your answer was, quote, "i do not believe so." do you stand by that answer today? 5914 tisch: i do, sir. mr. waxman: mr. campbell, you were also deposed and you said, quote, "to my knowledge, it has not been proven that cigarette smoking causes cancer." this is a rather passive and puzzling approach, especially in light of the consensus not by some, but all of the scientific community. will you will ever be convinced, and what evidence are you waiting for? and let us have the microphone passed over. mr. campbell: yes, i may be convinced. we do not know what causes cancer in general right now, so i think that we may find out what causes cancer and we may find out some relationship which -- which has yet to be proven. * * * * * * * * * (thereupon, excerpts of the videotape deposition of edward andrew robinson, ph.d. were played and transcribed as follows:) q. did mr. tisch set forth the position of lorillard in 1994 accurately? a. yes. q. and he was under oath. was he telling the 5915 truth? a. yes. he was telling the truth. q. can you give me any reason why -- and i'm talking from lorillard's perspective, not the perspective of the listener -- any reason why it would be unreasonable for a consumer of lorillard products to rely on a statement that lorillard made about the health hazards associated with its products? a. no. (thereupon, excerpts of the videotape deposition of kathleen gafney were played and transcribed as follows:) a. we would be talking about just general things, and the subject of smoking would come up, and we would have a discussion what was proof, what was not. and he did not believe, until the very end, that there actually was a connection, because he had read too many things that said there was not. q. did he ever have hypnosis? a. no. q. did he tell you why? a. he was not convinced i was right. he was a brilliant man for everything but that. 5916 (thereupon, the video ended.) mr. sales: you know, about 20 minutes before i have to sit down, it comes to a point in the case where the defendants and the plaintiff, mrs. gafney, they agree on something. frank gafney was a brilliant man. i want to suggest to you, however, that the consequence of that when you evaluate defendants' position in the case is most respectfully that they cannot have it both ways. they cannot tell you that throughout the 20th century, until a year before mr. gafney died, after seeing, just like mrs. gafney said, these things, when you get to this point in the case, they turn out not to be accidents. when mr. -- mrs. gafney said everything he had read and what had he been reading for years, controversy, doubted, disputed, it is air pollution, it is sugar, it is fat, it is whatever, and the reason that the industry had to do that was because that is the way you provide the crutch to the person who experiences compulsive use of a drug, three to 4 million times in his lifetime, that is what you do. and, you know, this is one of those 5917 documents where it is just the year before 1982 that the ftc put this out. it is one of the ones that i referenced before. take a look and see if there is not evidence in the case that mr. gafney was really like a lot of people, because when you evaluate his conduct and you compare mr. gafney's conduct in doing just what katie described, the question is was it reasonable? was it reasonable? and how do we compare that if you find that he is addicted and the addiction causes -- how do you compare that to the effects of 3 million hits from a product, which his honor will tell you, if we met our burden of proof, is unreasonably dangerous and defective. how do you compare -- how do you compare the kinds of things that you have seen in the case about what it is that the defendants kept hidden? and i ask you when you look at that ftc report, consider whether or not mr. gafney is standing alone and, you know, there are other things in the case that help you with that and i just want to go over it. this is in that 2001 national cancer institute thing. it is all about the illusion 5918 of filtration, one of the things they kept. nobody ever told mr. gafney. where is the proof in this case that people came to frank gafney and said, quit smoking those filters? it is the opposite. the real evidence about the loss of life and his family was that it supported the switching to supposedly less hazardous cigarettes that katie gafney urged on her husband, that is what the real evidence is. and when you evaluate whether or not mr. gafney was reasonable, what this comment -- what this showed on the -- this line, the heavy black one across and the vertical one in the middle, i did that. that is not in evidence, but the rest of that is in evidence. and why i did that was i picked a point about 1959 and showed where mr. gafney fit with what everybody else was doing when he switched to lorillard's products. he was right in there, fifty percent. that is what the evidence is in this case. and we know -- the court: excuse me, mr. sales. i think we have a juror that needs to take a break. mr. sales: thank you, your honor. the court: ladies and gentlemen, will you 5919 all step into the jury room? we want to keep you together. and we will just take a quick five-minute break. mr. sales: sorry, your honor. the court: remember, please, do not discuss the case, we are almost finished, but not quite. (thereupon, the jury exited the courtroom, after which the following proceedings were held:) the court: we will recess five minutes. the bailiff: all rise. court is in recess. mr. sales: i'm sorry i had my back to you, your honor. the court: i did not see it either. (thereupon, a recess was taken from 11:58 a.m. until 12:04 p.m., after which the following proceedings were held:) the court: all right. be seated. mr. sales, i'm told you have 15 minutes left. so our jurors' timing was coincidental, i guess. mr. sales: i think so, your honor. i'm going to use every minute the clerk says i 5920 have. the court: all right. well, the clerk will notify you when your time is up. and at that point, i'll give you one minute to wrap up. their food is waiting, if that is a factor for you, mr. sales. all right. bring them in, please. the bailiff: jurors entering. (thereupon, the jury entered the courtroom, after which the following proceedings were held:) the court: counsel, be seated. welcome back, ladies and gentlemen. mr. sales has just about 15 minutes left in his closing argument. mr. sales. mr. sales: in that 15 minutes, members of the jury -- thank you, your honor -- i ask that you indulge mrs. gafney and me in one more journey through the 20th century, because the question that we are talking about again is what happened to frank gafney. mr. bassett -- because we have not really talked about this yet. mr. bassett says to you that they did not do anything. well, if you 5921 find addiction and disease causation, they made a reasonably dangerous and defective cigarette, those cigarettes were unreasonably dangerous and defective. they were unreasonably dangerous and defective then, and they are now. and what dr. burns told us, which is totally unrebutted in the record, no medical witness, no addiction expert -- i guess, actually, dr. kaplan -- you know what, he did say how many cigarettes you smoke is irrelevant, but i would submit to you that you know that is not true. in fact, in the 1950s, the evidence in the case is, from mr. riegelsberger and mr. porter, that mr. gafney was smoking cigarettes that they are responsible for, those camels and those lucky strikes. and what dr. burns told us, and it is only common sense, when the thing that causes the disease is the exposure to the addictive drug is that they contribute in the proportion into which they are used. and mr. gustafson spent a lot of time talking about that contributing cause instruction. the second causation instruction, you 5922 did not hear. that is not on any of the defense slides, because it is important, or i want to say to you that it is important in evaluating that early smoking history in the 1950s to understand that it is every cigarette that needs to beat every other cigarette. and it would be impossible in this case to say that lucky strikes and camel cigarettes, from age 14, whenever the start date was, until mr. gafney switched in 1959 did not make any difference. mr. bassett says to you it does not make any difference what we did. it is a but-for test. and you know, because you heard the evidence from the people who know about addiction in this case, that the younger you are, the more likely you are to be addicted, and that is when mr. gafney was smoking these cigarettes. he never would have become addicted to cigarettes -- now, i'm going to part company with mr. gustafson on one thing, which is that you may find that the contribution is what the contribution is. you can add it up in years, you can consider the filter, whatever you want to do, that is up to you. but when you go to 5923 compare frank gafney with what r.j. reynolds did in the production and sale of unreasonably dangerous and defective cigarettes, those are matters that are appropriate for your consideration. so what happens? what happens is that mr. gafney's use of those defective and unreasonably dangerous products, and all the while, while they were participating in the same lies, that if you find addiction and disease causation, you are obliged to accept -- and they want to say put it all on frank. got that. let us take our tour through the 20th century a little bit further. and we show you these ads again to put yourself in the position of somebody who, when they have a loving spouse who is trying to urge their husband to do something that is safer, when the defendants know it is not true, what do they do? they see things like this. this could be frank gafney. "your voice of wisdom is speaking to you." now, that is prophetic, because we know, and you have seen it, that decades later, not 5924 even that far after, two decades later lorillard congratulated itself through its advertising firm and said, we were exploiting the health controversy. and they did not stop there, and just like everybody else, when you go to consider the reasonableness of mr. gafney's conduct, when he switches to true, the message from them again -- does this come up more? that is all right -- it is true. i thought all about it, i read -- read it. it says, "either quit or smoke true. i smoke true, the low-tar and nicotine cigarette. think about it." that is what this thinking man did. that is what this thinking man did. and why does it matter in the 21st century what happened in the 20th century? because there are things that we know now that frank gafney never knew. there is no -- there is no evidence in this case that lorillard or r.j. reynolds or any of them in that conspiracy said -- and we showed you documents for all of them, things that they were concealing from the public. there is no evidence that they ever explained to the addicted smoker -- and, again, we have 5925 agreement in the case. dr. cummings and dr. kaplan agree on something, that it is important -- why does all this matter? it is important before and after 1982, because when an addictive smoker knows what is happening to them, when they are asking themselves, you know, i laid the cigarettes down, and what is happening to me? and the answer is that your cigarettes are being designed so as to make it easier for you to use, make it better and more effective, the effects on you, and make it harder for you to quit, just like said they wanted to. and you know, they brought up this thing, dr. cummings, it is in evidence, this is a 1988 edition -- excuse me, a 1997 edition, but dr. cummings told you it actually started in 1988. let us just turn the clock a little bit forward. and what you will find -- they watched this, they showed you parts of it. it is kind of quaint. it is encouraging people. this is happening in the '80s. what are the messages? how do you get ready; this is what you need to do; here is some real people; do not wait, you will get sick; 5926 comparing to other folks; here's the good news. public health officials in the '80s and '90s were not telling people this is why this is happening to you. and ask yourself, would an educated man, a brilliant man, agreed to by both parties, would he, as one of those movies that they suggested that they played that they showed you, that consumption of their products is a disguised form of suicide? that is what the message is from this case. well, when the disguise is taken off, when public health officials get the message from their previously secret documents -- and this is in evidence as well -- what do they tell smokers today? and these are things that have just changed within the last few years. can you adjust that? well, you have seen it and i'll read it to you. the technician: david, it is coming up. mr. sales: think of the difference when you are asked to compare the kind of information that is available in 1982 to an addicted smoker like frank gafney before those ingredient lists were required and the kind of information that 5927 the public health officials, after they got a peek from the secret documents, what the messages have been. think of the difference it would have made to frank gafney in 1994 or '3 or '2, whenever you decide it made a difference in terms of his health, if instead of this well-informed reasonable man who was paying attention, according to them, reading the newspaper, he did not know that executives in a highly publicized way, all of them lined up together and continued the denials, he did not believe it. he did not believe it, because that is what they were saying. and if you turn the clock forward, even now, why does 1982 and today make a difference? you are asking yourselves about that date because the court requires that we prove that because there is a requirement in the law, there is a requirement in the law that the things that harmed frank gafney happened after 1982 on those two claims only, on those two claims only, that is why we have that there. and ask yourself if it would have made a difference to frank gafney. 5928 i have two things i want to talk to you about. home stretch. one of them is the insurance applications. and, you know, it is sort of part of the same discussion, because they are in evidence, one of them you know is from 1987, kind of hard to see here -- here it is, 1987. one of them is in 1977. and one of them is in 1961. and they provide, as the instruction from the court indicates, a window into things about health and smoking history. they are not for any other purpose and you are not to consider them for any other purpose or assume that there is no evidence of it that these resulted in life insurance policies. these are applications. and what do we know about the smoking history from 1961? well, they ask a lot of questions, and this is a reflection of our trip through the 20th century. they ask you if you are a pilot, if you fly, if you are going to go on an airplane ride. it is kind of quaint, but that is what they ask. they ask you questions about your health, about your urine, about your heart, about your friends -- about 5929 your family, rather, and what happened to them. and mr. gafney answered all those questions and answers them truthfully. but you know what? when you consider whether there is anything about smoking history in here, the new england life insurance company in 1961 did not care. they do not even ask. and you know what? in 1977, as you take that trip through the '70s and '80s and get yourself up to 1982 to find out whether it made a difference, in 1977, they are asking the same questions. they have got a few more now. have you had any vehicle accidents? have you had a stroke? you need to fill out the aviation questionnaire. these are all in evidence. they ask about whether you have got scars, again, what your urine -- all these things. and you know what? in 1977 -- mr. bassett mentioned that mr. gafney understood the risk. but you know what? actuaries are the people who decide risk, and the actuaries at the new england life insurance company, apparently, in 1977, who were making bets, giving information to people who -- mr. bassett: objection, your honor. 5930 court: legal basis? mr. bassett: misstates the evidence. the court: i'm sorry? mr. bassett: misstates the evidence. the court: overruled. go ahead, mr. sales. mr. sales: -- are providing insight as to whether or not to let people pay for life insurance and to take bets on whether they are going to live or die. in 1977, when mr. gafney was supposed to be all get-up and knowledgeable about this, they do not even care. it is not until after 1982, in this application, where they ask that question for the very first time. and you know what? mr. gafney told the truth. now, that gives you a dispute in the evidence, and you need to decide what to do about that, because there is clearly evidence that there was a quit for a year. but i want to suggest to you that there is another explanation possible, which is that during this period of time, for whatever reason, even when mr. gafney was seeking to go about trying to protect his wife, that he could not do it, not 5931 even for a year, not even for a year. and i'm going to say two things, one about damages and they talked a little bit about punitive damages. here's what i want to say about it. think about what you have heard in this case about the enormity of the sums of money that have been spent, exchanged, traded for a whole variety of things, and when you go to think about punitive damages and the cost that it has imposed where their lies and concealment in this country, even through and up to today, look at those surgeon general's reports in 2012, the magnitude of the harm that they impose not only on katie and frank gafney but through their lies, through their manipulation, is extraordinary. it is outrageous and justifies, under any one of those four standards that you are to consider, punishment. how much can we tolerate as a society? that is why in these kinds of cases, you are given the immense and important power to say, no, i will punish. i, as part of the jury, we will deter, and we will do it by speaking to the community and others through our verdict 5932 that this is wrong, that this is monstrous, that this is terrible to manipulate -- mr. maguire: objection, your honor. the court: legal basis? mr. maguire: improper argument. may we approach? the court: no, sir. mr. sales -- how much time does mr. sales have left? one minute, mr. sales. mr. sales: right on. thank you, your honor. monstrous, terrible, outrageous. that is up to you. finally, the last thing about damages. no message involved in this except it is something that -- we were all young lawyers, all trained by the same fellow, and they all told us the same thing, which is that we, the lawyers, we need to listen to our client. mr. maguire: objection, your honor. the court: legal basis? mr. maguire: with respect to message. the court: i'm sorry? mr. maguire: with respect to message. 5933 court: overruled. go ahead, mr. sales. mr. sales: what we learned is we need to listen to them because they are trying to help us. and what we know from katie gafney, because we have been listening to her -- you cannot talk to her, but we can, and we have some information about that, and it is in direct response to the defendants' suggestion that mr. gafney was somehow replaced by a liar and a cheat who broke her heart, made her feel as though she betrayed her husband. no. mr. maguire: your honor, objection to referring to matters outside the record. mr. bassett: join, your honor. the court: overruled. mr. sales: there is evidence in this case that he was unfaithful. no question about it. the court: mr. sales, 30 seconds. mr. sales: thank you, your honor. so they finish in their discussion with you by asking you -- i made myself a note, i'll get it in within the 30 seconds -- "frank gafney was a wonderful man, and now at 76, katie gafney is content," their word, "with her 5934 dogs." no. show by your verdict the power and the magnitude of this lady's loss of this brilliant and wonderful man. thank you.