mr. shields: all right. thank you. as an aside, i should say that if i seem like i'm gasping for my breath, i'm still battling a cold, and if i'm still contagious, i'll try and stay away from you, so that i do not give it to you as well. we were about to talk about the civil conspiracy, but i told you a moment ago that there were three elements of what they did: they targeted teenagers; they designed cigarettes to create and sustain addiction; and they entered into this conspiracy. let me tell you a little bit more about number two. both dr. burns and dr. proctor testified about them designing and engineering cigarettes to be addictive. i know we like to think of, particularly in an unfiltered cigarette like pall mall, that it is just tobacco rolled up in paper. it is anything but that. it is a highly engineered product, as dr. proctor told you. there are all these design specifications for how the product is engineered, including the exact amount of nicotine a cigarette is supposed to have. and why is that included, because there is a threshold amount of nicotine necessary to create and sustain addiction. and so cigarettes are engineered, and have been going back long before the fifties, to make sure they are addictive in three principal ways. one, they have to be inhalable. unlike chewing tobacco or a cigar, unless you inhale a cigarette, it is unlikely to be addictive because the whole point is, it is inhaling it into your lungs that the blood vessels absorb the nicotine and send it to your brain, which is what causes the addiction. if cigarettes were not inhalable, people would not become addicted to cigarettes. well, how are they making them inhalable? they flue cure them so that they become more inhalable. and they put all these additives in them to make a very harsh smoke that would not be inhalable, inhalable. and they do that so that it will be addictive. the second thing they do to engineer them to sustain -- to create addiction is that they make sure they have a sufficient dose of nicotine. now, that means selecting and blending the tobaccos that have the dose of nicotine that you want; but, above and beyond that, it means manipulating the levels of nicotine and adding them to make sure that you have a sufficient dose of nicotine. now, both dr. proctor and dr. burns told you about what is called reconstituted tobacco. what that is, you take the stems and the parts of the tobacco that are left over that have very little nicotine in them, but instead of discarding them, you boil them up, you make a sort of paste out of them, dry it out so that it becomes a paper, and then they spray nicotine levels on it so that they get the precise amount of nicotine they want to put in the cigarette. and then they chop up that paper into fine little slivers so that it looks like tobacco. and a substantial percentage of what is in a cigarette these days, and going back to the fifties, constitutes that reconstituted tobacco is one of the many means used to make sure that there is a sufficient dose of nicotine in a cigarette to create addiction and to sustain addiction. and third, and finally, they add chemicals to their product to make the nicotine more impactful, as a way of trying to make it more addictive. dr. burns told you, for example, about chemicals that interacted with sugars, that, in turn, gave more impact to the nicotine going to the brain. so those are the three ways in which they create and design cigarettes to make them create addiction and sustain addiction in existing smokers. let us go back to the conspiracy now. the conspiracy starts with the developing of scientific evidence that cigarette smoking must cause lung cancer. and dr. burns showed you this diagram in which he said the interesting thing is that when people really started to smoke cigarettes in about 1900, you had this rapid increase in consumption from world war i and from world war ii and from massive marketing. and then, about 20 years later, this lag time, you have a previously unheard of disease, lung cancer, suddenly skyrocketing almost parallel to the line of increased consumption. that information led scientists to say, well, maybe there is a relationship between cigarette smoking and lung cancer because we did not have lung cancer before we had this increase in smoking. and so they started undertaking population studies, studies to see if there was an association between smoking and the people that had lung cancer. and in 1950, there were four major studies linking smoking with lung cancer published in the journal of the american medical association and the british medical journal and in the journal called cancer research. these four studies were a major breakthrough in developing scientific evidence that cigarette smoking caused lung cancer. it led in turn to one of the authors -- one of the sets of authors, ernst wynder and evarts graham, to try the next step, and that is not only to look at population groups, but look at animal studies. one of the ways scientists try and determine if a substance causes cancer is to do a study on an animal, see if it will cause cancer in the animal. and then, if it causes cancer in the animal, then you might be able to refer it would cause it in a person as well, particularly if you have all this population data as well. and so ernst wynder and croninger did the mouse skin study paintings that were published in 1953 that were able to produce skin cancers on mice that were remarkably similar to the kinds of cancers being seen in lung cancers. the evidence regarding those prior studies was known to anyone who was looking at the scientific literature. most people do not look at the scientific literature. you know, 16-year-old don gamble was not reading the british medical journal or the journal of the american medical association, but reynolds was, and the other tobacco companies were. and dr. claude teague, who remained with them throughout his entire career, wrote this memorandum in which he reviewed all the scientific evidence that was then available and said the studies tend to confirm the relationship between heavy and prolonged tobacco smoking and cancer of the lung. that was in february of 1953. a few years later in 1956, another scientist at rjr, dr. rodgman, did another analysis of cigarette smoke and the evidence, walked his way through it, and said cigarette smoke is a major causal effect in the presence and increasing incidence of cancer of the respiratory system. that is lung cancer. but, most importantly, there was an interview done by british american tobacco company of the various top scientists and executives at all of the american tobacco companies in may of 1958. and the british american tobacco researchers that came around went to the american tobacco company, the then manufacturer of pall mall, went to the r. j. reynolds tobacco company, went to the other various tobacco companies, and said, with one exception, a dr. green at yale who was not affiliated with any of them, the individuals whom we believe -- whom we met with believe that smoking caused lung cancer. that is in 1958. and then, years later, reynolds again has an internal memo in which it goes through all of the evidence and concludes that the amount of evidence accumulated to indict cigarette smoke as a health hazard is overwhelming. so it is clear from those documents that they looked at the scientific literature, understood what the scientific literature was saying, and, in terms of their own internal beliefs, as shown by the bat memo, they accepted and believed that cigarette smoking caused lung cancer. and if you wanted to look particularly at the american tobacco company, the manufacturer of pall mall at the time, the american tobacco company, in the early fifties and throughout the fifties, was the leading tobacco company. it was the leader of the conspiracy. and the american tobacco company knew that it caused lung cancer because, one, we have a memo in which it tries to muzzle evarts graham and wynder from their work. they were at sloan kettering hospital in new york, and the american tobacco company gave large sums of money to the hospital. and this memo is where they met with the head of the hospital and talked to him about trying to reign in evarts graham and wynder from their work in which they were suggesting there was a relationship between cigarette smoking and lung cancer. you do that only if you know about the work, and you know about what is being published. and, secondly, they used their economic power, as this memo indicates, to get the head of sloan kettering to go out and issue a statement at a press conference that there was no established relationship between lung cancer and cigarette smoking. secondly, you will see the documents regarding the ecusta paper company. now, the ecusta paper company undertook a series of studies back in '53, starting in the summer and running into fall, along with the american tobacco company, and reported the results back and forth to the representatives of the american tobacco company. and what they did was the mouse skin study that graham and wynder were doing publicly. and they also found, as a result of that, that they were able to produce what would appear to be a skin lesion that would develop into a cancer. yet, despite the fact that they, in effect, were replicating what wynder and graham were doing, the president of the american tobacco company issued a press release alleging that the wynder and graham work was wrong, that it did not prove anything, that mice were not men, and, consequently, that we should not give it any credence. dr. robert proctor told you about this. dr. proctor, along with dr. burns, described what the industry knew. the example of the ecusta paper company is seen in document p-562, in which it described the results of its study and indicates that the test probably would produce an eventual cancer, and that was the importance of the work being done. and then that leads, in turn, to the meeting at the plaza hotel. it is the president of the american tobacco company, having met with sloan kettering, and having the ecusta paper studies that showed that it caused the same thing that wynder and graham were showing on animals, that then calls a meeting of the presidents of the american tobacco companies. reynolds, philip morris, all the others called to a meeting at the plaza hotel in december of 1953. and when they got together, their principal concern was not the health and safety of their customers or what they could do to protect their customers, but was how to protect their bottom line by a public relations campaign. and so they decided to employ the hill & knowlton public relations company to engage in a campaign to convince the public that the scientific literature did not support the claims that cigarette smoking caused lung cancer. and the interesting thing about the documents from that meeting is that, internally, they acknowledged the very things that they were denying publicly. here is a document, p-168, from hill & knowlton in which it describes its interviews with the research directors of those tobacco companies, in which they, in effect, admit, they understand it is addictive, it is a habit they cannot break, and they also understand the cancer causation issue by talking about whether they could produce a cancer-free cigarette. you do not talk about whether you can produce a cancer-free cigarette if you do not think your cigarettes are causing cancer. that is the bottom line. and so internally, they are admitting the very things that they are denying publicly. and the first thing they did to deny publicly was the issuance of the frank statement, in which they claimed there was no proof that cigarette smoking was one of the causes of lung cancer, and in which they undertook the responsibility of saying the interest of people's health was a basic responsibility of theirs, paramount to every other consideration of their business. keep that in mind as we look at what they did for the next 45 years as to what was really paramount for their consideration of their business. now, note, this frank statement did not say, here's the evidence that it causes lung cancer, but we do not believe it; or, we think there are some problems with the evidence; or, we think there is some scientific question. it just denied there was any evidence to begin with, knowing from their own internal documents that they had reviewed the evidence, and they thought it was more than sufficient to reach that conclusion. now, i want to be clear. we are not saying that don gamble saw the frank statement. do not know whether he did or not. lived in jacksonville at the time. it was published in jacksonville. he may have seen it, he may have not seen it. that is not the point. the point is, this is the beginning of a conspiracy that is so vast and so pervasive that these kinds of statements literally are everywhere for the next 40 to 50 years, so that it would be impossible for anyone not to have known that was the position that the tobacco companies were taking, because they constantly said it. they said it on radio and television and in press releases and in statements and in magazines, over and over. just like their advertising, it was like wallpaper, that everybody would have known and seen it over that period of time. now, is it likely that someone 40, 50 years later could say, i remember seeing this statement on such-and-such date, and it was called x? of course, not. memories do not work that way. but people remember the substance, whether they remember the specific statement or the specific time period. and we are going to see later, from comments that don gamble made, that he clearly remembered the substance of this and the campaign that came and accepted it as true. now, part of what they decided to do at the plaza hotel was create a couple of front organizations. the first one was tirc, the tobacco industry research council, later became known as the council for tobacco research. as their own internal documents indicate, it was a front organization. it was a shield. it was a public relations scam that they were using, not a legitimate scientific organization, which is what they told the public. what they did is spent all of this money on research of issues other than the fundamental question. and as dr. proctor told you, he called it distraction science, good science done by reputable scientists, it just did not look at the real issues. it looked at all these other issues, which enabled them to say, one, it had not been proven that cigarettes cause cancer. we have spent 300 million dollars, and we have not been able to prove it. and, two, it enabled them to work with prestigious scientists, who then would become less likely to make comments about cigarettes if all their research is being funded, even on other issues. by 1964, any question about whether there was scientific doubt should have been resolved. you were told by dr. burns and by dr. proctor that in 1962 president kennedy created an advisory -- asked his surgeon general to create an advisory committee to look into the issue. because at that point in time, the astronauts smoked, the president of the united states smoked, most doctors smoked. everybody smoked. so when the issue came up, the surgeon general creates an advisory committee. it looks at the evidence for a couple of years and, even though half of the members of the advisory committee were, in fact, smokers, concluded that cigarette smoking caused lung cancer and emphysema. now, at that point in time, it should have been clear to anybody that there was no longer any scientific issue to be decided. the industry then had to make a decision, was it going to accept the unequivocal, clear scientific evidence and deal appropriately with its customers, or was it going to continue down the road on its conspiracy of denial and concealment, of doubt and reassurance? it chose to do the latter. and the first thing it did, as part of doing the latter, was send out its emissaries to be on the evening news to deny what the surgeon general had said. and you saw that old grainy videotape from 1964 on cbs evening news in which one of the cullmans is being interviewed and denies that there is anything harmful in cigarettes, disputes the surgeon general's report, and, importantly, asserts that reassurance theme that we will see time and time again, that is, if there is anything harmful in cigarettes, we will find it, and we will take it out. now, what is the significance of that? that is the kind of thing that convinces existing smokers to continue to smoke. an existing smoker says, i'm healthy, nothing wrong with me; if there is anything wrong with it, they will find it out, let me know. they will take it out, and i'll be fine. so i might as well continue smoking. in fact, that very reassurance theme is set out by hill & knowlton in the plaza meeting in plaintiff's exhibit 168, as one of the things they should do. and you saw it. now, every time one of their emissaries got on television, that was one of the things they would say, nothing harmful in cigarettes, but if there is, we will take it out, so you might as well go ahead and keep smoking. they said that despite the fact that they already knew what was harmful in cigarettes. they had already identified all the carcinogens, and they knew you could not take them out. and they knew that filters and low tar and everything else was not going to take out the carcinogens, yet they made that statement over and over again. now, another example of it, this time moving forward a number of years to the president of rjr on nightline, in which, years later, 1980s, he is still denying that there is anything harmful in cigarettes, saying it does not cause cancer, does not cause heart disease, does not cause emphysema. he will not even admit that it will stain your teeth. and he uses that old refrain, if there is anything harmful, we will take it out. and then you saw part of their denial, doubt and reassurance campaign was every time the surgeon general would issue a report, they would go on and ridicule the surgeon general, deny the contents of it, claim it was not scientifically justified. we gave you one example of bill dwyer from the tobacco institute at a news conference in which he is ridiculing the secretary of health, education and welfare, joseph califano, for the 1979 surgeon general's report. above and beyond that, you will recall dave burns talking about how they reacted to the 1988 surgeon general's report on addiction. the 1988 surgeon general's report on addiction was a landmark document in which not only did the surgeon general say cigarette smoking was addictive, but said that the processes used for addiction were similar to cocaine and heroin. and it had such statements in it as in many senses it is easier to quit cocaine and heroin than it is to quit cigarettes. how did they react to that? the day before the surgeon general's report is even issued, they called a news conference. and dave burns said, i know because i was in washington for the issuance of the report, and saw the news conference, and saw it being reported on television, and at that news conference claimed that all of these tactics were improper, that there was no basis for them, and they had not even read the report because it had not been issued yet. but it was part of their campaign of denial, of creating doubt, of reassuring smokers to continue smoking. went so far as to go into the mid 1980s. this is 1985, when r. j. reynolds started an advertising campaign in major newspapers across the country in which it claimed that there was still an open controversy about whether cigarettes caused disease. and it ran a whole series of ads in newspapers during that time period. in addition to issuing those statements, they also did some less clear things. at least people knew when reynolds put out an ad that it was reynolds saying it. they did not know when they placed an article in true magazine, that at the time was the largest selling men's magazine in the country, that it was a totally phony article. the article claimed that there was still a controversy, that there was no proof that cigarettes cause cancer. it failed to reveal that the author of the article was a sports writer employed by hill & knowlton, and that the article was written by hill & knowlton working with that sports writer. and of the scientists quoted in the article, it also failed to reveal that all of them were on the payroll of the tobacco industry. that article, in turn, was picked up by the national enquirer. "cigarette cancer link is bunk." this time, although it is literally word for word the prior article, a different name is put on it. this does not say stanley frank; it uses a different name, a name that is wholly made up, and, once again, does not reveal that it is placed there by the tobacco industry, that it is paid for by the tobacco industry, that the scientists quoted in it are on the payroll of the tobacco industry. now, a major part of the campaign of denial included the claim that filtered cigarettes were safer, included the claim that low tar cigarettes were safer, and, as dr. burns told you, that is not true. the evidence is now in, and it is unequivocal, that there is no benefit from a filtered cigarette. it does literally nothing. that there is no benefit from a low tar cigarette because smokers compensate by smoking more, smoking harder, and drawing it in deeper, with the result that they are exposed to just as much of the tar as before. and the reason they do that is they are addicted to nicotine, and in order to get the nicotine in the low tar cigarette, they have to smoke more of it in order to get the dosage necessary. reynolds' principal defense is that it was known that cigarettes were harmful, therefore mr. gamble knew they were harmful. it shows, and we will offer in evidence, magazines and news stories and public service announcements about the harms of cigarettes. we do not deny that. that is another straw man argument. nobody is claiming that don gamble did not hear or see the claims that cigarettes cause lung cancer or other disease. and showing us a textbook from georgia from years before he was born or a magazine article from the late fifties or a public service announcement in the seventies misses the point. you know, unless it was being said publicly, there would have been no need for the conspiracy in the first place. that is the point. it was publicly known. nobody denies that. and because it was publicly known, they entered into this conspiracy to deny and conceal what they really knew, and pursued this campaign of doubt and reassurance, a campaign that worked on many millions of smokers, like don gamble. they offer some additional evidence, and they say, well, this is going to prove he knew that it caused cancer. they showed you that this morning, the cancer policy. supposedly this shows he knew that cigarette smoking would cause lung cancer. this policy, as a portion of the deposition they read indicates, was a policy that was given to all the employees of the city of jacksonville at the time he worked there. it has nothing to do with smoking. look at it. there is not a question about whether he smokes. the health portion of it does not reference smoking. the payment for it does not depend on whether you are a smoker or non-smoker. it is just a generic cancer policy provided to the city employees at the time. it offers absolutely no evidence that he believed that cigarette smoking caused lung cancer. it merely shows that he took advantage of what he was offered in a generic policy that, on its face, has nothing to do either with smoking or with lung cancer. now, finally, they attempt to deal with all of this massive evidence by attacking the messengers, mainly by attacking dr. burns, dr. krugman and dr. proctor. and they will talk to you about how much they have been paid. there is several things to keep in mind with that argument. one, it does not go to the content of what those witnesses said. and the content of what they said is affirmed in many of the documents you have from numerous scientists and experts in the field. dr. proctor's testimony, dr. burns' testimony is affirmed by the 2014 surgeon general's report. two, dr. burns and dr. proctor and dr. krugman all reached their opinions and conclusions and published them into peer reviewed literature long before they were ever requested to testify in a case. so you cannot claim that their opinions are based upon being paid. they expressed those opinions, they published those opinions, before they ever were asked to testify, before they were ever paid a dime to testify. three, they got started testifying because the united states department of justice requested them to testify, and because the attorney generals of various states, including the state of florida, requested them to testify. next, much of what they have been paid was for the time that they expended working for the department of justice and for the attorney generals of the various states. but even for the additional time, they are being paid for time they actually expended at what clearly was a reasonable rate for the professionals of their time, as evidenced by the fact it is the department of justice and the attorney generals that are initially employing them to do that. are you saying that if you get paid for spending mass amount of time, so that it amounts to a lot of money, that that somehow corrupts the opinions that you have published and expressed for years before you were ever employed to begin with? not only is that illogical, that is silly. and finally, keep in mind when they want to talk about the amount of money, that they contributed to that money by taking the depositions of them over and over and over again, asking them the same questions and the same opinions. dr. burns told you he would been deposed by the tobacco defendants 150 times. ask yourselves, why did they do that? do not think they knew what he was going to say after the third time or the fourth time? it is because all that money that they are making -- paying him because of the time he is expended is then adding to how much he has received, and they can come into court and say, look how much money he is been paid. that is another straw man argument. you have to judge the credibility of dr. krugman, dr. burns and dr. proctor based upon their written publications before they were ever involved in this litigation and their degree of knowledge as expressed in witnesses in this courtroom. finally, let us summarize this whole campaign, as they themselves summarized it when they wrote, "while the strategy was brilliantly conceived and executed over the years, it is only fair to say that it was not nor intended to be a vehicle for victory," and they describe it as creating doubt about the health charge. now, it is also true that their internal documents show that they knew and understood that nicotine was addictive, that they were in the business of selling nicotine, an addictive drug effective in the release of stress mechanisms. there are an extensive number of documents that show that while they were denying it publicly, internally they were acknowledging it. and when they denied it publicly, the ultimate denial publicly was the 1994 hearings in congress, in which they stood up like they were in a courtroom here, which they were not, held up their right hand and said under oath, nicotine is not addictive, with documents in their files that said just the reverse. they did that because they understood that they could not make this argument about choice that they are making here if a person was addicted. all right. what is it that was fraudulently concealed? and i think this is an important point i want to make clear to you. we are not saying that it was not known that cigarettes caused lung cancer. of course, it was. we are not saying that it was not known that cigarettes were not addictive. of course, it was. the point of the fraudulent concealment campaign is not that they were concealing what was publicly being said otherwise; what they were concealing is what they truly knew and believed internally. and so what they concealed was that they knew that their cigarettes caused cancer and other diseases. what they concealed was that they knew that their cigarettes were addictive. what they concealed was that they knew there was no doubt or controversy. what they concealed was that they had already identified the harmful substances in smoking and knew that they could not be removed. what they concealed was that they, in fact, designed their cigarettes to make them addictive. what they concealed was that they targeted teenagers. and they concealed that they knew filters and light cigarettes and low tar did not work. now, the concealment is truly what they believed, not that these things were not being said publicly. the point is that had they not concealed what they truly believed, everything would have been different. if they would have come out and said, we know cigarettes do, in fact, cause cancer, we know cigarettes are addictive, we know filters do not do any good, the whole climate of everything would have changed. it would have taken away the ability of a smoker to rationalize continuing smoking. it would have taken away the possibility that someone like don gamble would say, i believe what the cigarette companies were saying. that is the whole point of the fraudulent concealment and the conspiracy claim. so then let us turn to what don gamble put this reliance on, that is, what impact did the fraudulent concealment and conspiracy have on don gamble. the testimony you have on that is from jessie, in which jessie gamble said, he told me over and over again that the tobacco companies had said that they would put nothing in cigarettes to hurt us or nobody else. he said that cigarettes were not harmful to him or anyone else. his son don confirmed hearing his dad say those same things, that the tobacco companies would never put anything in cigarettes to harm anyone, and that he did not think they were harmful. now, that is not saying he had not heard they were. we are not going to tell you that. it is not saying he had not heard that it was being said that cigarettes cause lung cancer, that he had not heard that cigarettes cause various disease; but, he had also heard that the tobacco companies denied it, and chose to believe the tobacco companies. when you say, they would not put anything harmful in cigarettes, that is a way of saying, i do not think the tobacco companies would be selling this if they thought it was harmful. that is a lay person's way of saying, i believe the tobacco companies when they say cigarettes are not harmful. that is what reliance means. it is shown by his statements. but it is also shown by his actions. he continued to smoke unfiltered cigarettes when other people were switching to filter and low tar cigarettes on the basis that they were healthier. if you do not believe that cigarettes are harmful, there is no reason to switch to a filter. if you do not believe that cigarettes are harmful, there is no reason to switch to a low tar cigarette. the fact that he stayed with an unfiltered cigarette, pall mall, for all of those years, is further confirmation of his belief that they were not harmful to him and his belief in the tobacco companies not putting anything harmful in them. but -- we understand that there were warnings on the package, and you have a right to consider what effect those have, but the federal trade commission looked at the question of whether those warning statements worked, whether they were effective. we will have those documents. they concluded in their first report, p-269, that they were ineffective because nobody seemed to pay any attention to them. they concluded years later, in their 1981 report, that a large number of people did not understand the harms of cigarettes, and that the labeling continued to be ineffective. now, the third issue you are going to have to decide is comparative fault. as i said, fault is not an all or nothing proposition. there can be more than one party at fault. they can contribute together. they can both be substantial causes, and consequently be allocated between the two. i will concede that under the facts you have heard in this case you, as the jury, could conclude that mr. gamble was at fault in not quitting sooner or trying harder. you could conclude that. and if you do, then what you would do is apply comparative fault and determine the percentages between the two. that is what comparative fault is for. but when you are thinking about comparative fault, keep in mind the following. don gamble started smoking cigarettes as a teenager, like everybody else in his time period, long before there were any public warnings, long before the public understood there were -- cigarettes could cause lung cancer, and he became addicted. and over the years, as he continued to smoke more and more cigarettes, and heard from the tobacco companies that they did not put anything harmful in cigarettes, and if there was anything harmful they would take it out, he believed that they were not harmful. now, you can say that he should not have believed that, but he did. and compare that conduct to their conduct, in which they purposely conceal what they really believe; that they spend massive amounts of money to convince people to continue smoking; that they target teenagers with their product; that they design their product to make them addictive, so that they will keep smokers smoking; and that they engaged in this massive conspiracy to deny the harmful effects of smoking to create doubt and to reassure smokers. so compare the two. and we submit that if you do, the vast majority of the fault goes over to the column of the tobacco companies, r. j. reynolds as a successor to the american tobacco company and as a successor to brown & williams tobacco corporation. but that is a decision you are going to have to make. and when you do, then the next matter you need to decide is compensatory damages. the court has instructed you -- and you will have those instructions -- on what constitutes compensatory damages. and if we boil down that instruction, it is including the following elements for the damages of wrongful death. there are really two claims. she is bringing her individual claim as a surviving spouse, and jessie is also bringing her claim on behalf of the estate of don gamble, because she is the personal representative of the estate. individually, as a surviving spouse, she is entitled to recover for the loss of his support and services, for the loss of his companionship and protection, and for her mental pain and suffering. for the estate, the estate is entitled to recover medical expenses and funeral expenses. now, in regard to the economic damages, loss of services, you have the evidence from mr. spruance. he presented you this chart and explained how he arrived at these figures of economic damages for loss of services between 142,000 and 296,000. you heard that evidence. it is up to you to evaluate it and determine the figure that you think is appropriate. but you are also going to have to determine, in addition to those economic expenses, the non-economic: loss of protection, pain and suffering, loss of guidance, all of the things that the surviving spouse is entitled. and you are entitled to consider the period of time in which she has been denied that, that is, the period of time in which he died prematurely, that he would have been around to provide services, protection, and she could have avoided the pain and suffering of his premature death. that is a matter for you, as the jury, and your enlightened conscience to determine the appropriate figure. there is no magic formula. i wish there were. i wish i could say, here's the formula you use to arrive at the figure, but there is not. the formula is what you believe is appropriate under all of these facts and circumstances, and in consideration of jesse's testimony about the impact of his premature death on her. you saw that and how she testified. you will have to evaluate all of that and come up with a reasonable figure. i can suggest what we think is a reasonable figure for your consideration, but ultimately it is your consideration. i suggest to you that a reasonable figure under these circumstances is not less than 10 million dollars. given the background, circumstances, and the evidence in that case -- in this case, that is a reasonable figure for the surviving spouse for all of the losses, for her pain and suffering, and for what she has had to endure as the result of the premature death of her husband. once again, that is a matter for you to determine. finally, you are going to have to determine whether to award punitive damages. punitive damages, as the court has instructed you, are damages designed to punish the defendant for its misconduct and to deter similar misconduct in the future, not only by this defendant, but by others. it is the way that civil courts deal with punishment. this is not a criminal court. we cannot send somebody to jail. what you can do is award punitive damages as a way of punishing them for their misconduct and as a way of keeping them from doing it in the future and from others doing it. that is the whole point of punitive damages. it is not designed to compensate the plaintiff because she would have been compensated under her compensatory damages. it is awarded, nonetheless, in addition to compensatory damages for the purpose of punishment and deterrence. and the court has instructed you on the elements to consider. let me suggest, in addition to the instruction, the facts you should think about in deciding whether to award punitive damages. one, was it intentional conduct? clearly, it was intentional conduct. the evidence is overwhelming that it was intentional conduct. there is no evidence to the contrary. the entirety of the evidence is that it was intentional misconduct. two, is whether it is a personal injury or death, instead of merely economic. the law thinks it is more reprehensible, as do most anybody, to say that the impact of what you are doing is to injure somebody or to kill somebody, as opposed to merely causing them some economic loss. that is a factor to consider in whether to award punitive damages. it is also relevant that it was repetitive and continuous, not just for a limited period of time, but for decades. and as dr. proctor told you, it even continues today. you are also entitled, and the court will instruct you, to consider the magnitude of the harm. the magnitude of the harm, of course, to the gamble family was the loss of don gamble, jesse's husband, the father of don. but the magnitude and the harm as well is the impact on everyone else. what did dr. burns say to you? 350,000 americans -- i'm sorry -- 480,000 americans die each year from smoking-related disease. mr. walker: objection, your honor. improper argument. the court: sustained. mr. shields: i'm sorry? the court: sustained. if y'all want to discuss it at sidebar, that is fine. mr. shields: you are entitled to consider under the instruction whether to award punitive damages based on the totality of the harm, but not the amount. now, the totality of the harm here is not just a statistic. it is an outrage. and the only way that our system can effectively deal with it in the civil court is by the award of substantial punitive damages. and if we get to that phase, we will talk more about it. but the first part of that is for you to consider in this phase whether to award them at all. finally, you should consider the motivation of the defendant. and what was its motivation? selling cigarettes. making money. greed. this campaign over all those years is the result of one simple fact, how much money can we make. that is the bottom line. so, ladies and gentlemen, let me conclude. i thank you for your attention. i talked a long time. i know that. we have a lot of evidence here. this is an important case. i wanted to have the full benefit of explaining the evidence to you and how it fits together. we will ask you at the end of the argument to come back on a verdict form finding that don gamble was a member of the class, finding for the plaintiff on each of the questions being asked, and indicating that it is appropriate and warranted to have punitive damages in this case. thank you. mr. shields: i began the first portion of my argument by making a preliminary observation that not only was the greater weight of the evidence on the issues in the case in favor of the plaintiff, it was the only evidence; that the defendants did not put on any evidence, they did not call any addiction expert, they did not put on any evidence to refute the claims that were being made. the defendant responds by saying, well, we did not need to call anybody because we cross-examined your witnesses. the fact is, even with cross-examination of our witnesses, they did not put on any evidence on the issues that you have to decide, so that you remain the fact that the entire evidence on the issues you have to decide came from the plaintiff's experts and the plaintiff's testimony. and the questions that he refers to deal with all kinds of tangential matters that are designed to divert your attention from the issues you have to decide, what i call straw man arguments. and we will go to that in a moment. but ask yourself this. dr. burns testifies, using the standards set out by the surgeon general's report and the american psychological association's diagnostic and statistical manual, that don gamble was addicted to nicotine in cigarettes. no evidence to the contrary. they do not call an addiction expert that disagrees. they do not even ask dr. burns any questions about that opinion. they ask him all kinds of other questions, but not during their entire examination of him did they ask him about his conclusion that mr. gamble was addicted to cigarettes. the only evidence is that mr. gamble was addicted. dr. burns also said, and he continued to smoke because of his addiction, which meets the instruction of the court about legal causation. if addiction is the reason you continue to smoke or is a reason you continued to smoke -- that is significant -- then that establishes legal causation, because it is the continuing to smoke that caused emphysema and that caused his lung cancer. was there any evidence to the contrary? they did not call an addiction expert that said that he did not continue to smoke because of his addiction. they never even asked dr. burns about that. instead, they asked a question about whether he started to smoke because of advertising, or they asked questions on all kinds of other things. but not once in the entire examination was there any questioning about whether addiction was the reason he continued to smoke. now, understand, all of this discussion about he could not quit, choice, and so forth is interesting, but it does not answer the question of class membership. class membership is, was he addicted, did he continue to smoke because of that addiction, so that his addiction is the legal cause of the disease he got. that is the question you are going to have to answer. the question is, did he choose to smoke. the question is not, did he try to quit enough. the question is not all the kinds of things that they tried to raise. the question is whether he met the class definition. that is the question you have to ask. and the evidence is totally one-sided, nothing to the contrary on those issues. similarly, you get to the other issues in the case. did they engage in a conspiracy to fraudulently conceal what they knew? they tried to divert your attention by saying, well, it is already known. it is out there in the public. that is not point. the point is they promised, with the frank statement, that they were going to protect the interest of -- the health interest of their customers, to the exclusion of their own interest. and instead, they made all of these statements over the years, not just the affirmative statements on face the nation and other television programs, but the massive amount of advertising, billions of billions of dollars on advertising. and not once did they ever say, oh, by the way, we, in fact, do know and believe that it causes lung cancer. in fact, it is addictive. in fact, it causes these diseases. instead, they concealed what they knew. they did not put it in these image advertisements. they did not include it in the statements. so it is not just a matter of what they went out and publicly said. the fraudulent concealment claim is what they did not say about what they really knew and the internal documents showing what they really knew. no evidence to the contrary to that. was there any discussion with dr. burns or dr. proctor or dr. krugman by defense counsel of whether they disclosed what they really knew? instead, they tried to divert your attention by talking about all kinds of other things, but never addressing that fundamental issue. there is also the question of was there a conspiracy. of course, that is one of the engle findings. the documents clearly show they entered into an agreement. it clearly shows what they did pursuant to the agreement and all of the components. was there any discussion on cross-examination or otherwise of any of that. mr. walker: objection, your honor. he is misstating the questions on the verdict form. the court: well -- mr. walker: i could elaborate, but i do not want to do it in open court. the court: objection noted. the jury has seen the verdict form, and i'll go over it with them. so i'll advise the jury to rely on the verdict form that is actually used. mr. shields: there is not even a question on the verdict form about whether they entered into a conspiracy to fraudulently conceal because that is already been established by the engle findings, if you get to that point. the question is the reliance question, the causation question. there was no evidence to the contrary on any of those matters. instead, they cherry-picked around the edges on things that make little or no difference, what i call the straw man arguments. what do i mean by that? what i mean by that is you define the issue different than what it is, you set up an argument that really is not an issue in the case, and you knock it down. it is a straw man you knock down to say, we did such and such, when it does not address at all what you are going to be required to address in answering the questions. and here are some good examples of that. what he told you were the key issues, look to see if any of those key issues are on the verdict form, whether you are ever asked those questions. you are not, because they do not answer the questions on the verdict form. take the first one. he knew. what does that mean, he knew? of course, he knew what was being said. otherwise, in talking about the labels, he would not have told his wife that he believed the tobacco companies when they said they would not put anything harmful in cigarettes. he would not have told his wife that he believed that cigarettes were not harmful. that he knew has to be distinguished from what he believed. he knew does not answer the question. it is what he believed that is relevant. think about it this way. we have all heard that the electromagnetic radiation in cell phones causes brain cancer. how many of you believe that? are you all still using your cell phones? because if you did, you would not be using them. that is exactly what smoking was like back in the fifties, sixties, seventies, and eighties. the difference between what was being said and what was being believed in the face of this massive campaign in which they concealed what they knew, in which they tried to convince the public that there was scientific doubt, in which they tried to reassure smokers to continue to smoke. another example, he never really tried to quit. well, i'm going to talk in a moment about the truth of that statement and what the evidence really is, but there is no question on the verdict form about whether he tried to quit. the question on the verdict form is whether he was a member of the class. to be a member of the class, he had to be addicted. whether or not you tried to quit does not change whether you were addicted. to be a member of the class, one of the substantial reasons for continuing was the addiction. whether or not he tried to quit does not answer that question. that is a diversion. it is a straw man issue that does not answer the question you will have to answer on the verdict form. or take a look at the last one. no one forced him to smoke. that is the kind of thing that their jury research suggests they ought to say, but it is not one of the issues on this verdict form. mr. walker: objection, your honor. it is improper argument. the court: sustained. mr. shields: it is not one of the issues on the jury form that you are going to have to decide, whether he was forced to smoke. it is not an issue to be decided by you whether he was forced to smoke, because the issue is whether he was addicted and whether that was the reason that he continued to smoke. the issue is not whether he was forced to smoke. but the fact of the matter is there is massive undisputed testimony that what addiction means is that you are compelled to seek the next dose of nicotine. that was the very definition used by dr. burns of what addiction means, and he walked through the criteria that showed the meaning of that. so there are all of these issues and straw man arguments that do not really address what you have to decide. third important point, even in regard to those issues, the defense has misstated what the evidence is. i cannot walk you through all of the misstatements we just heard about what the evidence is. i'm going to have to rely upon you and your notes to know what the testimony actually was, as opposed to what you were told a few moments ago, but let me give you some examples of that. you were told, for example, that we asserted that this plaza meeting was a secret meeting, and it was up to him to show that it was not. that is not the testimony. the testimony that came out, the first time anybody referenced it as a secret meeting was when he referenced it on cross. and dr. proctor said, well, it was reported as a secret meeting. and then, the next thing you saw was that it was reported in the new york times as a highly secret meeting of the presidents of the companies, in which they refused to comment. total misstatement of what the testimony was, and there are example after example of that. he showed you, for example, textbooks from early 1940s in georgia to say this shows that he knew. well, what did the textbooks say? some generic information that it was not good to smoke. but mr. gamble was four years old at the time of those textbooks that they showed you. i do not really think that he was in school reading a health textbook for a 9th grader in 1941. similarly, he talked about, well, the newspapers were full of this information, anticipating my argument that, in fact, what the newspapers did, as dr. krugman showed you, is because of their desire to always show both sides, when they reported a story they always reported the tobacco version as well. now, they have put in a lot of newspaper articles. so have we. we have put into evidence the newspaper articles from the jacksonville papers that show what tobacco was saying and what was being reported in the newspapers. but defense counsel says, well, that is always at the end. that really is lost in the process. and the example he referred to, which was the only example referenced in the trial, was the life magazine article. the always at the end is an interesting way of stating it. there is the article. it is all on one page. the whole last paragraph deals with the position of the american tobacco company. well, i suppose that is at the end of the article, but it hardly, as suggested, is somehow hidden, as opposed to being front and center from the very article itself. and that is true for most of the newspaper articles that you will see in evidence. we will not take the time to go through all of those. you will see that the position of the tobacco companies are repeatedly set out in those. but the important point, i think, in all of this is don gamble, jr.'s testimony. dad was not much of a reader. he did not watch a lot of television. he only had a 9th grade education. and, most importantly, what don said was, you know, he did not believe it was harmful, and he would not have smoked around us kids if he thought it was harmful. maybe that is the best evidence of what he really believed, the fact that he smoked around his kids, and he would not have done that if he thought it was harmful. now, you have heard a lot about warning labels in the defense presentation, but keep in mind, there have been several consensus reports from the federal trade commission and from the experts that have analyzed whether those warning labels did any good, and whether people knew and believed the harms of cigarettes. and rather than believe the assertions of counsel and what i say or what mr. walker says, you might just want to look at what the documents say. read what the federal trade commission report wrote in 1967. read what the federal trade commission report wrote in 1981. read what the surgeon general's reports from 1995 and 2010 and 2014 all wrote on these issues, keeping in mind that those reports are prepared based on panels of experts looking at all of the evidence extensively, analyzing it, and dealing then with the issues, not by evidence presented in a courtroom. you can criticize dr. burns. you can criticize dr. proctor. you can criticize dr. krugman. but the bottom line is that everything they told you is set out in these consensus reports of the experts from the national academy of sciences, from the national cancer institute, from the federal trade commission, from the united states surgeon general's reports, which are required by federal law to set out the consensus of the scientific opinion. and ultimately, i say to you, if you want to know the truth of all of this, look at the 2014 surgeon general's report, required by federal law to set out the consensus of opinion among the experts, and read the first chapter, because the first chapter of it goes through what the tobacco industry said and did from the fifties through the time of this report. and the interesting thing is, it is literally an outline of the evidence we presented in this trial. and everything we told you is set out in the surgeon general's report, with the ultimate conclusion of the chapter that the tobacco industry's extensive campaign to counteract these forces through marketing, public relations, political influence and the creation of doubt about the scientific evidence on tobacco is now well documented through the industry's internal documents. the industry used its influence to thwart public health action at all levels and fraudulently -- that is the term of the surgeon general -- fraudulently misled the public on these issues, including whether lower yield cigarettes conveyed less risk of health than secondhand smoke, whether it harmed non-smokers. undoubtedly, these actions slowed the progress in tobacco control and regulation. read the chapter. read the ultimate conclusion. it is exactly what we have been telling you for the last week and a half about their comment. now, in addition to misstating so much of the evidence in that closing argument, i think you need to be reminded about their misstatements about dr. burns as well. we saw the quotes that they stuck up from dr. burns. and when he asked dr. burns about those at trial on cross-examination, what dr. burns said in response was: that statement is taken out of context. may i explain? and counsel would not let him explain. and when he quoted him another statement, dr. burns said: that statement is taken out of context. may i explain? and he would not let him explain. it is a little disingenuous then to come up in closing argument and quote those statements, when you refused to give the witness an opportunity to explain how they were being taken out of context and what they really meant. and speaking of taking out of context, we heard in their closing argument that mrs. gamble quit because smoking made her sick. it was affecting her health. what did she really say? it gave her headaches. and that has an entirely different meaning than it was making her sick or affecting her health. why did he misstate it in the broader terms? to give you the wrong impression about what she testified. he also told you that mr. gamble did not really try to quit. what was the evidence? that was not the evidence. mrs. gamble said and don gamble, as well, said he tried to quit over and over. many, many times he tried to quit, starting in the 1980s. and in 1985, when they bought their trailer home, and when he was diagnosed with emphysema, were specific attempts that she remembered, but throughout those years she said he made many, many attempts to quit, rarely lasting more than a few days. when he did attempt to quit, he had withdrawal symptoms, and he relapsed. well, how does that turn into closing argument that he never made any real attempt to quit smoking? and you walked through all those years. probably 30 minutes of closing argument was, here's what was happening at this time, and he did not try to quit. and that is not the testimony at all. it just misrepresents totally what jessie gamble told you and what her son don gamble told you. let me pull all this together and simply say, you all took a lot of notes during the course of this, and that is good. you have the ability then to go back and see what the evidence really was and what evidence was put in and what was done and what was not done. you do not have to rely on the lawyers. i could get up here and talk for another hour or two about all of the misstatements in their closing argument and how they misstated the issues in this case. ultimately, you are going to have to decide what the evidence really was. you are the deciders of the facts. but you are deciding the facts in the context of what questions are asked on that verdict form. and when you answer the questions on the verdict form, what you are going to discover is, one, most of the arguments that you just heard do not relate to the questions that you have to answer, and mere attempts to divert you from answering those questions. and, two, if you go back through your notes, you are going to discover that it grossly misstated what the evidence was. and that is not a matter of one lawyer saying one thing and the other lawyer saying another thing. you have got your notes, you can collectively go back with your recollection and deal with specifically what was being said. let me conclude by simply saying this. this case is about addiction. don gamble clearly was addicted to cigarettes. he continued to smoke because of that addiction. that proves class membership. that is the beginning point. and ask yourself one simple question. if there was not nicotine in cigarettes, and if he was not addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, would he have continued to smoke? undisputed evidence is nobody continues to smoke without nicotine. and if you are not addicted, you do not continue for decade after decade. the answer to that first question is crucial to this entire case. clearly he is a member of the engle class. once you determine that, then the engle findings are binding on you, and they refute virtually everything he said in the last 45 minutes of his closing argument because you are bound by those determinations; not only the evidence in this case, but the court has instructed you that you are bound by those determinations, so that you then move on to the question of what impact it would have made had they not concealed what they really knew and believed. now, the answer to that is simple. don gamble is relying on what they said. he said the tobacco company said they would not put anything harmful. that is his way of saying they are not harmful, the companies do not think they are harmful. you cannot say that if the company, in fact, is revealing the truth; that they know they are harmful, that they know they cause lung cancer, that they know they are addictive, and they know there is no scientific controversy; that they know there is no question of doubt; that all of this reassurance is totally untrue; that they know what is harmful in there, and they know that it cannot be taken out. that is what is being concealed. mr. walker tries to think -- have you think that what is being concealed is that it is being said that these things are true. what is being concealed is what they truly believe, because had they revealed what they truly believe, in all of that massive advertising, in all of those press statements, in all of those television appearances, in all of those articles in the magazines and newspapers which they impacted, had they truly believed all of that, what would have happened? the culture we have today would have been the culture we would have seen back in the 1950s. that culture is what would have impacted don gamble and every other smoker at the time. it would have made it much more difficult to continue smoking. it would have encouraged quitting. it would have provided the cessation efforts and abilities for people to effectively try and quit. it would have taken away the denial and rationalization that addicted smokers needed to continue smoking. that is what the reliance is. that is what the difference would have made. so we think, when you fairly look at what the evidence really is, and what the issues you are asked to answer on the verdict form, as opposed to the false issues that have been put up for you, it will be clear that you should return a verdict in favor of the plaintiff, and that you worked your way through the compensatory damages and punitive damages as instructed. it is getting close to 6:00, so let me conclude. we thank you for your time. we thank you for your attention. we appreciate it. you have put in a lot of effort. we have put in a lot of effort. and we know you are going to go back there and work effectively, deliberating together, trying to reach a fair and just decision for jessie gamble. thank you very much. thank you, again.