mr. walker: of course, your honor. thank you. good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. it is nice to be able to talk with you directly again. i mentioned at the start of the case that there is only a few times in the case where i can actually talk to you. and so it is nice now, at the end of the case, now that you have seen everything, to be able to come back and kind of give you at least our vision of what we think has happened here and why we think you should be coming back with a defense verdict. before i say anything else, though, i certainly want to thank you all for your service, like mr. shields did. you all probably have figured out by now that everyone in this room believes in the jury system, and we are all counting on you all to look at the facts, use your common sense, apply the judge's instructions, and come to a verdict that you all think is the right verdict. and i want to thank you on behalf of reynolds as well. you all took your oath. it is been almost two weeks, not quite two weeks yet. i guess, about a week and a half ago, you took your oath to serve as jurors. and some of us do this a lot. when i tell you, i've been in cases where jurors, like, fall asleep or they are doodling and not paying attention, i know that is hard to believe that anything would happen in a courtroom that you might fall asleep to, but you all have not done that. you have been paying attention. you have been listening carefully. we have noticed that you have been taking notes and really have been very diligent jurors. and on behalf of everyone, i think plaintiff's counsel, too, we all really appreciate that, and that is what makes this process work. we have reached the end of the case. and everything that we have done in this trial from start to finish leads up to this verdict form that the judge talked to you a little bit about. all the testimony that you heard, all the evidence, it is all supposed to give you the tools and the information that you need to do your job, which is to answer the questions on the verdict form. and that includes the instructions of law from the judge, instructions on things like credibility, how to figure out who you can believe and who you cannot believe, and so on. mr. shields started by saying a lot about how he does not think that the greater weight of the evidence supports their side of the case. he thinks it is the only evidence. and i want to address that right from the outset because you heard from seven witnesses in this case. and although plaintiff's counsel called all of those witnesses, they were actually our witnesses, too. and that is because the answers that they give to questions are evidence for whoever in the case is asking the questions. so when i asked questions of those witnesses, their answers back to me are testimony and evidence that we can rely on and that you can rely on to support our side of this case. now, it is true, we could have called more witnesses than you heard from. we could have called more witnesses to tell you things that you already heard in the case. for example, we could have called a witness to tell you that mr. gamble was surrounded by information about the health risks of cigarette smoking. we could have spent a day and a half on that or more. but we did not need to do that because dr. burns and dr. proctor, just to give you two examples, already admitted to those facts. we could have brought you a witness to tell you that mr. gamble was not influenced by advertising, but we did not need to do that because their own dr. burns admitted that. we could have called witnesses to tell you that mr. gamble never really put down his cigarettes and tried to quit smoking, but we did not need to do that because their own witnesses admitted that. dr. burns admitted that all the way up until the 1980s, there is simply no evidence at all that mr. gamble was ever interested in quitting smoking. and it was that same dr. burns who said, in a way that only dr. burns could, that mr. gamble really did not put down his cigarettes and stop smoking. he said mr. gamble was not observed abstaining. that means nobody saw him actually going without cigarette smoking. we could have called a witness to highlight for you that mr. gamble never really disliked smoking or never made up his mind that he was never going to smoke again, but you heard that from mrs. gamble herself. we did not need to bring you a witness to spend more of your time on something you have already heard. i told you during opening that the witnesses that you would hear from in this case -- some of them, the paid ones, would be some of the most biased witnesses on the planet. and some of you may have thought, wow, you know, that is -- he is exaggerating, he is trying to make a point, he is advocating, but then you got to see them. and i said in opening about people like dr. burns and dr. proctor, i said, you know, do not take my word for it. when they are on the stand, watch how they answer questions when they are talking with mr. shields or mr. kalil, and watch how their demeanor changes and the way they answer the question changes when i start asking the questions. listen to their testimony and see, are they giving straight answers to simple questions, or are not they. and we will talk in a little bit about that. mr. shields says that the 9 million dollars they collectively have been paid -- that is dr. burns, dr. krugman, and dr. proctor -- that that does not mean anything to them, that it does not actually affect the content of their testimony at all, that that 9 million dollars is just irrelevant to them. but that is not what you saw. you watched them testify. you could see that it was important to them. you could see, for example, when dr. proctor, when i was going through with him about reynolds' website today, and the website, right on reynolds' website, says, "cigarette smoking is a leading cause of preventable disease in america," he wanted to quibble with me about why it does not say "the leading cause." at the end of the day, when it comes to tobacco, when they are hired by plaintiffs in cases like this, there is no answer, no conduct, no document that will ever satisfy the likes of dr. burns or dr. proctor. you all might even remember the point in time where i said to dr. proctor, what would you make of a statement from back in the eighties by somebody who was actually there, who said that 95 percent of americans were thoroughly aware of the health risks of cigarette smoking? and dr. proctor did not know what you probably knew, which was that the statement i was talking about was made by one dr. burns. you had just heard us go over that testimony a few days before. dr. proctor, with the 4 million dollars he is been paid, he did not care. he tried to tell you that that statement by dr. burns must have been a highly-lawyered statement that the tobacco industry was somehow behind. and obviously, that is not the case. it was their own dr. burns who had made that statement. the truth of the matter is, no matter what the american tobacco company said or did, or reynolds, or anyone else in the tobacco industry at any point in time, their witnesses who have been paid all that money were going to find fault with it, and they were going to tell you the same thing they tell every jury, no matter what the facts of the case, that there is this horrible, massive conspiracy that involves all sorts of conduct that -- even if it did not have anything to do with the smoker in the case. and that is why one of the instructions that you are going to get is so important. can we pull up that first? this is the one on credibility. you will have it in the instructions that you take back with you to deliberate. "in determining the believability of any witness and the weight to be given the testimony of any witness, you may properly consider the demeanor of the witness while testifying; the frankness or lack of frankness of the witness; the intelligence of the witness; any interest the witness may have in the outcome of the case," and it goes on. those are some of the same things i was just talking about. what did you learn from dr. burns' demeanor? what did you learn about the frankness or lack of frankness from dr. proctor? and we have already talked about the interest these witnesses had in the case. i want to get back to the verdict form because that is really what your job is. and i think, for me to be helpful to all of you, i need to try to walk through with you the verdict form that you will get and how we believe the evidence relates to the questions on the verdict form. but before i do that, there is one thing i want to point out, and that is this. every single question on the verdict form is about one and only one smoker, and that is mr. gamble. and as we move through the questions, you are going to see that mr. gamble's name is right there in the question. and that is why, at the beginning of this case, when i said you needed to keep your eye on the ball, sift through all of the allegations that are being hurled across the courtroom, pay attention to the facts that actually mattered to mr. gamble, because that is the only smoker you are going to answer questions about on the verdict form. when we started this case, i told you there were five key facts in the case, and that is still true. i put them on a board because i thought it might make it easier to talk about them. and those five key facts that i talked about in opening are the ones that you can see us trying to establish through our questioning during the case: that mr. gamble knew the risks associated with cigarette smoking, warnings about the risks were coming at him from all sides, starting from even before he finished school; that nothing that the american tobacco company or r. j. reynolds or any other tobacco company did had any impact or effect on mr. gamble because he was not relying on statements from the companies; that the evidence would be that mr. gamble never really tried to quit smoking. we will come back to this, but when you are thinking about this, remember, the evidence was that for the first 25 years of mr. gamble's smoking, he was not trying to quit, not even once. it was not that he tried to quit and failed because he was so addicted. he did not even try. mr. gamble smoked what he wanted to smoke. mr. shields talked a lot about advertising and how advertising supposedly makes people do things, but 98 percent of the advertising for cigarettes starting in the sixties and seventies were for products that mr. gamble never bought. he did not even try them. that is like saying watching advertisements for toyotas makes you go out and buy a ford. it does not make any sense. or a bicycle, because it is even a different kind of a product. lastly, no one forced mr. gamble to smoke. that is the bottom line fact that runs through every single thing that i'll talk about today. nobody put a gun to mr. gamble's head and forced him to smoke, and no one prevented him from trying to quit smoking either. so let us pull up, please, the first question. this is the first question on the verdict form: "please state whether donald gamble was a member of the engle class." and to even know what that means, you have to look at the instructions, so i put that underneath it: "to prove that he was a member of the engle class, plaintiff must prove by a greater weight of the evidence that donald gamble was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, and that cigarette smoking because of that addiction was a legal cause of his emphysema." now, you heard evidence on both of those issues. on the addiction point, most of the evidence that you heard came from this dr. burns. at $4,800 a day, he is the witness who travels all around florida telling juries -- or jurors like you and others that, while not all smokers are addicted, every time he testifies, he testifies that the smoker in that case was addicted. and most of the facts that they are relying on to tell you that he was addicted and heavily addicted and so heavily addicted that he could not stop smoking are facts like these. can i have the next demonstrative? no, no, this is -- after that. all right. they told you about using a product first thing in the morning; they told you -- no, the next one. -- about using the product regularly and continuously throughout the day; about carrying this product in his pocket; using it everywhere in the home, including in the bed; using it outside; using it in the car; using it while watching tv; using it during meals; using it while at work; not interacting with others because of using it; anxious when you do not have it; and it being a normal part of life. now, i put all of these on a slide to make a point, to show you all something about facts like these. because when you are talking about tobacco companies and cigarettes, the assumption is that if you are doing these things a lot, if you are using the product a lot during the day and in these ways, it must be that you are so addicted that you cannot stop using them. but let us look at these again. imagine if the product that is being used in the way that this is described is not cigarettes. what if it were a product like an iphone or a smartphone? have you met people who first thing in the morning check their smartphone; who use their smartphone regularly and continuously throughout the day; who always carry their smartphone in their pocket; who use it everywhere in the home, including in the bed; who use it outside; who use it in the car -- although that one's illegal now, i think, in a number of places -- who use it while watching tv; who use it during meals, when they are supposed to be conversing with other people; who use it at work; who are not interacting with other people because they are on their phone; who are anxious if they cannot find it -- if you have ever seen somebody think they left their smartphone behind, watch out -- and that it is become a normal part of life. i'm not saying that to minimize the fact that cigarette smoking can be addictive. of course, it can. i was one of the first people that told you that when i first met each and every one of you. my point is, that just because you are using a product in these ways, a lot, in a lot of places, does not mean that you cannot stop using it. it does not mean that you cannot control your behavior and make choices and decisions about your behavior. you will have to make up your own mind about whether mr. gamble was addicted, whether you believe dr. burns; but, honestly, it is not even the key question you have to decide here. because whether he was addicted or not, the more important question you have to decide is the one about legal cause. can we have the next one, please? that is the second part of this question that is far more important: "that cigarette smoking, because of addiction, was a legal cause of his emphysema." and to know whether it is a legal cause, you need to look at the instructions on legal cause, and that is this one. now, it is a long instruction. i've highlighted what i believe will be the key points for you to look at in terms of evaluating evidence in this case. "his emphysema was caused by addiction to cigarettes that contained nicotine, if he was addicted, and his addiction to cigarettes directly and in a natural continuous sequence produced or contributed substantially to producing the emphysema so that it can reasonably be said, but for his addiction, his emphysema would not have occurred." and then there is another paragraph about it that comes back around to talking about whether addiction substantially contributed to producing his injury. now, that is really the issue here. it is one that might even be worth writing down if you are keeping track. did mr. gamble have an addiction that was so substantial that it kept him from smoking and prevented him from quitting? this is the evidence that you heard about nicotine and smoking and quitting. the evidence was that nicotine does not prevent smokers from choosing to try to quit. dr. burns was very clear about that. and through dr. burns, we learned -- pull up the next slide, please -- that even if you look at smokers in general, you find that there are many, many daily smokers who do not even claim to want to quit, as many as 31 percent, from burns' own testimony. and even if you look at the smokers who are saying they want to quit, which is the second bar, when you look at the number of smokers who are actually doing something about it, the number goes down. that is because, as many of you know from your own personal lives, that there are some times when people say they want to quit smoking, but actually are not doing anything about it. it could be that they have a loved one who is pestering them about quitting, and they are not ready to try. it could be that they just have not reached a stage in their smoking where they are ready to try. it could be it is something that they want to do eventually, but are not ready to do yet. either way, dr. burns was clear. all smokers can quit smoking if they are motivated and committed to trying and sticking with it. even addicted smokers can quit. even heavily addicted smokers can quit. and you learned in this case that over 50 million americans are former smokers in this country, and as many half of those smokers smoked a pack a day or more before quitting. now, mr. shields said, well, addiction to nicotine is just brain disease. it gets in your brain. there are these nicotine receptors, and all this stuff is going on, and you cannot quit. all of those allegations about what happens in the human brain apply to all 50 million americans who are former smokers in this country, but nevertheless quit smoking. and by the way, mrs. gamble is one of those 50 million americans who quit smoking. and we will talk a little bit more about that. so, how do we figure out then if addiction was a legal cause of mr. gamble's illnesses? the answer is something that we all know and have known for many, many, many years, that quitting smoking reduces risks to your health. it is why doctors tell patients to quit. and that is been known for decades and decades. so let us talk about emphysema. this is the issue that is on the first question on the verdict form. no. go back one. okay. emphysema. dr. burns testified that men who quit smoking by age 45 can eliminate the risk of getting emphysema from smoking, because the minute you stop smoking cigarettes, the damage that the cigarettes can do to the lungs starts to go away. the body starts to heal. and dr. burns said, if you quit by age 45, you can eliminate that risk. in the case of mr. gamble, he turned 45 in 1982. so what i've done, i gave you a timeline that starts in 1959. that is when mr. gamble was first seen smoking, when he met mrs. gamble. and it goes all the way up to 1982. that is the year that mr. gamble turned 45 years old. and that is the period during which mr. gamble needed to quit smoking in order to avoid the risks of emphysema. if we take a look at the next slide, you will see the similar information applied to lung cancer. according to dr. burns, the risk of getting cancer from smoking disappears after you have been quit for 15 years. what does that mean? mr. gamble's diagnosis was in 2003. if he had quit smoking 15 years earlier, sometime before 1988, he would not have gotten cancer. those are the two critical dates for mr. gamble: 1982 for emphysema, 1988 for lung cancer. and mrs. gamble was actually a perfect example of this. she actually smoked for 25 years, as much as two packs a day, but she quit in the early/mid 1980s, while she was still in her thirties, and she avoided all of that excess risk of emphysema and lung cancer. unlike mrs. gamble, however, mr. gamble did not stop, and therefore he did not avoid those risks. so here's the question i want to try to answer for you: was mr. gamble so addicted that he could not stop smoking, or was it that he knew the risks but was not really trying to quit smoking? and i want to review the evidence with you on that point, particularly because mr. shields said -- one of the things he said before he sat down was that, hey, nobody's claiming mr. gamble was not warned, nobody's claiming he did not know. well, that is not what mrs. gamble said when she took the stand because i asked her. mrs. gamble said, and she asks you to believe in support of her claim for 10 million dollars, she is asking you to find that mr. gamble knew nothing whatsoever about the health risks of cigarette smoking until the late 1990s. she is asking you to believe, for 10 million dollars, that she and mr. gamble both believed that cigarette smoking was perfectly safe until 1996; and, that the very first time it dawned on her and mr. gamble that there could be a problem with cigarettes was when he was diagnosed with emphysema in 1996. you are going to have to decide whether you think those claims are credible, but let me say this. if you believe that mr. gamble was warned of the health risks of cigarette smoking, and that it was not in the late 1990s, but long before then, but he nevertheless was not really trying to quit smoking, then your verdict should be for reynolds for the reasons that i will explain as we go along. let us look at the facts. mr. gamble went to school in georgia, so we showed you what was in georgia textbooks about smoking around the time that he was a youngster. "tobacco is called a habit-forming drug. this means that a person who starts to smoke soon finds that it is rather hard to stop smoking." "tobacco contains a poison called nicotine." "even moderate smoking shortens life." "tobacco smoke injures the delicate tissue of the air passages." those are textbooks that were in use in georgia between the 5th and the 9th grade when mr. gamble was in school in georgia. polling from a few years before the gambles met revealed that ninety percent of americans had heard or read that cigarette smoking caused cancer. and we told -- we showed you the evidence of why. the reason why -- put up the next one, please -- is the coverage, and it is referred to here as objective coverage in the press. "the public has been informed through the excellent coverage of the press, radio and tv," and then from dr. heller, as well, making the very same point, pointing out that it was a very objective job, not one sided, and that it is an exceedingly valuable way of informing the public. the evidence in this case, including the documents that we admitted just before we started moving on to closings, in the record in this case you will find, if you want to see it when you go back to the jury room, there are literally dozens and dozens and dozens and dozens of jacksonville journal and florida times union articles from the fifties and the sixties and the time periods that are relevant to the gambles going on and on and on about the health risks of cigarette smoking. i think there is a couple hundred articles like that in evidence, where you can see that this information warning about the health risks of cigarette smoking was all over the press. dr. burns admitted that there was no evidence that mr. gamble was addicted before she met him when he was 22. she meets him in 1959. he is already smoking, but she starts smoking shortly afterward. and then they are both smoking from 1959 on. articles about the health risks of smoking are continuing to appear in jacksonville papers. we have given you some examples here out of the hundreds that will go back with you in the jury room. within a few years, but before 1965, mrs. gamble realizes that cigarette smoking is either addictive, or that they are hard to lay down, or, at a minimum, they are hard to put down. we went back and forth with her about that until she finally agreed that she knew before 1965 that cigarettes were hard to put down. mr. gamble does not try to quit at that time. in 1964, the federal government comes out with the surgeon general's report concluding that cigarette smoking is causally related to lung cancer. it is front page news all over the country, and prime time news specials are being aired on every channel. when there were three channels on tv, you could not miss it because they were all showing it. right here in jacksonville, the 1964 surgeon general's report was front page news. and dr. proctor even said that this story was one of the biggest news stories of the century. mr. gamble did not try to quit. that same year, in 1964, the american medical association said that the health hazards of excessive smoking have been well publicized for more than ten years and are common knowledge, as of 1964. by 1965, there are already almost 18 million former smokers in the united states. and there is a fork in the road, like so many, for mr. gamble. he could go left and try to quit smoking, like the 18 million other americans did, or he could go right and choose to continue smoking. mr. gamble was not one of those who quit smoking. he did not even try. by 1966, warning labels go on the cigarette packages: "cigarette smoking may be hazardous to your health." they are on the cartons that mr. gamble was buying at the time. they are on the packages. right next to the "particular people" slogan that he was heard repeating, right next to that is that same warning label on every single carton and every single pack of cigarettes: "cigarette smoking may be hazardous to your health." mr. gamble does not try to quit. and from 1966 forward -- this is really important -- the evidence was that 85 percent of the time that mr. gamble ever smoked, that he was ever seen smoking cigarettes, there were warning labels right there on the packages. 85 percent of the time. a few months after those warning labels go on the cartons and go onto the packages, a few months after that he fills out an application for cancer insurance for himself and for mrs. gamble, just a few months after the warning labels go on the cartons and the packages. two years later, daniel horn, in 1968, said this. he was a government official with the national clearinghouse on smoking and health. "you could stand on a rooftop and shout, smoking is dangerous, at the top of your lungs, and you would not be telling anyone anything they did not already know." mr. gamble still did not try to quit. by 1969, the polling data that you heard evidence about shows that almost three-quarters of americans had not just heard about the risks, but actually believed that cigarette smoking was a cause of lung cancer. mr. gamble did not try to quit. news accounts are starting to come out, not just about the health risks of cigarette smoking, but about the benefits of quitting smoking and how you can go about doing it. articles about anti-smoking groups, quit smoking clinics, how you can find them, why you might go to one, and advice about how to quit smoking. mr. gamble does not even try. in fact, in the four years after that 1966 warning label came out, just in those four years, 13 million people made the choice to quit smoking, but mr. gamble is not one of them. he still has not even tried to quit smoking even once. by 1970, the warning labels on cartons and packages are strengthened, and they now say, in big, bold, capital letters: "warning. the surgeon general has determined that cigarette smoking is dangerous to your health." and that shows up right on the packages as well, right next to the "particular people." and this is one of the warning labels that the judge gave you the instruction about. can we pull that up? the court's instruction was: "after 1969, the warning labels placed on cigarette packs by defendant and other engle defendants complied with federal law, and defendant and the other engle defendants had no legal obligation to make any additional warnings. plaintiff has made no claim for failure to warn after 1969." those warnings that went on the packages were more than sufficient to warn people that cigarette smoking was dangerous, but mr. gamble still did not try to quit. in 1971, that same warning that we just looked at appears in all cigarette ads, print ads, including ads for pall mall cigarettes. in that same year, the cigarette companies stopped advertising on tv and radio, no more of those ads. a few years later, by 1975, dr. burns, who is alive and well and talking about this at the time, says: "more americans knew that cigarette smoking was dangerous for them than knew the name of the president of the united states." mr. gamble still has not tried to quit smoking. by 1977, the polling data that you heard evidence about shows that nearly three-fourths of -- we are now looking at smokers, not just americans -- nearly three-quarters of smokers believe that cigarette smoking causes cancer. mr. gamble still is not trying to quit. 1979, the data that you heard about was that 30 million americans have made the choice to quit smoking, just going back to the surgeon general's report of 1964. and that same fork in the road is presented for mr. gamble, like so many other americans, does he put down the cigarettes and try to stop smoking, like 30 million others did, or does he keep smoking? and the evidence was mr. gamble chose to keep smoking. by 1981, the head of the roper polling organization writes to the federal trade commission and says that the public is highly aware of the reported dangers of smoking. that same year is when dr. burns made the statement you heard about a few times: "95 percent of people are thoroughly aware of the health dangers of smoking, and ninety percent of them realized that their own health could be affected." mr. gamble still did not try to quit smoking. in 1982, mr. gamble turned 45. that is the year he needed to quit smoking to avoid the risk of emphysema; but, the entire time from 1959 to 1982, when all of this information was coming out, and well over 95 percent of the american public was informed of the risks, mr. gamble still had not tried to quit smoking even one time. in 1985, the warnings are strengthened again. and now, alongside the "particular people" slogan, appears these warnings, the four rotating warnings that still appear on cigarette packages today, the one that tells about smoking causing lung cancer, heart disease, emphysema; about cigarette smoke containing carbon monoxide; and about quitting smoking now greatly reduces serious risk to your health. that same year, polling data now shows that 94 percent of smokers -- looking at smokers now -- believe that smoking is harmful to health. then something interesting happens. ms. gamble is about 39 years old in 1985. she is been smoking for 25 years. she believes that she is addicted. and what started out as a one-pack-a-day habit for her is now up to two packs a day. she is actually smoking more than mr. gamble at this point in time. and she realizes that her cigarette smoking is affecting her health. it is making her sick. so she decides to quit smoking. can i have the next one, please. she struggles, she fights through it, and she succeeds at quitting smoking, and she never smokes another cigarette again. she went to the left in this fork in the road by quitting smoking. mr. gamble, who was not smoking even as much as mrs. gamble at this point in time, says he wants to quit smoking, but really he is just hiding the smoking. the evidence was if mr. gamble had quit smoking when mrs. gamble did, he would have avoided the risks of emphysema and lung cancer just like she did. it is just that he made a different choice than she made about quitting smoking. and you heard evidence that in this time period, in 1984 and 1985, mr. and mrs. gamble were actually discussing the warning labels on the packages. before that time, we are relying on the common sense to know that if you are reaching for a carton like this or a package like the ones inside it to pull out a cigarette, you are going to see that warning. you are going to see that warning throughout the day, throughout the week, throughout the month. but by the 1980s, when mrs. gamble is quitting smoking, you do not have to try to use your common sense about whether he saw it. they were talking about the warning from the surgeon general. and that is one of the reasons why mrs. gamble quit smoking, because it was affecting her health. i want to move forward in time to 1988. i mentioned earlier that 1988 was the point in time where, 15 years before mr. gamble's lung cancer diagnosis, if he had stopped smoking, he would have avoided the risk of lung cancer from smoking, but he kept on smoking. over the years, mrs. gamble tries to get mr. gamble to stop smoking. she goes out and buys carrots. she comes up with the idea to cut them up and to give them to mr. gamble for him to hold instead of a cigarette. she is the one who is giving him these peppermints to try to get him to stop smoking. but those are all her efforts, not mr. gamble's efforts. and so he goes on telling people that he wants to quit smoking, but really just continuing to smoke. he buys a pack of nicotine gum, but he does not finish the pack. he does not complete the course of the nicotine gum program. and he does not use the gum to actually put down the cigarettes that he is smoking. instead of putting down his cigarettes over the years, the testimony that you heard is that while mr. gamble supposedly was trying to quit smoking, his smoking actually increased. he goes from smoking about a pack a day up to as much as two packs a day or three packs a day. that is like somebody who claims to be on a diet, but is actually just eating more and more unhealthy foods. by 1990, the data that you heard about shows that 94 percent of americans believe that cigarette smoking causes cancer. and a few years after that, mr. gamble is told that technically he has emphysema. that is an illness that can become very serious over time, but he does not have any symptoms yet, and he does not need any treatment for it. the medical record that mr. shields put in talks about how at this point in time mr. gamble can climb stairs with no problem. he is not coughing up blood. he is asymptomatic. he needs no treatment. he has no cough. he is not wheezing. and there is no further workup, and he only needs to return as needed. and mr. gamble went on smoking. now, what does all of this tell us about the true legal cause of mr. gamble's continued smoking? it means that it is not because he never heard about the health risks of cigarette smoking. dr. proctor agreed it was one of the biggest stories of the century. and think about this, if mr. and mrs. gamble knew and had heard about the 9-11 terrorists attacks, the o.j. simpson trial, the passing of princess diana, the moon landing, and the kennedy assassination, how could it be that they missed all of this information about the health risks of cigarette smoking? they did not miss it, like no one else missed it. and, of course, they were warned, and mr. gamble knew the risks. the true legal cause of his continued smoking cannot be addiction because addiction does not stop you from quitting if you are not trying to quit. and for the 25 years leading up to mr. gamble's 45th birthday, he was not even trying to quit smoking. think of it like this. you can think of addiction as being like faulty brakes on a car, okay? if you think of addiction making it harder for you to stop, it is like faulty brakes on a car. you put your foot on it, maybe it slows down a little, maybe it does not slow you down at all, and you keep going forward. but think about an accident where somebody is driving a car, and they are not paying attention. they are looking at their smartphone, like we talked about earlier, or they are yelling at somebody in the back seat, and they never put their foot on the brake, and then there is an accident. was the accident caused by the faulty brakes that the driver never used, or was the accident caused by the fact that the person never stepped on the brake to begin with? during the 25 years of mr. gamble's smoking history that mattered, the 25 years when he could have quit smoking to avoid the risk of emphysema and lung cancer, mr. gamble never put his foot on the brake. an addiction does not stop you from quitting if you are not even trying. addiction did not stop mrs. gamble from quitting when she was ready to quit and took actions to make it happen. i want to be clear about one thing, and this is really important. i am not in any way trying to judge or criticize mr. gamble. we have not sued anybody. we are only here because mrs. gamble filed this lawsuit, and we have to respond to her allegations. and this is america. people are entitled to engage in behaviors that they know are not good for them. we have been talking about cigarette smoking. there are people who like to smoke, know the risks, and are not interested in quitting at this time. but it does not really even have to be cigarettes. it could be, here in florida, you can ride a motorcycle without a helmet. you see people all the time riding down the highway, 80 miles an hour, on a motorcycle with no helmet. is it because they think it is safe? is it because they do not know the risks? or is it because this is america, and we let people do things that are not good for them? that is the issue with mr. gamble. some people just do not want to quit. and some people who want to quit are not ready to actually do something about it yet. in the end, it is not about judging or criticizing mr. gamble at all, because the bottom line is, it does not matter what i think about mr. gamble's choices, whether they were good ones or bad ones. respectfully, it does not even matter whether you all think that his choices were good ones or bad ones. what matters is that they were his choices, and his alone. no one forced mr. gamble to smoke cigarettes, not reynolds, not the american tobacco company, not nicotine, not anyone. and that is why the surgeon general has called cigarette smoking a personal choice behavior. and even when they have recognized that cigarette smoking is an addictive behavior -- even when they recognize that cigarette smoking is an addictive behavior, the individual smoker still has a decision to make about whether or not to continue that behavior. i think it is best summed up by another piece of evidence that you heard from a website called drkoop.com. and it is this one: "the cigarette is not going to light itself and jump into your mouth, nor are you going to go into a brain-induced hypnotic trance and light the cigarette. no matter how much you have smoked or how much you like to smoke, the choice to light up is always yours." each and every time mr. gamble lit up a cigarette, the choice was his, and that means that addiction was not the legal cause of mr. gamble's illnesses. to put a finer point on it, that means checking no to questions 1 and 2 on the verdict form. the second question is really the same question. it just relates to the lung cancer and the death. i talked about them together. let us take a look at the next two questions on the verdict form. these are the questions that relate to their fraud and conspiracy allegations, for which they are asking you to award them 10 million dollars. "please state whether r. j. reynolds' predecessors' concealment or omission of a material fact about the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes, or both, were a legal cause of donald gamble's lung cancer and death." and then the second question is very similar, except it is talking about an agreement to conceal or omit a material fact. once again, these questions are only about donald gamble. and the instruction that you will get for both of those helps understand exactly what those instructions mean: "reliance by mr. gamble on statements to his detriment is a legal cause of lung cancer and death if it directly and in the natural and continuous sequence produces or contributes substantially to producing such lung cancer and death, so that it can reasonably be said that, but for the reliance, his lung cancer and death would not have occurred." and then the instruction about material information refers to his decision-making process. and it is his decision-making process. once again, note about this instruction, reliance is required. it is not enough that somebody says something. mr. gamble must have relied in some way on these allegations that they are making, and it must have been a substantial but-for cause of his injuries, in the same way that we looked at for the addiction. again, the key here for that is 1988. did the statements that they are complaining about prevent mr. gamble from quitting smoking when it would have made a difference to him, before 1988? now, when this case started, i told all of you that the plaintiffs would make all kinds of accusations about reynolds and about the tobacco industry, and that they would do that using witnesses who collectively have been paid almost 9 million dollars. so i ask you asked you to listen to see if those witnesses would give me straight answers to simple questions. remember this? i asked dr. burns if it was true that there was no evidence mr. gamble ever heard this clip from c-span that he played. this is what he said. and he said it twice in exactly the same way. "there is no indication that he heard the c-span clip and remembered it in a way that was powerful enough to him that he discussed it with family members, in a way that was memorable enough to them that they recalled it and reported it at the time of the deposition. so that is correct, yes." now, he could have just said, yes, that was correct, but he gave that long answer, and you will have to ask yourselves whether the millions of dollars that they have been paid, including the 4 million to dr. burns, explains why he would give an answer like that. i said that their evidence about fraud and conspiracy would consist entirely of cherry-picked passages from cherry-picked documents selected from millions of available documents, and that a lot of them would be taken out of context, would be drafts, would be unsigned, or they would be proposals where there was no evidence that the proposal was ever adopted. and so i asked you, again, to wait for us to show you the rest of the story. and i could see that you all did that each and every time. why was it important to wait for the other side of the story? remember this? this was the document that dr. burns showed you from 1962, where he showed you the six-page version that made the statement they wanted to make and came to a full stop. i had to come back and say, wait a minute, you know there is another version of this document that is 24 pages longer, and it does not stop where you stopped reading to the jury. it goes on and explains and puts into context what you showed. and we went back and forth about why he did not show you the other document. and at the end of it, what he said was he wanted to show the longer document, but the decision was made by counsel not to show that document. that was his testimony. what about this one? do you remember this one? dr. krugman took the stand and told you that this document from 1984 defined younger adult smokers as people under the age of 18. well, when you finally got to see what was actually in that document, when i went through it with dr. proctor the next day, you saw that that same document that he used actually defined younger adult smokers as people age 18 to 24, and did it over and over and over again. i went page by page. and it was not until we were about 60 pages into that document that we found the one reference to somebody under age 18 -- using government statistics, not gathered by the company -- and then the rest of the document was 18 to 24. that is why i asked you to wait to hear the other side of the story. what about this one? maybe you will remember this one, too. dr. burns was here. he kept showing press releases. and i said, dr. burns, that press release is just what the companies hope will be published, right? oh, no, no, no, they were published. trust me, they were published. they were published. and i said, well, maybe the jury would like to see that for themselves. why did i say that? it was not because i was trying to say they were never picked up, none of them. i wanted you to be able to see that when he says they are picked up and published, it is in papers like the new york times, the boston globe, papers that mrs. gamble testified the very next day mr. gamble did not read. then dr. burns said, oh, yeah, this one from 1988 claims that cigarettes are addictive, are irresponsible and scare tactics. trust me, i'm dr. burns, this has been published, you can take my word for it. then dr. proctor comes in. he is been paid a different 4 million dollars than the 4 million dr. burns made. and i asked him about this same press release. and he came clean with you and said, no, that one has never been published. then he tried to say there was some other one that they did not bring to show you that was. well, this is why we said, wait for the other side of the story, because their whole case was like that. i told you in opening that their entire case would be about what tobacco company representatives said and what certain people in the tobacco industry hoped to accomplish. and that most of the time, it did not work. remember this? this was the polling data that we went over with -- i guess it was dr. burns, about who the american people were actually listening to, and, more importantly, who they were not listening to. mr. shields kept talking about how the tobacco emissaries said x, y, and z. he is talking about people like the ones in these clips that they showed you, anne browder, mr. dwyer, mr. johnson on tv, mr. horrigan. those are the very people that the polling data consistently, going all the way back to the sixties and seventies, people consistently said were not viewed as reliable sources of information on smoking and health. remember this? this is the conspiracy. they kept talking about how powerful this conspiracy was and how it was keeping things from the american people. but if you really look at the allegations they made -- remember, even today, mr. shields said, well, they tried to prevent ernst wynder from publishing his mouse skin painting studies. that did not work. they were published. he completed the studies. they were splashed over life magazine, one of the most popular magazines in america. then they showed you a document that said, well, somebody in the tobacco industry tried to stop this bill talman public service announcement from being shown. that was the one involving perry mason, the guy who, every time perry mason won, he lost. that did not work either. it was shown. and not only was that public service announcement shown, when mr. talman passed away, they started airing that public service announcement on the news with a story about how he had passed away. they said a bunch of times, well, somebody in the tobacco industry tried to stop warning labels from going on cigarettes. that did not work either. there are warning labels on cigarettes. and they went on in 1966, at the same point in time when supposedly the tobacco industry prevented them from -- was opposing that legislation. and then, lastly, the scare tactics press release we just talked about. supposedly, that was something that they wanted to put out there in the public. and dr. proctor said, yeah, maybe they put it out there, but it did not actually get published in any magazine. that was another fail. now, the last thing that i told you about what you would hear in their fraud and conspiracy case was that it would be almost entirely generic, that it would have almost nothing to do with mr. gamble. and that is exactly what you heard over and over and over again in their evidence. can we pull up the next one, please. they started making allegations about filtered cigarettes that mr. gamble never smoked. they made allegations about low tar and low nicotine cigarettes mr. gamble never smoked. advertisements that mr. gamble never saw for products that he never bought. marketing to young people after mr. gamble became an adult. tv interviews, court depositions, press releases and other statements that mrs. gamble said mr. gamble never saw and never relied upon. they are just throwing stuff up against the wall and hoping something will stick, hoping that they can drown you in so many allegations of bad conduct to cigarette companies, low hanging fruit. it is not hard to attack a tobacco company. it is hard to try to prove to you that these attacks had anything to do with mr. gamble. remember what mrs. gamble said about the frank statement, she never heard of it. and it was not just the frank statement. because as soon as she said that, i said to her -- actually, what she said was she never -- not just that she never heard of it, but the first time she saw it was when her lawyers put it up on the screen here. and i said, well, that is interesting. what about all of the other stuff the plaintiff's experts were showing, all these -- you know, anne browder and howard cullman, what about that stuff, did you see any of that? no. never saw that before coming to this courtroom either. and she was living with mr. gamble. i said at the beginning that i was going to be respectful of you all's time. that we would respond to many of the allegations that they made, but that, in all candor, i was not going to respond to every accusation or allegation that they made, no matter how irrelevant to mr. gamble. i said you were going to have to keep your eye on the ball because this case is only about donald gamble. so over the weekend, i went back and added up their case. you all listened to seven days of witness testimony by witnesses selected by plaintiff's counsel. six of the seven days that you heard testimony came from the testimony of those 9 million dollar men: burns, krugman, proctor. that was six of the seven days of testimony that you heard. i counted all of the questions that they asked those three witnesses. and it may not surprise you, it added up to a big number. they asked burns, krugman and proctor over 2,100 questions, all in all. of those 2,100 questions, only 125 were about mr. gamble. that is 6 percent. 94 percent of their case against reynolds in this case involving mr. gamble had precisely nothing to do with mr. gamble. remember this from dr. proctor? he said this right at the end of his testimony, answering a question from mr. shields. he said: "yeah, my testimony might be relevant if the jury wants to know what happened to millions of other people." this case is not about millions of other people. it is not even about one other person. it is only about mr. gamble. and dr. proctor, if you will recall, he did not even know when mr. gamble was born. when you strip away all the noise, you can begin to look at whether anything the american tobacco company or the industry did actually prevented mr. gamble from quitting when it could have mattered, before 1988. and i want to take up what the evidence was on that. first of all, dr. proctor admitted that there was no statement by anyone in the industry in the 1950s, sixties, or seventies saying that nicotine was not addictive, and the 1988 press release was never picked up. so then plaintiff showed you statements from cigarette company employees and representatives, like the frank statement, like the statement from philip morris -- can we pull that back up, please. -- saying things like the harms are not proven. more research is needed. the one from philip morris was that the tobacco companies would remove anything bad from smoke. what is important about that is that mr. gamble never once repeated any of those themes. no one came and told you that mr. gamble said, no, do not worry, the harms are not proven. he never said something about research being needed, or that the companies would remove something from cigarette smoke. you learned in this case that the plaintiffs have access to 13 million documents from the tobacco industry, and yet they managed to only find and bring you statements that mrs. gamble said she never saw before, even though she was living with mr. gamble the whole time. so then mrs. gamble and her son said that mr. gamble talked about that the companies would not put anything harmful into cigarettes. and they both said it in exactly the same way. he thought they would not put something in the cigarette smoking -- in the cigarettes that was harmful. but they said a lot of things, too, that did not add up, and this was one of them. think about this. if mr. gamble really said that a tobacco company told him they would never put anything harmful in the cigarettes, why could not they find a single statement from a tobacco company that actually said that? why could not they show you that? if mr. gamble really heard that from a tobacco company, why was not he shocked in 1997 when he was told that he had emphysema from cigarette smoking? he should have been floored by that information. if he really had no idea that cigarette smoking could cause illnesses, he would have been shocked. you did not hear anything about that. just imagine. you go to the doctor, and you are told that you have a debilitating lung disease, and that it is caused by something you thought was totally safe, like a bottled water. you would be shocked. you would be angry. you would want to blame the company that made the bottled water and did not tell you it could give you that debilitating disease, and you would be highly upset about it. but you did not hear any evidence in this case like that about mr. gamble. he was not shocked. he was not surprised. he was not angry. he did not blame a tobacco company. he did not file a lawsuit. he did not even talk about filing a lawsuit. there is no evidence of any of that. in fact, this lawsuit is not mr. gamble's lawsuit, it is mrs. gamble's lawsuit. think about all the evidence that i've gone over and that you will take back with you into the jury room about all of the information about the health risks of cigarette smoking that was not hidden from view. mr. shields spent a lot of time talking about what he thinks the tobacco industry concealed. and it kind of makes it sound like this information was not out there. it is a little bit like me trying to conceal from you the fact that the sky is blue. i may never say to you that the sky is blue, but you can walk outside and see that the sky is blue, even if no one ever tells you that. because this information about cigarette smoking shortening life, about it being addictive, about it making it harder to quit was out there everywhere he turned, on tv, on the radio, in magazines. it was what people were talking about as well. and even some of the specific allegations do not relate to things where something was successfully hidden. can i have the next one, please. remember this? they talked about this secret plaza hotel meeting. and then when i stood up, you learned that, well, actually, it was covered in the new york times. then they showed you an article from the 1950s about polycyclic hydrocarbons, an internal document from alan rodgman. and then we showed you that the same month of the same year, the same eight polycyclic hydrocarbons were reported on in reader's digest. they showed you documents about nicotine being the sine qua non, or the essential ingredient in tobacco or in cigarettes. when i stood up, we showed you that that, too, was being reported on in the most popular magazine in america. this information was not hidden from the public, and it certainly was not hidden from mr. gamble. so, is it true that there were statements on both sides out in the public? absolutely. you have seen that. i showed it to you. when i showed you the life magazine article, i went back, i did not cherry pick any part of it. i put it on the elmo, and i showed you the end of the article, where there was a sentence or two from some tobacco company representative. and dr. burns admitted, yeah, a lot of times where you find these responses, they are at the back of the article, and it is a paragraph or a sentence or something. what they are really asking you to believe is that mr. gamble somehow believed the company that was making the product over what doctors and scientists and government officials and reporters were saying about smoking risks, as if people of mr. gamble's generation were somehow naive, but the evidence is they were not naive. we talked a few moments ago about what the polling data showed. we also, during the case, looked at a reader's digest article from 1962, where the press was talking about the standard response from the industry being more weak and pathetic than ever. mr. gamble was not naive, and neither was the american people. think about it like this. it is a little bit like if you go to the store to buy an outfit, and the person who works in the store who is trying to sell you this outfit says to you, that looks great on you, you should totally buy that. it looks great on you. when you hear that, you do not think to yourself, well, they are definitely telling the truth, or, they are lying to me; you take it with a grain of salt because you understand that the person who is saying that to you has an incentive to say what they are saying. and the american people did the same thing. and you have been given no reason to believe that mr. gamble did not also do the same thing. they argued about advertisements, mostly based on ads for cigarette products that mr. gamble never smoked, like camel or winston or american spirit and so on. they keep mentioning this "more doctors smoke camel." mr. gamble never smoked camel. and, of course, there were no advertisements for cigarettes on tv after 1971, and all of the print ads after '71 carry the warnings that we looked at earlier. and we mentioned about how 85 percent of the time, the "particular people" slogan was right there on the package. so you did hear this evidence about "particular people." what was the actual theme of those particular people ads? before we hear that, look for this. the ad of the -- the theme of the "particular people" advertising campaign had nothing to do with cigarettes being safe or healthy. it was all about flavor and taste and how easy -- the smokeability of the cigarettes. let us take a look at some of the ads that are the basis of their claim for over ten million dollars in this case. okay. (ad played.) male speaker 1: cigarette? male speaker 2: no thanks. i prefer a pall mall. you see, pall mall smokers never settle for second best. we are particular about taste. male speaker 1: what is so particular about pall mall's taste? male speaker 2: its natural mildness. and pall mall's natural mildness means just one thing, smooth, pleasing flavor. female speaker 1: cigarette? female speaker 2: no thanks. i prefer pall mall. pall mall smokers never settle for second best. we are particular about taste. female speaker 1: what is so particular about pall mall's taste? female speaker 2: its natural mildness. and pall mall's natural mildness means just one thing, smooth, pleasing flavor. male speaker 1: cigarette? male speaker 2: no, thanks, but i prefer a pall mall. pall mall smokers never settle for second best. we are particular about taste. male speaker 1: what is so particular about pall mall's taste? male speaker 2: its natural mildness. pall mall's natural mildness means just one thing, smooth, pleasing flavor. male speaker 1: here, have a pall mall. male speaker 2: thanks, you bet. be particular, buy pall mall famous cigarettes, outstanding and they are mild. (ad concluded.) mr. walker: every single one of those ads was about taste. and if mr. gamble did not like the taste of the pall mall cigarettes he smoked, he would have changed to another brand. folks, believe it or not, ads like the ones i just showed are a huge part of their fraud case. that is their fraud case. that is the part of it that they can tie to mr. gamble is that he heard about "particular people," and those are the ads that they are talking about. you are going to have to decide whether those ads are a fraud, whether they warrant an award of 10 million or more dollars that they are asking for. and when you think about that, remember this. mr. gamble never once said that he took any kind of a health message from those ads, and he never said that he smoked pall mall because of advertising. even dr. burns, for all the money that he is made, about $20,000 into his testimony in this case, he admitted that mr. gamble was not influenced by marketing and was not responsive to tobacco advertising. of their big three, who add up to the 9 million dollars, dr. burns is the only one who actually read the depositions. and the only one of those three then that actually read the depositions told you, in no uncertain terms, that mr. gamble was not influenced by marketing and was not responsive to advertising. the next issue i want to talk about is this whole thing about targeting children, youth marketing. they made a big push about this. this is going to be the best example yet of why you have to keep your eye on the ball in this case. you have to remember that burns and proctor and some of these witnesses, they are testifying all over the place in lots of other cases in this engle class that you keep hearing about. what is the evidence in this case on this topic? first of all, the evidence is that mr. gamble started smoking at age 20. age 20. that is what he told his doctors repeatedly in a number of different ways. the first record on which they rely says he started smoking since he was a teenager. and if that was the only record that there was, maybe they would be on to something. but right after that, the record says 46 years ago, from 2003. it is not like he was rounding, it was about 40 years, or about 50 years; mr. gamble gave a very specific number of years, 46 years ago. and when you do the math, that has him starting at age 20. and throughout his records, you see these references. he smoked at age 20; smoked and has since age 20; since age 20; and so on and so forth, over and over again. so dr. burns said, well, the one that says teenager is somehow more precise than the other ones that say age 20, because there was a pulmonologist involved in that record. well, one of the other records that talks about him starting at age 12 was also a report that he gave to a pulmonologist, dr. wolfe. there is simply no way that you can look at all of these medical records and conclude that mr. gamble started smoking at age 15. that means that these allegations about youth marketing have nothing to do with mr. gamble. but there is more reasons why they have nothing to do with mr. gamble. every single document that they showed you -- and i went through them one by one -- every single one goes back to a time period where either mr. gamble was not born, like the one from 1927, which was ten years before he was even born, or it is after he is a grown man, 36 years or older. mr. shields started talking today about this joe camel campaign in 1990. he said, well, in 1990, there was an effort to target children. okay? in 1990, mr. gamble was 50 years old. he was over 50. then they say, well, look at the 1994 surgeon general's report. it talks about this, too. in 1994, mr. gamble was 57 years old. there is not a single shred of evidence in this case that these allegations about targeting people who are underage have any application to the years when mr. gamble was underaged. not that it matters; he did not start smoking until he was 20 years old. and lastly, because, frankly, these allegations are offensive, we went ahead and took the additional step of showing you that they are just not true. so setting to one side that they have nothing to do with mr. gamble, we had to come back and actually show you what is actually written about the company policy in the documents that they, themselves, are relying on. "reynolds' consistent policy is that smoking is a matter of free, informed adult choice, which the company does not seek to influence." "we are presently and, i believe, unfairly constrained from directly promoting cigarettes to the youth market." "it is not our business to motivate people to start smoking, particularly minors." "to smoke or not to smoke is a personal decision which we do not try to influence." and then the other one is the longer one, where it says, hey, sometimes people are writing youth in these documents without saying what we really mean. in order to say what we really mean, you need to say adult. so what is the answer of the biased paid witnesses? well, sure, these are internal documents, but they must have put that in there to impress -- just in case, 40 years later, somebody would pay someone like dr. burns a bunch of money to go digging this stuff up. these are internal company documents. who were they lying to? they are talking to each other inside the company. this is evidence that the companies did not target people who were underage to try to get them to smoke cigarettes. but regardless of what you think about that, it is absolutely the case that those allegations have nothing to do with someone who started smoking at age 20. and we gave you, as well, evidence about what reynolds' position is on this today, because those were serious allegations. we showed you on the website where it says: "reynolds and its operating companies are guided by the belief that minors should never use tobacco products." and you heard evidence that reynolds will not even advertise in a magazine unless 85 percent or more of its readership are adults. these allegations about fraud and conspiracy, whether they are based on company statements that nobody believed, whether they are based on advertisements that had nothing to do with mr. gamble, or these allegations about youth marketing that had nothing to do with mr. gamble, do not provide a basis for an award of money damages in this case. on the questions on the verdict form, the answer to those questions should be no. the next question on the verdict form, number 5, asks you to state for each party the percentage of any fault that was a legal cause of donald gamble's lung cancer and death that you charge to, and it has the two parties. now, i should say this. if you check no to either of the first questions, you will not even get to these questions on the verdict form. i'm still going through them because it is my job to do that, and i think it is important that you understand our side of the evidence on these issues. but our position is you should not even get to questions 5 or 6 or the ones that come after this. but, as i said, it is my job to talk about them. what is the evidence? this question boils down to this. who is responsible for the choices that mattered to mr. gamble? let us look at the choices that we know could have made a difference to mr. gamble. thank you. these are the choices that actually could have made a difference to mr. gamble. the choice to light up that dr. koop says is always yours. the choice to seriously try to quit. the choice of when to quit. remember, he did not even try before 1982. the choice of how to quit. you heard a lot of evidence about the things that he did not try. and the choice -- this one's really important -- the choice of how hard to quit. those are the choices that mattered for mr. gamble, and those choices could not have been made by anyone other than mr. gamble. the american tobacco company could not force mr. gamble to seriously try to quit. it could not force him to decide when or how or how hard or for how long to try to quit. mr. gamble is one hundred percent responsible for those choices. and even dr. burns. mr. shields said that we did not bring a witness about these issues. we absolutely did. our witness on this is dr. burns. dr. burns said every one of these things and more. everyone remains responsible for their own behavior. individuals are responsible for putting the cigarette in their mouth. the individual is the one that has to make the step. every smoker has the choice to try to quit. it is the smoker's responsibility to make the cessation attempt. this one's really important. with enough internal and external support, any addiction can be broken, but it is up to the individual smoker to make the effort to try to stop. there is not one of those admissions that came from dr. burns that would support anything other than one hundred percent responsibility for mr. gamble, in particular, for the 25 years that he smoked, in the face of warnings about the risk, without even trying to quit. no one forced him to smoke, and no one prevented him from trying to quit. and you heard from his son, donny, mr. gamble believed in personal responsibility. he taught his children personal responsibility. and there is no evidence in this case that mr. gamble ever blamed anyone else for the decisions that he made, including the decision to smoke, and neither should you. now, what i did not put on that chart are the choices that did not matter to mr. gamble, things like design. mr. shields talked to you about, well, the cigarettes were designed this way or that way. you heard evidence about filters and laser holes being put into filter tips and reconstituted tobacco, additives. the bottom line for all of those allegations is that the pall mall cigarettes that mr. gamble smoked were no more dangerous and no more addictive than any other commercially sold cigarettes. their witnesses admitted that. those differences would not have made a difference to mr. gamble. if he had smoked a filtered cigarette instead of an unfiltered, or all of those other changes that they are talking about, it would not have made a bit of difference to mr. gamble. and, of course, you heard lots of accusations about things that did not matter to mr. gamble, about things that happened before he was born, and a lot of testimony about things that happened even after he passed away. we believe and we will ask you to find when you look at the question -- you have to go back. no. back. back. -- that the answer to this question on the verdict form should be zero percent for reynolds and its predecessor companies, and one hundred percent for mr. gamble, for the choices that actually mattered to mr. gamble. all right. can we move forward again? all right. now, this is an instruction that is important to this as well. because some of you might be thinking, well, sure, mr. gamble made those decisions, but the company chose to sell cigarettes and chose to advertise cigarettes. well, the instruction that you have from the judge is that simply making and selling and advertising cigarettes is a lawful activity that cannot be the basis for liability. you can only find liability based on the instructions that the judge gave you, but you cannot put down a percentage just because the companies, american tobacco and brown & williamson, made and sold cigarettes. that was a lawful activity and still is. the next question relates to damages, and there are a few different lines there. i'm going to try to cover this quickly because you all know by now how i feel about this and what we think you should do here. it is no secret. i told you in jury selection and during openings that we do not think this is a case where damages should be awarded. there are lots of other cases out there that you heard burns and proctor testify in, but this is not a case where damages should be awarded. i did tell you in opening that you would hear evidence about $8,000 in funeral expense and about $43,000 in medical expenses. you heard that evidence, of course. but i need to say this about this question about damages. two things. first, the testimony that you heard about this category of damages called support and services was truly remarkable. this was this gil spruance that they brought to you. they paid a guy almost $200 an hour to come in here and tell you that it would be reasonable for you to award almost $400,000 for things like paying the bills, changing light bulbs, and cutting the grass and things of that nature. $400,000. he was talking about, if you want to hire somebody to cut your grass, you got to run background checks and set up fica withholdings and all that. what was he talking about? he admitted that he did not even bother to find out from mrs. gamble what those services were actually costing her, but you can bet it was not $400,000. that is an astonishing request that ought to tell you something about the credibility of their entire case. and then today, mr. shields said to you that you should award 10 million dollars in pain and suffering damages. he just pulled that number out of thin air. 10 million dollars sounds like a nice round number, and that is what he wants you to award. there is simply no basis for that, no basis for that at all. the last question on the verdict form relates to punitive damages: "under the circumstances of this case, state whether, by clear and convincing evidence, punitive damages are warranted against reynolds or its predecessors." you only get to this question if you have first found for them on the fraud and conspiracy claims, which are questions 3 and 4. so we do not think you should get to this question in the first place; but, if you do, you need to understand -- even just if you are considering it, you need to understand some things about how punitive damages work. can we have that slide, please? punitive damages can be awarded only for conduct that was a legal cause of mr. gamble's illness and death. so if they have made allegations about something that happened years after he passed away or something about filtered cigarettes that he did not smoke, all of those examples that i gave earlier about conduct allegations that do not relate to mr. gamble, this is not the case to try to award punishment for that. "punitive damages can be awarded only to mrs. gamble." so any amount that you award, which we do not think you should award any, it is going to go into mrs. gamble's pocket. and you should understand that punitive damages are the damages that are paid over and above, in addition to, any damages that compensate mrs. gamble. punitive damages are not compensation. they are simply extra money. i showed you the jury instruction that says that you cannot punish reynolds for being in the business of selling cigarettes. you heard evidence about how cigarettes are inhalable, and about how many people are affected by smoking-related diseases every year, but you cannot punish reynolds for those things. a cigarette that is not inhalable is not a cigarette. it is a cigar. and some of the other allegations that they made to try to get to you award punitive damages are really just complaints about the fact that reynolds is even in business at all; but, cigarettes are a legal product, and it would violate the court's instructions for you to punish r. j. reynolds just for being in the cigarette business. and you should know that every document, every internal document, every public document that they showed you has been public for many, many years, and society and the government still have determined that it is legal to sell cigarettes. think about this. punitive damages can only be awarded to punish and deter conduct that harmed mr. gamble. i've already described for you how most of the allegations they have made have nothing to do with mr. gamble, but i want to show you something else, too. because you heard a lot of evidence on this question of whether reynolds should be punished, and you will see that almost everything that you heard does not rise to the level of something that should be punished. let me give you some examples. can we pull that up. all right. it is not punishable, reprehensible conduct to have the same scientific view as the public health community did in the 1950s. can we show the dem that shows them that? the next one. remember this? they made all of these allegations that the american tobacco company knew something in the 1950s. this is before anyone sees mr. gamble smoking, but that the american tobacco company knew something and lied about it. but the only evidence that you saw that actually came from the people running the american tobacco company was this statement here about what paul hahn believed, and it was: "the industry is strongly convinced that there is no sound scientific basis for the charges that have been made." and we showed you that people like dr. hess, from the american medical association; dr. heller, from the national cancer institute; and, dr. hammond, from the american cancer society, people who are not there on behalf of some tobacco company, they felt the same way. why is it that dr. hess and dr. heller and dr. hammond can honestly hold this view, but at the exact same time moment in time, paul hahn cannot? their only reason is it is a tobacco company. it is a whipping boy. of course, they are lying. of course. so then they bring dr. proctor to try to show you that paul hahn knew something he was not telling people. what did they bring you? they brought you a letter from some random manager at another company called ecusta paper. it was not mr. hahn's letter. it was not even sent to mr. hahn. there is no evidence at all that mr. hahn, the person who signed the frank statement, did not believe what he was saying. and you cannot punish someone, even a corporation, for its opinions. can we go back, a slide back. it is not punishable conduct to fund good research and to publish research indicating that smoking is addictive and can be harmful to health. can we show to dem as to what was published. all right. in terms of publications, you heard evidence that dr. rodgman at reynolds disclosed his research into what is in tobacco smoke, including hydrocarbons, to the surgeon general; that the surgeon general thanked the tobacco industry research committee for its contributions. and we actually showed you some of the articles that were published on research funded by tirc, including articles concluding that smoking is addictive -- that was in 1963 -- articles that cigarette smoking caused heart disease, harms the lungs and causes cancer. funding that kind of research is not punishable conduct. following the design recommendations of the public health community is not punishable conduct. submitting lists of ingredients to health and human services every year since 1986 is not punishable conduct. dr. proctor testified that the companies, including the american tobacco company, were, in fact, searching for ways to understand what was in smoke and to see if they could remove the bad elements. that is not punishable conduct. we showed you the evidence about reynolds specifically, how reynolds spent over a billion dollar over ten years trying to develop a premier cigarette that would be -- was hoped would be a safer cigarette; how dr. russell, a preeminent researcher, praised reynolds for that research, and how reynolds continued that research into its eclipse cigarette. that is not punishable conduct. companies should not be punished for holding an opinion. they should not be punished for the stupid things that some of their employees might write down in a document picked out by lawyers. i bet that if i talked to any of you for ten or 15 minutes, i would learn that each of you has or at one point in time has had that one co-worker who seems to be full of ideas about how everyone else should do their job; that one co-worker who seems to know everything about things that are not even in their job description, right? that person who has ideas that they think are great ideas, like mr. shields said this claude teague was a brainstormer, a creative guy in the company who talked about everything. he is that guy. we have all worked with people who you would never want their thoughts or their suggestions to be put forward as representative of the company. and we showed you that this dr. teague that they keep talking about, the first document they showed is one he wrote when he was in his early twenties and had just been hired. some of the other documents where he is supposedly making marketing recommendations, he was not even in marketing. he did not run marketing. and there is no evidence that he made a presentation to the people who were running those departments. reynolds should not be punished for that. reynolds should not be punished for not publicizing risks about the health risks of smoking that were already being publicized in the press and on tv. we showed you this earlier. and they certainly should not be punished for conduct that had no effect on the smoker whose wife is looking to receive extra money. we ask that you reject all the plaintiff's requests for money damages: the $400,000 for mowing the lawn and paying the bills and the other things they talked about; the 10 million dollars they want you to award for pain and suffering; all of it. at the end of the day, the bottom line key facts are the ones i've been talking about since day one. mr. gamble knew the risks. he did not rely on anything the company said or did. he never really tried to quit. he smoked what he wanted to smoke, even when the whole world switched to what was being advertised. and no one forced him to smoke or prevented him from trying to quit when it would have made a difference to him. maybe mrs. gamble would have a stronger case if the cigarettes that mr. gamble smoked never had warning labels on them. maybe she would have a stronger case if he switched to filtered cigarettes because he saw an ad that said they were safer. maybe she would have a stronger case if he saw the frank statement and relied on that. maybe she would have a stronger case if the "particular people" advertising campaign said something about cigarettes being healthy or safe. maybe she would have a better case if he actually put down his cigarettes and tried smoking for himself and really meant it. but they do not have any evidence of any of those things. the evidence was just the opposite. and for those reasons, we are going to ask you to come back with a defense verdict. now, i've tried to fairly summarize the evidence that you have heard. and after i sit down, mr. shields will have another chance to argue to you, and i will not get to respond. he has that luxury because plaintiffs have the burden of proof. we do not have the burden of proof on the liability issues in this case. but it means that if he makes a new argument that i have not addressed, i will not get a chance to respond to that. but you all know me by now. you know our case. you know our evidence. and you can probably figure out pretty well how i would respond to just about anything that mr. shields might say after i sit down. i just want to express our appreciation one last time for your patience, for waiting for the other side of the story. i've explained this case the best way that i know how, and we are relying on you to reach a fair verdict here. we are in your hands. we know you will use your common sense. you will follow the law. you will stick to the facts that mattered for mr. gamble. and we hope that you will come back with a defense verdict. thank you very much. thank you, your honor