2 ms. parker: may it please the court. good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. i have an opportunity now to talk to you again at the end of the case. i want to also thank you for your service as jurors here, and i want to thank you on behalf of my client, r.j. reynolds, and also on behalf of our trial team, john walker and ben hill over here as well. you have all been sitting here day after day. and, you know, it is two weeks tomorrow that you have all been sworn in as jurors. you have been patient. you have been paying attention and listening to the evidence, and we appreciate it very much. now, when i gave my opening statement, i told you at the very beginning that i was only going to talk about one person, that this case is about one person and one person only, and that is alex gelep. and that is still the case here. this case is about alex gelep. it is about his cancer. it is about his choices, his smoking, his decisions. and ultimately this case is about whether the plaintiff here is entitled to recover money damages from reynolds and from philip morris. that is what we are here about. 34 now, mr. acosta said in his opening that reynolds and philip morris is the seller of the cigarettes. and that is true. but that is only 4 part of the story. our society is fully aware that cigarettes have helped -- have decided that cigarettes should be a legal product for adults who choose to smoke. and i told you in my opening statement cigarettes can cause lung cancer. we do not dispute that. cigarettes can be addictive. we do not dispute that. and some people who smoke are addicted. we do not dispute that. but this case is about mr. gelep. and congress and our society already knows that cigarettes cause lung cancer and that cigarettes can be addictive. but we have freedoms here in the united states. we have freedoms in the united states to engage -- to choose to engage in risky behavior. we can do that. we can choose to drink alcohol. we can choose to smoke cigarettes. we can choose to go snow skiing. we can choose to race cars. we can choose not to eat right. our society allows cigarettes to be sold. and, in fact, you heard the evidence that mr. gelep and his wife owned a store where they 35 sold cigarettes. and mr. gelep sold cigarettes in that store because he believed that adults should have the right to choose to smoke just like he did. he made the decisions when he wanted to smoke, and he made the decisions when he wanted to 7 quit. and that is what he told his doctor. when he wanted to quit, he quit. when he did not want to cut down, he did not cut down. when he decided to quit, he was able to do that with no assistance. he was able to quit cold turkey successfully with no assistance. but rather than spend the trial talking about mr. gelep, a lot of this case, a lot of what you heard from the plaintiffs has been about cigarette smoking in general terms. but as i said at the very beginning, we do not dispute cigarettes cause lung cancer. we do not dispute that cigarettes can be addictive. but that does not answer the question that we are here about today, which is about mr. gelep. now, what i'm going to do this afternoon with my time is talk about mr. gelep and to go over what the evidence has been about him. and you are going to be given a verdict form, mr. acosta 36 showed you up there on the screen, with that one question. and ultimately in order to answer this question, you are going to have to consider mr. gelep and the circumstances of his life. now, after the lawyers finish the closing arguments here, judge rondolino will give you the instructions on what the law is, like he told you. what i'm going to do is go over what we think those instructions will be and apply those to the 10 evidence that you have heard in this case about mr. gelep. first of all, as judge rondolino has told you the plaintiff here has the burden of proof. that means the plaintiff has to prove to you every element of the claim. every element of the claim has to be proven to you by the plaintiff. so if we will break this down, there is three elements here. there is primary lung cancer, addiction, and legal cause. all of those have to be proven to you by the plaintiff, and all of those are on the verdict form. and if the evidence fails to establish any part of that -- any part of it, then you should find in favor of reynolds and philip morris. and that is important. because if we had -- 37 if we had not stood up at all, if we had put up zero evidence in the case, the plaintiff still has to meet their burden of proof. they have to prove to you everything that is in that question. but we did put on evidence. and our evidence shows that not only did the plaintiff fail to prove their case, but they really do not have a case. now, the threshold issue is whether mr. gelep had primary lung cancer. and by that, i think we all know we are talking about lung cancer that originated in his lung, not cancer that spread to his lung from some other part of his body. and if 13 the plaintiff cannot meet that threshold issue, the case is over. the plaintiff also has to prove that addiction is the legal cause of mr. gelep's illness. in other words, the plaintiff has to prove that mr. gelep was addicted and that his alleged addiction is the reason that mr. gelep developed his illness. but the plaintiff is not going to be able to do that -- has not been able to do that, because even if you assume somehow that mr. gelep had cancer caused by smoking, it still cannot be said that that was but for the addiction. there is more than one part here, more 38 than one thing the plaintiff has to prove. now, in order to prove their case, the plaintiffs are asking you to discount mr. gelep's own words, what he told his doctors. they are asking you to discount his own actions, what he did in his life. and they are asking you to discount the fact that mr. gelep believed that other consumers also had the right to choose to smoke. that is what he believed. that is what he stood for. and that is why he sold cigarettes himself. so as i go over the evidence, i think that you will see the plaintiff here just does not have a case in this case about mr. gelep. now, we have presented evidence to you so that 16 you would get to know mr. gelep, you could get to know him as a person, you could get to know his medical situation, you could get to know about his illnesses so that you can make the decisions that are going to be before you here. remember this medical record. mr. gelep does not want to cut down on smoking. and the doctor who wrote that, dr. hansen, who was the older doctor who came whose son is married to gelep's daughter, on the stand, dr. hansen said 39 this is what mr. gelep told him. now, as you are considering the case, it is really important to remember what the circumstances are about mr. gelep and what the circumstances are not. this is not a gentleman who tried everything in the book to quit but was not able to. this is not the kind of person who woke up in the middle of the night because he needed a cigarette. he was not the kind of person who was tormented by smoking, who hated smoking, who wanted to quit but just could not. that is not mr. gelep, and there is been no evidence that that describes mr. gelep. and, in fact, the true picture is exactly the opposite. let me show you these photos. these are all of mr. gelep. these are all in evidence. this is a happy gentleman. this is a happy guy who enjoyed smoking. he was not somebody who is 19 tormented by smoking. some smokers like mr. gelep enjoy smoking and they do not want to quit. and even the plaintiff's experts who came to court agreed to that. and according to dr. seiden, who came to court last friday and testified, mrs. gelep said -- and mrs. gelep was the person who knew mr. gelep the best -- if he wanted to 40 quit smoking, he would quit; if he did not, he did not. it was a matter of what he wanted to do. he was a willing smoker. he was a willing smoker. he knew there were health risks to smoking. he knew that from his own personal experience starting with the kidney cancer back in 1969, but those risks were not important enough to him for him to decide that he did not want to smoke. and, again, he said he does not want to cut down. now, this case is not about whether cigarettes can be addictive or whether some people who smoke may be addicted because, as i've said already, they can be. but unless you yourself want to quit, you are not going to be successful. so you have to look at the circumstances of the particular individual instead of just talking generally about cigarettes or about addiction. and the fact that cigarettes are addictive and maybe that some people who smoke may be addicted is not a question on this verdict form. it is not 22 something that you are going to have to decide in this case. let me go now to the first point, and that is the medical case. and that is that mr. gelep did 41 not have primary lung cancer. and that is he did not have cancer that started, that originated in his lung. the plaintiff has the burden to prove that with evidence. but for the plaintiff's case, where was the pathology? where was the pathology? dr. groff testified. dr. groff came -- was the first witness for the plaintiff. he said he never reviewed the pathology. he said, i'm just a psychiatrist. dr. goldman -- dr. goldman is the one from here in tampa that mr. acosta talked about. he did not even know that there was pathology in existence. he did not even know that until i told him. and, of course, he had no opinion. dr. cummings -- now, dr. cummings is the expert that mr. acosta brought from buffalo, new york. he is the one who was the public health specialist who started a stop -- ran a stop-smoking clinic. dr. cummings said he was not qualified beyond public health epidemiology. he had not reviewed the pathology. dr. dunn, who is the first one of the treating physicians who came that mr. acosta called -- now, dr. dunn is the one who performed 25 that bronchoscopy procedure where they went in and 42 got the tissue. and dr. dunn said he did not look at it. he sent it to a pathologist. and, also dr. dunn, recall, did not even know that mr. gelep had kidney cancer or had cancer that was in his abdomen -- in his abdominal fluid. i had to tell him that on cross when i asked him questions. he did not even know that. he treated him for a very, very limited period of time. and then dr. hansen, again, the elderly doctor whose son is married to the gelep girl, he said he never reviewed the pathology either. so ask yourselves. the plaintiff has the burden of proof. why did not the plaintiff bring the pathologist to testify? we had to bring the pathology to court. we had to introduce this evidence, what is left over, of the pathology. and it is marked, and it is in evidence. now, dr. bennett, who came to court monday, yesterday, and he -- he looked under the microscope and he showed you -- he demonstrated to you what the pathology shows us about mr. gelep's cancers. and mr. gelep had multiple cancers. remember this chart. he had kidney cancer back in 1969. he was operated on in early 1970. he had kidney cancer again in 1996. he had colon cancer 43 also in 1996. and, again, this is all that same general area of your body. he had cancer in his peritoneal fluid that was all throughout his abdominal cavity. and he had cancer located in his lung. but that cancer came from elsewhere. it did not start with his lung. and the key point is where that cancer originated. you need to know where a cancer originated in order to determine what caused it. and i know you-all have heard this several times throughout the trial, but if the cancer starts in your kidney, it is called a kidney primary or primary kidney cancer. if a cancer starts in your colon, it is called a primary colon cancer. if it starts in your lung, it is called primary lung cancer. but a cancer that starts somewhere else in your body and then spreads to your lung is not a primary lung cancer. the bottom line here is that mr. gelep did not have cancer caused by smoking. his cancers -- his multiple cancers, were all connected. they were all related to the same disease process caused by his genetic defect. that is what caused him to have these cancers located all over. none of mr. acosta's witnesses had reviewed the 44 pathology, and none of them had reviewed the genetic dna background to this. 3 and in addition, besides not bringing a pathologist, the plaintiff did not take steps to preserve evidence that would have been useful in this case. there could have been medical tests conducted when mr. gelep was alive, but he refused some of those tests, and he did not have others. remember he did not have a colonoscopy. he refused the chest x-ray. he refused a rectal exam. there could be tests done on tissue samples from his lung, but this is all we have. the lung tissue was not preserved. there could have been tests on his body, on his tissue through an autopsy, but the family did not have an autopsy. those are three different opportunities that the plaintiff had. but instead, they are coming to court and asking you to speculate that mr. gelep's lung cancer started in his lung and was caused by smoking. and that is particularly troubling here when you consider that the gelep's son paul -- paul gelep is a lawyer. and you have heard the evidence that he is the person who was behind filing the lawsuit. he signed the complaint. he met with 45 the doctors. he attended the depositions. and, remember, he named himself as the beneficiary of the complaint. at first he said he did not know that. remember i got the complaint and i showed 5 it to him to refresh his memory? and then he agreed. he signed the complaint that started this lawsuit that named himself as a beneficiary. and, ladies and gentlemen, less than a week before this trial started, paul gelep prepared a document that you have not seen yet. this is a document that his mother signed as the personal representative of his father's estate and it transfers property, real estate, from the estate to herself. that is an official exhibit. it is an official court document that is going to be in evidence that you can take back with you to the jury room. so now on the one hand, the plaintiff is saying she has the capacity to sign legal documents that are filed in court transferring property on march 4th, less than a week before this trial started, but on the other hand, you heard mr. acosta say during his opening that she was confused. and that is their excuse as to why you should discount what she said. so i encourage 46 you, when you go back to the jury room and deliberate, look at this document that is in evidence. now, we are -- i said this in my openings. we are very sorry that mr. gelep had cancer. and it is always a tragedy when you lose a family member. the judge is going to -- judge rondolino 8 is going to give you the legal instructions, and that includes an instruction that you should not be swayed from the performance of your duty by prejudice, sympathy, or any other sentiment. so i ask you to focus on the facts as you are evaluating this evidence. now, this has been a long trial. it is been two weeks now, and you have heard a lot of evidence. but i just cannot emphasize this enough. if the plaintiff has not met her initial burden to prove that mr. gelep had cancer -- primary lung cancer, cancer that originated in his lung, then the case is over. they did not call a pathologist, and they did not preserve all the tissue. now, mr. geraghty, on behalf of philip morris, and i have both said in our opening statements, and i've said again this afternoon, cigarettes can cause lung cancer. and there are 47 many parts of our society that are involved and engaged in selling cigarettes because they believe that the public has a right to choose. and even the plaintiff's own witnesses, their own experts agree you cannot look at statistics alone. statistics can only tell you about a population as a whole, but they cannot tell you about a particular individual like mr. gelep. now, dr. cummings -- again, he is the one who came from buffalo, new york, and he said his 11 specialty was epidemiology. and i asked him and he agreed that that is the study of populations, not the study of individuals. so the plaintiff's position is, well, he had cancer -- their position is he had cancer -- they found the cancer in his lung. so that is it. he was a smoker, so it must have been caused by smoking. but that is not consistent with the facts here. and the statistics and general statements alone cannot satisfy the plaintiff's burden of proof. let me give you an example about why you cannot rely on general statements and statistics. if you looked at ten people -- just randomly ten people and you knew they had died, if you looked 48 at just statistics, that would mean that six or seven out of those ten people passed away from heart disease, because that is six or -- 60 to seventy percent of people die from heart disease. so if that is all you knew as the statistics, the general information, you can say, here are ten people who have passed away; six or seven of them must have passed away from heart disease. but if you look at the specific facts of those individuals instead of looking just generally, if you look at those people, those ten people could have been on an elevator that fell 20 floors and all ten of them passed away not because of heart disease, but from the injury of the elevator 15 crash. you cannot just consider these general statements about cigarettes causing lung cancer. pardon me. you have to look at the individual, about mr. gelep. now, mr. gelep had cancer in his abdomen that started in his colon. you have two parts to your colon. there is the small intestine and the large intestine. you heard dr. bennett say the most likely origination point here was his colon, his large intestine. and that cancer spread 49 throughout his body. and the medical term for that is metastasize. and one of the places it spread was his abdominal fluid, his peritoneal fluid. and that is throughout your abdomen. it goes all the way from your diaphragm all the way down to your colon. cancer cells were found in that abdominal fluid, and here's the report that shows that. you have seen that before. both the plaintiff's experts, dr. goldman and dr. hansen agree mr. gelep had cancer in his abdominal fluid. there is the report. now, there were tests done on those cells that came -- those cancer cells that came out of his abdominal fluid. if we could pull that up. 17 that is the report about the special staining that dr. bennett told you about, the special staining here including this cea stain that was done by mr. gelep's treating doctors on the cancer cells that came from his abdominal fluid. and those tests were strongly positive -- called it strong positivity for this cea. as dr. bennett explained, 95 five percent of colon cancers stain positive for cea. 50 one key issue in this case are those stains, because they show colon cancer was in -- had already spread and was in his abdominal fluid. but mr. acosta and the plaintiff did not bring an expert to talk about those stains. dr. bennett testified yesterday -- and i'm going to go over his qualifications very briefly. he is a medical doctor, pathologist, forensic medical examiner, completed over 8,000 autopsies. he is the only witness in this case who is qualified to answer the questions here about the pathology, about the staining, and about the big picture of what happened. now, dr. bennett prepared this list over here that he showed you yesterday, and i want to go over that briefly. this is why mr. gelep did not have primary lung cancer. first of all, where it was located. if we could pull up that. 20 the expert report say it was in the parenchyma, which is the tissue part of the lung. it was not found in his airways. and that is where primary lung cancer usually starts. the cell type is the second thing that dr. bennett listed. the pathologist who reviewed 51 the tissue from the lung -- because that tissue is no longer available. that is not what is in these boxes. they said that all they could -- all they could say is that it is non-small cell. they could not go further and say a particular type. non-small cell is most consistent with this being a metastasis as opposed to being a primary lung cancer. most colon cancers are non-small cell. and if this had been a primary lung cancer, his doctors would have been able to determine exactly what cell type it is instead of just saying this general non-small cell description. the third thing is the pattern of spread. you heard dr. bennett talk about the footprint and about the way it spread. the cancer spreads up. it cannot spread down using the body's pathways that dr. bennett explained to you. it is very uncommon for lung cancer to spread without first going to all those lymph nodes. and here there is only a suggestion that it pushed up against one of them. but there is plenty of evidence that his cancer in his abdominal area had a footprint to go 23 to his lung. first of all, that is where the blood goes and also the direct extension that dr. bennett told you about. 52 number four, the symptoms. how many times have we seen this record? when mr. gelep went to the doctor in january, he told his doctor, cough, nausea, diarrhea, seven-and-a-half-pound weight loss. nausea, diarrhea, and weight loss are all symptoms of colon cancer. do you recall that when dr. goldman, the one from moffitt here in tampa, was on the stand and he at first disagreed with that. and then i asked him what was on the moffitt cancer website, and then he finally agreed those are symptoms of colon cancer. and number five is the pathology staining that we talked about, the cea stain. that shows this is a cancer that did not start in his lung, that spread there from his colon. those five reasons show why mr. gelep had colon cancer that spread to his lung, not a primary lung cancer. now, why is there nothing in the medical records about colon cancer? when mr. gelep got sick in january of 1996, he went to his doctors. that is when he told them he had those symptoms, and they ran tests. and they found right there in january he already had cancer located in his lung, excerpt - closing statements 3-24-09 53 located in his kidney, located in his abdominal fluid, and he was terminal. it was inoperable, and there was nothing that they could do other than treat the symptoms. and so his doctors had no reason -- they had no medical reason to conduct tests to find out exactly where this cancer started or what caused it. and i also wanted to mention, in these medical records from the plaintiff, this exhibit 508 here, there is inconsistency from his doctors -- from his treating doctors over what kind of cancer that mr. gelep had. some records say he had kidney cancer from 1969/1970, 20 years ago, that metastasized -- that is "mets" -- to his lung and to his kidney. you can go through those. and one doctor said the cells from the cancer in the peritoneal fluid looked more like the kidney. so even under these medical records from his doctors who were not even looking for it, the cancer in mr. gelep's lung did not start there. even under these records that the plaintiff has put in evidence, these doctors say this was kidney cancer that spread to his lung, that is not primary lung cancer. now, remember dr. bennett talked yesterday 54 about the role of fire fighters. and i hope you-all remember that. he said fire fighters are like the treating doctors. they are the ones who get there on the scene and they have got to put the fire out. and that is what mr. gelep's treating doctors did. he came to them, he was sick, and they took care of him. they treated him. but dr. bennett is like the fire investigators who come in after the fact and sort through everything to determine what happened and what started the fire. remember this: mr. gelep never had a colonoscopy. every witness has agreed that a colonoscopy is the best way to determine whether or not somebody has colon cancer. but he never had one. his doctors never did that. he also refused a rectal exam. and he also refused a chest x-ray. nobody was -- none of his doctors -- nobody was looking at the whole picture, and they did not have any reason to have to. he was already terminal. he was already inoperable at that point. but that is what a forensic medical examiner like dr. bennett does. he comes in and he looks at all these different things and he puts the 55 pieces together. now, let me mention again, there is no lung tissue here. and that is the gold standard. if 4 they had done an autopsy or they had preserved the tissue from the lung, that lung tissue would be available. and it could be tested and it could be reviewed under the microscope. but we do not have that. and the plaintiff is asking you to speculate without that physical evidence that what mr. gelep had was primary lung cancer that started in his lung. now, let us talk again about colon cancer. because, remember, dr. bennett went over this part with you. colon cancer is not caused by smoking. it is associated with genetics, high fat diet, red meat, sedentary lifestyle, obesity, family history, age, chronic colon conditions, and alcohol. remember, we went over that yesterday. and dr. bennett said the same -- one of the same genetic defects that causes kidney cancer also causes colon cancer. all of mr. gelep's cancers were related to his genetic predisposition for cancer. now, i want to talk for a minute about his kidney cancer and tell you first and foremost -- 56 and you will see this on the verdict form -- there is no claim in this case that you are going to have to answer a question for about kidney cancer. the only issue on the verdict form is about primary lung cancer. there is no claim here on kidney cancer. 7 the first kidney cancer was diagnosed when mr. gelep was 42 years old in 1969. and we have heard a lot of evidence about that. that is when he had one of his kidneys removed. and then he was diagnosed with kidney cancer again in 1996 when he was 68 years old. and you have heard that over 50,000 people a year get kidney cancer, many of whom are people who have never smoked. all of these cancers are related because of mr. gelep's genetic makeup. and all the evidence points to this genetic defect that he was born with that caused him to have these cancers. an individual who develops -- who has that first kidney cancer and then develops a second one, the fact that you have that second kidney cancer is strong proof -- you heard from the witness stand -- strong proof there is a genetic component to it. and then when you have an individual who has all these different cancers located all these 57 different places, that is also evidence of genetics. now, here's the diagram dr. bennett went over showing the cells that contain those genes. and if you have a genetic susceptibility to cancer, that means that you have a defect in one of those genes. and mr. gelep, as you have heard, was adopted. so we do not know his family history of cancer. we do not have any way to find that out. 10 but we do know that family history and genetics plays a significant role in the development of cancer. and there are dna tests that could have been performed to show whether mr. gelep had this genetic defect, but we cannot do that because we do not have that tissue. we do not have that evidence to run the tests on. you heard dr. bennett talk about that yesterday. and then there was no autopsy. even without those tests, though, we know from the evidence we have, that mr. gelep's cancers were caused by his genetic defect. remember this chart that dr. bennett prepared. the genetics are 10 to 13 times most likely to be the cause. now, you may be thinking, well, even if it 58 was genetics, his smoking played some role. and when you hear the instructions on the law from the court, the court is going to explain to you that the question is whether addiction to cigarettes that contain nicotine is a substantial contributing cause. the legal question is not whether smoking played any role, it has to be a substantial contributing cause. and look at those numbers. so if you apply your common sense to the facts of this case and if you base your decision on this case about evidence about mr. gelep that 13 you have heard here in this courtroom, you will find that the plaintiff has not met the initial threshold burden to show that mr. gelep had a primary lung cancer. and that means the case is over and you would answer no. again, we did not have to put up any evidence. the plaintiff has the burden of proof. i want to talk for a minute about the death certificate. the death certificate was signed by the older doctor who came in, mr. -- i'm sorry -- dr. hansen, again, the one whose son is married to the gelep's daughter. he signed the death certificate. and the death certificate says that 59 the cause of death was adenocarcinoma of the lung. but remember, there is not a single pathology report, not a one that says that. all the pathologist could say is that it was non-small cell. we do not know where dr. hansen came up with the idea that it was adenocarcinoma, but there is no evidence in the pathology -- the pathology reports to support that. he was just wrong. mr. gelep's death was caused by this abdominal fluid buildup. you recall -- and it is in the medical records and dr. bennett talked about it yesterday -- the doctors removed two liters -- if you go to the grocery store and buy a bottle of coke -- we are talking about two liters that were removed on one occasion and four liters 16 that was drained on a different occasion. that is a lot. and so when you get to this question, again, on the verdict form, the plaintiff has to prove that but for the cigarettes that mr. gelep smoked, this injury would not have occurred. and the plaintiff is not going to be able to meet this initial threshold issue of establishing that there was a primary lung cancer. let me turn now to the next issue in the 60 case, and that is, did mr. gelep smoke because he could not quit or because he could quit and just did not want to? but before i do that, i want to address something briefly. mr. acosta talked a lot about company documents during his opening statement. he showed you documents that are in evidence here. what do those documents have to do with mr. gelep? ask yourselves that. and are these documents finals or are they drafts? one of the documents that mr. acosta just showed you, which is exhibit 545 -- it is not a good quality copy -- it has a notation at the top that mr. acosta did not show you. if you fill that in, it says "draft." this is a draft. so when you are looking at the company documents, look at them carefully and ask, what do they have to do with mr. gelep? are you just 19 being shown a cherry-picked sentence or two out of a document? what do the documents have to do with the cigarettes that mr. gelep smoked? my point is, you need to look at the whole picture, not just a cherry-picked sentence or two out of a document that is marked "draft." all right. let me talk now about addiction. 61 mr. gelep's death was not caused by an addiction to cigarettes, it was caused by something else. it was caused by his choice to smoke even though he knew he was capable of quitting, because he did quit. the best evidence there is about whether a smoker can quit is whether they were able to quit, whether they did quit. we know mr. gelep was able to quit because he did quit here, and that is documented in the medical records. the evidence is that he quit at least four times in his life. he quit in 1969 when he was diagnosed with kidney cancer. he quit cold turkey. in 1974, he quit. and that is when the attorney's son, paul, testified that they had met for a duke-florida homecoming game and his father had quit then. in 1987, he quit for six months. and this is when the son, paul, sent the letter from the grandson. this is mr. acosta's letter that is in evidence where mr. acosta says the longest time he quit was in approximately 1987 for six months. and he quit the fourth time in 22 january of 1996 for nine or ten months, and he quit told cold turkey. plus, there is this medical record that says he quit for eight years. mr. gelep quit for good in january 1996 cold 62 turkey when he was diagnosed with cancer. when he was personally motivated, he could quit with no trouble at all. but he was never committed to quitting before then. he did not want to quit before then. he told his doctor he did not want to cut down. how can a smoker's family come to court and ask for money damages when the smoker told his doctor he did not even want to cut down? mr. gelep knew that smoking was risky. he knew it was bad for his health. he believed it had caused his kidney cancer back in 1969, but he decided to take those risks because he enjoyed smoking. what is important in this case are the circumstances of mr. gelep's life about his smoking. and here's what the evidence showed about that. when mr. gelep applied himself to things that he cared about, he was successful. that was consistent throughout his life. he was a successful man. he was a strong-willed man. you heard his son, paul, say that he was his own man. nobody could tell him what to do or what not to do in any area of his life, not just smoking. and he 25 ran his own business. and obviously you have to 63 be an intelligent person -- you have to be smart, savvy to run your own business and be successful at it. and mr. gelep ran a number of businesses. he ran -- the evidence was he ran a deli, a bar, a liquor store. he ran that sundry shop called gelep sundries where he and mrs. gelep sold cigarettes. he invested in and he owned commercial real estate. he owned an insurance company. he was an intelligent man, and he enjoyed smoking. his habit was, you heard, to have a cigarette with a cup of coffee in the morning. sometimes that was at home. sometimes he had his first cup of coffee when he got to work. and sometimes, remember, he went to a number of restaurants and he met his friends there to have a cup of coffee and a cigarette. and he enjoyed smoking when he played golf. and when he decided to quit, he did so instantly, cold turkey, no assistance. he never tried nicotine gum. he never tried a patch. he never went to a stop-smoking clinic. he never tried hypnosis. he never tried medication. he never asked a doctor for help. and he never asked anybody else for help, because he was able to quit easily, with no assistance, cold turkey. 64 this is not somebody who has tried everything in the book over and over and just cannot quit. this is somebody who quit as soon as he decided that he wanted to. mr. gelep was a willing smoker who smoked despite knowing about the health risks. and at some points in his life, he chose to smoke and at other points in his life, he chose to quit. and i want to talk for just a minute about when mr. gelep smoked. remember this navy record in 1945, does not drink or smoke. now, the medical records are inconsistent about how long, what long of a period of time mr. gelep smoked. one record says 10 years, another record says 18 years, another record says 30 years, and then the record that says 45 years. the records are just not consistent, whether it is 10 years or 45 years. but the earliest any record shows mr. gelep smoking was 1951 when he was a 24-year-old adult. however long he actually smoked, we know he was able to quit without outside assistance, cold turkey. and even the plaintiff's own expert, dr. cummings, the one from buffalo, new york, said that. dr. cummings said his definition was -- remember this -- six months of no smoking equals a 65 quit -- a successful quit. and under -- this is 2 mr. acosta's -- this is the plaintiff's expert. under the plaintiff's expert's definition, mr. gelep successfully quit on at least two occasions, 1987 when he had the six-month quit and 1996 when he quit for nine to ten months. you heard from the witness stand that one aspect of whether a smoker is motivated to quit is whether that person is aware of the health risks of smoking. mr. gelep's family and his doctors encouraged him to quit smoking over the years. did mr. gelep know that smoking was risky for his health? yes. i want to go over briefly what the evidence was about that. mr. gelep was warned decade after decade from his family and from his doctors that he should quit smoking because of health concerns. he knew smoking was bad for his health, but he chose to smoke anyhow. he believed it firsthand from his own cancer in 1969. and you may recall dr. seiden said based on reading mrs. gelep's deposition, he quit at that time because he did not want it to kill him. he owned a bar and a liquor store and a sundry shop where he sold cigarettes. and those 66 cigarettes had warnings on the packages. mr. gelep sold cigarettes even though he was aware of the risks of smoking because he thought and believed that smokers should have a choice. 5 in 1974, we heard the testimony about mr. gelep catching his son john smoking. remember that? john was 17 years old, and he said he was coming out the door and his father was coming in the door and he left his smokes there in the garage, and his father caught him. and his father left him a note the next day and kicked him out of the house. that shows -- and he said -- let me add this. and john gelep, on the stand, testified that in that note his father told him that he was kicking him out of the house that one of reasons was because smoking was bad for him. that shows right there mr. gelep knew in 1974 that smoking was bad for his health, and he believed that his son had a choice. and he could have quit smoking if he had wanted to. and mr. gelep's doctors told him to quit. here are four medical records where his doctors told him, discontinue cigarettes, discontinue cigarettes, stop smoking. by not smoking, you could keep it that way. and his son paul told him 67 he should quit because of his health over and over again. and mr. gelep was aware of the warning labels that were on the cigarettes that he smoked starting in 1966. we will put those on the screen. warnings were on every single package of cigarettes that mr. gelep smoked from 1966 forward. and he was 8 exposed to that package warning 365 days a year for every year he smoked starting in 1966. the evidence is overwhelming that mr. gelep knew about the health risks of smoking. on those times when mr. gelep quit, he was able to function normally. and that is what he told his doctors. we need to go by what he said, not what somebody says way after the fact. he only gained some weight because he ate more. and he may have been what was described as restless or jittery. those are not clinically significant symptoms, nothing like what you hear about as withdrawal. let us look again at these medical records. these are in mr. gelep's own handwriting. he had quit two weeks before this record. he quit two weeks before, and he said he was not depressed. remember when some of the doctors -- some of the 68 experts for the plaintiff came in and said, oh, he suffered from depression because he was -- because of withdrawal. he said he did not. and then the next record from 1988, his wife did not seem to believe that when he was off cigarettes, he was depressed. that is nothing that comes close to what is described as withdrawal by the medical doctors. now, mr. gelep usually smoked, according to the medical records, two or three packs a day. 11 but just because somebody smokes two packs a day or three packs a day does not mean they cannot quit. and we know that. we have proof positive in this case. we have proof positive because mr. gelep did quit. this is not a case of somebody who never quit and could not quit. he did quit. he quit on at least -- at least two occasions. and the last time he quit, he quit for good in january 1996 and never smoked again. last friday we brought to trial dr. george seiden who testified. remember he the one with two doctor degrees. he is a medical doctor. he also has a ph.d., board certified, treats patients. and he said that he only called one smoker addicted because he thought it was 69 pejorative term. he did not like to use that word addicted because if you tell somebody they are addicted, that gives them an excuse. they can say, oh, i'm addicted. i cannot quit. and dr. seiden said he did not like to do that. he did not like to use that term addicted when describing a smoker. he studied all the records, all the depositions, all the evidence in the case, and he explained that mr. gelep did not lose control over his smoking. it was his decision to smoke and his complete lack of motivation to stay quit. and that is why he smoked. 14 we know that mr. gelep controlled his smoking. it did not control him. we know he controlled his smoking because he did not smoke in bed. he did not smoke in the bedroom. he did not smoke until he had his first cup of coffee in the morning. he did not smoke at the movies. he did not smoke in church. he sat in the nonsmoking section of restaurants. and he refrained from smoking wherever it was forbidden like at his son paul's house. and he did not complain about it. that is somebody who can control their smoking. this is not somebody who cannot go to the movies 70 because they need to smoke or cannot go out and eat at a restaurant unless they were able to smoke a cigarette. that is not mr. gelep. and i said this in my opening and i'm going to say it again. actions speak louder than words. actions speak louder than words. mr. gelep controlled his smoking. and we know that because of what he did, his own actions in his life. the plaintiff cannot prove that mr. gelep was not capable of quitting because he did quit. there was nothing about his smoking that impaired his intelligence. there was nothing about it that caused him to lose his power of reasoning or his ability to quit if he wanted to. mr. gelep just never made the decision to quit smoking for good until january 1996. 17 and there is not a shred of evidence in this case that he had any of these nicotine receptors that you heard about. remember i asked the experts? there is nothing in any radiology to suggest that and we do not have an autopsy here. there is no physical evidence to support that in this case. in the face of all these warnings that he received over the years from his doctors, from his 71 family, from the warning labels on the packages, mr. gelep had to make a decision for himself about whether to smoke or not. and he decided to smoke despite knowing that it was bad for him. why did he do that? because for mr. gelep, with full awareness about the health risks of smoking, mr. gelep said -- decided for himself the enjoyment, the pleasure i get out of smoking is worth taking that risk. everybody makes lifestyle choices. and many of those choices are made, just like mr. gelep did, despite known health risks. they are made because of these intangible things that you cannot measure like enjoyment and pleasure. that is why some people decide to have a glass of wine or a beer or being a couch potato and not getting enough exercise or not eating the right foods or smoking. now, we all do not make the same lifestyle choices. that is up to the individual. 20 mr. gelep made that decision for himself to choose to smoke. and during jury selection, remember you-all were seated out there and i was up here and i asked everybody if you believed that individuals should be permitted to make the choice to smoke 72 for themselves. and all of you said yes. whether you agree or disagree with the choice mr. gelep made is not the issue. the issue is whether any of us should second guess the choices that mr. gelep made. some people weigh those benefits of pleasure against the health risks and they say it is not worth it. and those people do not smoke or they quit smoking. other people weigh that and they say, it is worth the risk to me. and i'm going to smoke. and i choose to smoke. and that is what mr. gelep did. now, you heard during the trial there have been a lot of labels used to describe smoking, habit, dependence, addiction. and you heard that the term addiction has changed over time. there was one definition in the 1964 surgeon general's report, and then they changed the definition in the 1988 version of the surgeon general's report to something different. but whatever you call it, whatever you label it, it does not mean you cannot quit. it does not mean that mr. gelep could not 23 quit. and let me just talk for a minute about nicotine. you heard from the witness stand 73 nicotine occurs naturally in the tobacco plant. and even mr. acosta's -- even the plaintiff's experts agreed nicotine does not cause cancer. nicotine is not a carcinogen. but this case is not about smokers in general and whether nicotine might play a role with respect to some other smokers. this case is about mr. gelep and could mr. gelep have quit. and the answer is, yes, because he did quit. and there is no stronger evidence that you could have. was mr. gelep's death caused by an addiction to cigarettes? is that the legal cause? and that is the question on the verdict form. did mr. gelep smoke because he could not stop or because he did not want to stop? the evidence in the case has been that his death was not caused by an addiction to cigarettes, because he was capable of quitting, because he did quit. and you cannot have stronger evidence than that. he was able to quit when he wanted to cold turkey. he had control. when he wanted to stop, he stopped. when he wanted to start and start smoking, he started. and he chose not to quit for good until january of 1996. he was aware of the risks. and for him, the benefits excerpt - closing statements 3-24-09 74 of smoking outweighed the risks. he was willing to take those risks. now, you have been listening to evidence for two weeks now -- just about two weeks, two weeks tomorrow. so you ought to have a good idea about mr. gelep now and the kind of man he was and the kind of smoker he was. there is no basis here to conclude that addiction substantially contributed to mr. gelep's cancer and that but for any alleged addiction, he would not have gotten cancer. as dr. seiden who testified on friday put it, there was no clinically significant impairment. nicotine does not control a person's choice. and that was true for mr. gelep. mr. gelep's death was not caused by an addiction to cigarettes. mr. gelep made a series of choices in his life, just like we all make choices where we all take risks that might affect our health. mr. gelep was in control of those choices, and he chose to smoke. that brings us to the verdict form. and the verdict form, as we have shown you, has one question on it. you are going to have this back in the jury room. and it asks, was alexander gelep addicted to cigarettes that contained nicotine; and, if so, 75 was such addiction a legal cause of a primary lung cancer and his death? the evidence that you have heard in this case proves that the answer to that should be no, because the plaintiff has not met their burden of proof. when you are going back and you are deliberating and you are evaluating the case, i'm going to ask you to remember and focus on three key facts. he did not have primary lung cancer. he did not have cancer that originated in his lung. he had multiple related cancers all in the abdominal area that spread to his lung, but that is not primary lung cancer. and smoking was not the cause of those multiple cancers in his abdomen. that was genetics. number two, mr. gelep was able to quit. we know he was capable of quitting because did he quit. when he was motivated to quit, he quit cold turkey, no assistance, no trouble at all. and number three, before 1996, in his own words to his doctor, he did not want to cut down. and dr. hansen confirmed that on the witness stand. now, i've tried with my time this afternoon 76 to go over everything that mr. acosta mentioned in his closing argument. but if i have omitted something, if i've forgotten something, do not let 4 the fact that i have not mentioned it make you think that we are in agreement. mr. acosta's going to have another opportunity to talk to you after mr. geraghty for philip morris finishes. that is because the plaintiff has the burden of proof, as judge rondolino has told you. and i think you have seen from this trial you need to hear both sides of the situation. you need to hear both sides of the story, so to speak. so if mr. acosta raises something new in his rebuttal, knowing that i cannot respond to it, i'm going to ask you to consider two questions. one is, why did not he mention it already so i could address it? and second, knowing the evidence you have heard in the case, how would we have responded if i had had an opportunity to? when you listen to mr. acosta's rebuttal, listen carefully and see if you hear answers to any of these questions. how can the plaintiff prove her case when they did not have an autopsy? how can the plaintiff prove her case when they 77 did not have all the pathology tissue? how could the plaintiff proof her case when mr. gelep refused some of these medical tests and he did not have others? how could the plaintiff prove her case when it is undisputed that mr. gelep had multiple cancers located in his body? how can the 7 plaintiff prove her case when they did not even call a pathologist to testify? how could the plaintiff prove that mr. gelep could not quit when we all know did he quit at least twice, six months in 1997 and nine or ten months in 1996? how can the plaintiff prove her case when all the evidence is he enjoyed smoking and he smoked because he chose to do that? how could the plaintiff prove that addiction was a legal cause when you heard from mr. gelep himself in the medical records that he did not want to cut down on his smoking? that is what he told his doctor. and how could the plaintiff prove that addiction prevented him from quitting when he never ever had trouble quitting? when he made up his mind to quit, he quit successfully, cold turkey, no assistance, no trouble. now, none of us likes to consider or have to consider the truthfulness of anybody. i mean, 78 it is just against our nature. but as jurors, that is going to be something you are going to have to do. that is your obligation to consider the witnesses. and the court will instruct you -- give you an instruction about the credibility and the believability of the witnesses. and you are going to have to decide for yourselves whether you believe the plaintiff's witnesses when they did not even look at the pathology and at least one of 10 them did not even know that there was pathology out there. i want to thank you again for your service as jurors here. i want to thank you again on behalf of myself and our trial team and also my clients, reynolds. and i want to ask you when you go back in the jury room to keep your focus on mr. gelep. and i also want to ask you to keep something else in mind. i do not know if you can see from where you are seated here, but behind the court on the wall, there is lady justice on the seal. you see? she is blindfolded. and she is blindfolded because when you make up your mind, when you deliberate out there, you should consider the evidence without taking into account sympathy or whether you have any prejudice about any company or anyone 79 else. she is blindfolded so that the decision, what is fair and what is just, is based on the evidence and nothing but the evidence in the case. i want to close with just one final thought. if the plaintiff here can avoid these choices that mr. gelep made, then the family of anybody who is used a risky product can also claim that the choice -- that their choices should be disregarded. you, the jury, stand between us and the question that you have to decide as to whether the family of a smoker who had a disease that had nothing to do with smoking, who enjoyed smoking, 13 who controlled his smoking, who understood the risk of smoking all throughout his life, who told his doctor he did not even want to cut down, who quit when he decided to quit with no trouble, who did not preserve the evidence or bring it to court will be able to go forward with their case for money damages. so we are in your hands now. and we want to just respectfully ask that you follow the law and you listen to the evidence. and i want to thank you again very much for your attention this afternoon. your honor, that concludes my closing. 80 the court: thank you. mr. geraghty? mr. geraghty: i'm just going to need a couple more minutes to move things around. the court: okay. then we will just wait. anybody need a break or are we good? the bailiff: you can stand up and stretch, if you want. mr. geraghty: may i proceed, your honor? the court: please. mr. geraghty: may it please the court. good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. here, again, i'm the last lawyer that is speaking to you, although by my clock it is a little early. i think typically it is been 4:00 16 that i've normally been able to address you. so the fact that it is only 3:30, i'm going to look at as an advantage. i will not be the last lawyer to speak to you, as i think you have heard. because the plaintiff bears the burden of proof, mr. acosta will have one more time to address you. now, i hope i do not disappoint you when i tell you that i cannot promise you that i'll take ten minutes or less. it is been a long trial, and 81 the evidence is such that i simply cannot summarize what i believe are the important points in that span of time; but i promise you i will not take any more than about 25 minutes. and i also cannot guarantee it, but i'll try my best not to trip over a cord while i'm up here. now, on behalf of my client, philip morris usa, myself, and i think on behalf of all the lawyers, i just want to thank you for the time that you have spent here with us. it is been over two weeks. you have been extremely attentive. you have been very engaged throughout. and i think i can speak for all the lawyers when i say that we really appreciate your time and your attention over the last two-plus weeks. it is been a long trial. i know you are anxious to retire and go deliberate and then hopefully go home, so i'm going to try to address the important points as 19 quickly as i can. now, this lawsuit is about alexander gelep -- i think you-all know that at this point -- the kind of man he was, the way he lived his life, and his decision to smoke cigarettes. and i want to show you the verdict form. ms. parker has already showed it to you, and mr. acosta showed it to you. 82 can you-all see that clearly from where you are? and just so you know the case is about mr. gelep, the verdict form refers specifically to him. the question is "was alexander gelep addicted to cigarettes that contained nicotine and, if so, was such addiction a legal cause of a primary lung cancer and his death?" now, ms. parker has already talked to you about the fact that there are three components to this question, and she addressed specifically the issue of whether or not the plaintiff had primary -- the decedent had primary lung cancer as the plaintiff contends or whether he had primary colon cancer as the defendants contend. i'm not going to address that issue. i'm going to address the two other parts of the question; was mr. gelep addicted to cigarettes that contained nicotine, and if so, was his addiction a legal cause of his death. i talked to you about these three simple 22 truths in my opening statement: one, mr. gelep enjoyed smoking; two, mr. gelep made a personal choice to smoke; three, mr. gelep always had the ability to quit smoking. the evidence you have 83 heard over the course of the last week and a half to two weeks supports every single one of these points. and i would submit to you that these three points help you answer the question on that verdict form. i'm going to spend the time i have talking to you about the evidence you heard and the evidence you did not hear from the three fact witnesses. and specifically i'm referring to paul gelep, john gelep, and their sister helen diamandis. i call them fact witnesses because i want, in your mind, to distinguish them from the expert witnesses you heard testify in the case. i'm also going to talk a little bit about some of the medical records you heard ms. parker refer to. these medical records are key in this case. because through his doctors, alexander gelep actually speaks directly to us about how he feels, what he wanted to do, what he did not want to do, and what he intended to do. and these records represent the only testimony we have for mr. gelep himself. alexander gelep enjoyed smoking cigarettes. you do not have to take my word for it; you have seen 25 the evidence over the last two weeks. ms. parker 84 showed you a series of photographs, all of which are in evidence, and those photographs demonstrate that mr. gelep enjoyed his life. i would encourage you to look at those photographs. he enjoyed being in the company of his friends and family, and he enjoyed smoking cigarettes. but we have more than just pictures, we have the testimony of mr. gelep's oldest son, paul. what did paul tell you? paul said that his father was the kind of man who, quote, never met a stranger. never met a stranger. he told you his father would spend time socializing with friends and family, enjoying a cup of coffee, and smoking cigarettes. those are three things -- three things that alexander gelep enjoyed to do. in fact, paul told you about the different places on clearwater beach where mr. gelep would go to meet his friends, drink coffee, and socialize. the island house restaurant, young's (phonetic) pit barbecue, and mcdonald's on clearwater beach. during these visits mr. gelep and his friends would talk about the day's events, what was happening in their lives, and he would enjoy a cup of coffee and smoking cigarettes. there is no doubt that mr. gelep was a 85 personable, outgoing, and friendly man who chose to spend time doing the things he enjoyed; and smoking cigarettes was one of those things. mr. gelep made a personal choice to smoke cigarettes. he was an informed smoker. he understood that there were significant health risks associated with cigarette smoking. we know that his wife mary quit smoking in the mid 1960s in response to the 1964 surgeon general's report. for years his son paul preached to him about the dangers of cigarette smoking and urged him to quit. and the evidence is clear that despite being informed of the risks of cigarette smoking, mr. gelep chose to continue smoking. you have not heard any evidence to suggest that mr. gelep did not understand the health risks associated with cigarette smoking. to the contrary, what we have learned about mr. gelep over the last couple of weeks is that he was an intelligent and successful businessman who made a decision to smoke cigarettes. as his son paul said from the witness stand, he said, quote, my father, quote, had his opinions about things, and he had his views. that was paul from the witness stand. 86 you heard that both dr. hansen, who testified 2 here, and dr. smitherman told mr. gelep on a number of occasions that he should cut down or quit smoking. ms. parker showed you the medical record from 1994 where dr. hansen wrote that mr. gelep told him that he did not want to cut down on smoking. dr. hansen testified here live right before you. mr. acosta himself asked him very pointedly, did alexander gelep tell you that he did not want to stop smoking? and dr. hansen, without batting an eye, told you, yes, he did say that. that comes directly from dr. hansen. alexander gelep always had the ability to quit smoking. he always had the ability within himself to quit smoking when he decided it was time to do so. and how do we know that? because he did. because he did. he quit smoking on several occasions, and you have heard all about that during the course of the evidence. and each time he quit, he did it cold turkey, without any assistance whatsoever. paul gelep told us about several different times that his father quit smoking. you heard that he quit in 1969 when he was first diagnosed 87 with kidney cancer. you also heard from paul that in the fall of 1974, he saw his father in gainesville and his father was not smoking at the time. paul was not sure why his father had quit 5 smoking at that point, but what we do know is that alex gelep quit smoking for a period of time and then later that year decided to resume smoking again. alexander gelep quit again in 1987. you have heard about him receiving a letter from his grandson. reading that letter motivated mr. gelep to quit once again in 1987. the evidence shows you that he quit for at least six months and maybe longer. and the evidence you also heard from paul was thereafter, his father told him that he wanted to start smoking again. in january of 1996, two weeks before he learned that he had lung cancer, mr. gelep once again decided to quit smoking, and this time he quit for good. this time he quit for good. according to paul, he never smoked another cigarette again. that is paul's testimony. he quit cold turkey. and you saw the record -- i will not put it up there again, because ms. parker has already showed it to you. but when he went to 88 see dr. dunn two weeks after he quit smoking, he did not report a single significant withdrawal symptom -- not a single significant withdrawal symptom. is there any reason why mr. gelep could not have made the decision to quit for good at some earlier point in his life? is there any reason 8 why? the evidence shows that the answer is absolutely not. absolutely not. mr. gelep always had the ability within himself to quit smoking whenever he was motivated to do so, and the proof is that he did. now, you may recall from my opening statement that i told you you would hear evidence that the single most important factor that determines whether somebody's going to be successful of quitting smoking is motivation. motivation. and who did you hear that from? well, you heard it from dr. seiden, for one, but you also heard it from dr. michael cummings, the expert that the plaintiff brought to the courtroom. dr. cummings and dr. seiden both agree that motivation is the single most important factor in determining whether a person can successfully quit smoking. and then after motivation is 89 persistence. now, during my opening statement i also talked to you about three questions. three questions. i told you about three questions from the american cancer society. you may recall this is a pamphlet called smart move published by the american cancer society. it is actually written by dr. cummings himself, the same dr. cummings who testified in this case. dr. cummings told you-all that this was one of the most widely distributed 11 stop-smoking pamphlets in the country. and one of the questions that dr. cummings and the american cancer society asks: number one, do you want to stop smoking? number two, are you willing to make some changes in your daily routine? and number three, are you willing to put up with some uneasy moments after stopping? and if you can answer yes to all three of those questions, according to the american cancer society and dr. michael cummings, the plaintiff's own expert, you can quit smoking. you can quit smoking. could mr. gelep have answered these three questions? of course he could. of course he could. and could he have answered them at any 90 point in his life that he decided that that was the time to stop smoking? absolutely. now, have you heard any evidence to contradict what i've just told you? have you heard any testimony from paul or john or helen diamandis to dispute these three things? significantly, you did not hear any evidence from any one of mr. gelep's children to dispute that he could have quit smoking whenever he was sufficiently motivated to do so. none of them testified that their father said he was addicted. none of them testified that he said he wanted to quit smoking. none of them testified that he 14 tried and failed to quit, ever. they never said no, our father, he did not enjoy cigarette smoking. you heard no testimony from them to that effect. and after mary gelep -- are not they the ones who knew their father best? and if they truly believed that their father was hopelessly addicted and incapable of quitting smoking, do not you think you would have heard them testify to that fact on the witness stand? you did not hear anything of the sort from them. instead, all you heard them talk about were the specific brands of cigarettes that their father smoked. 91 and i want to spend a few minutes talking about this testimony, because it is important. it is important because it goes to the issue of credibility, the believability of the witnesses. and i will not put it back up there, but you saw the instruction that ms. parker showed on the screen. that is an instruction you are going to receive from judge rondolino. and you will be the judges of the believability of the witnesses in the case. you may recall that i told you in my opening statement that members of the gelep family were going to come in here and change their testimony about when their father smoked marlboro light cigarettes. and you saw it happen right here in this courtroom. why this sudden change in their testimony? 17 well, perhaps it was because paul gelep knew that his mother had provided sworn answers under oath that his father only smoked marlboro lights from 1990 to 1996, and he was concerned that they would be unable to prove their case against philip morris. so let me remind you of the evidence that you heard. and as you listen, consider whether you can believe the changed testimony you have heard 92 from john and paul gelep. you heard from the witness stand, john and paul testify about a matter that contradicted mary gelep's sworn interrogatories. in those sworn answers she said that her husband smoked marlboro lights from 1990 to 1996. paul prepared those answers originally back in 1999, and then mary swore to them under oath in 2001. paul testified that before he prepared those answers, he checked with his mother, he checked with his brother john, and he checked with his three sisters, including helen diamandis. paul testified he would never have had his mother sign that answer under oath, back when their memories were fresh, if he did not believe the answer she gave was honest, truthful, and accurate. paul confirmed the accuracy of those answers as recently as december 2008 when he gave a deposition in this case. that is just three months 20 ago. then in this courtroom they told you a different story. they told you that they believed their father started smoking marlboro lights in the 1970s. they told this new story based upon two photographs that they claim show their father with 93 packs of marlboro light cigarettes. these two photos have been admitted into evidence. they are plaintiff's exhibit 662 -- i believe this one is m, and this is 662-k. these are those two photographs. john flatly admitted that the photograph of he and his father and his girlfriend from las vegas does not depict a pack of marlboro lights. he flatly admitted that. paul, on the other hand, said he thought this particular photo that shows a new year's day cake, 1980, he thought this showed a pack of marlboro cigarettes. paul said he and his brothers blew up these photographs on march the 8th, 2009, the day before this trial started. now, paul did not bring the blown-up versions of the photographs, but we have them now. they have been introduced into evidence as defendant's exhibit g, h, and i. and i encourage you to take a look at them. and what you will see when you look at the back, is that on the very -- on the back of the 23 photograph, it indicates that these photographs were created at a ritz camera on march the 8th, 2009 by paul gelep and his brother john and his 94 sisters. what else did paul and john not show you? well, they did not show you a photograph taken of their father at about the same time on a boat. we introduced that photograph into evidence. i believe it is defendant's exhibit a. the photograph is on your left-hand side. this is the photograph we admitted into evidence, and we showed the photograph to both paul and john. and on the right-hand side is a photograph -- a picture of true cigarettes. john and paul both admitted that the pack of cigarettes in their father's left breast pocket has a circular blue emblem that looks an awful like -- an awful lot like a pack of true cigarettes. true cigarettes were not manufactured by either philip morris or the r.j. reynolds tobacco company. we have introduced some other photographs that show mr. gelep with packages of cigarettes in a left breast pocket that look like true cigarettes. this photo was taken in 1979 or 1980, about the same time that paul and john told you about the two other photographs. finally, i want to remind you that john testified under oath twice before this photo excerpt - closing statements 3-24-09 95 jogged his memory -- excuse me, before this photo jogged his memory, john gelep testified twice that his father was smoking true cigarettes in 1979 or 1980. take a look at the two photographs; the only two photos that john and paul brought to support their changed testimony. paul told you that they had hundreds and hundreds of photographs of their father. and of those hundreds and hundreds of photographs, these are the two photographs they brought you to support their changed testimony. you decide -- take a look at these photographs when you go back and deliberate, and you decide whether these photographs show a package of gold and white marlboro lights. so why do we have the sudden change in testimony on the eve of trial? i would submit again that it is because paul gelep was concerned that there was insufficient evidence that his father smoked marlboro lights long enough to be the cause of his father's death; that 1990 to 1996 was too little too late. did john and paul testify truthfully from that stand? well, that is for you to decide. you are the judge of the facts in the case, and you can accept or reject the testimony as you deem appropriate. 96 now, frankly, i'll tell you now, there is no question on the verdict form in this phase of the case that asks you to decide what brands of cigarettes mr. gelep smoked. this will only be relevant in phase two of the case, if you even get that far. i do not think you will based upon what has happened in this phase. but this changed testimony is important, again, because it goes to the issue of credibility. remember that the experts brought by the plaintiffs relied upon the deposition testimony of paul and john gelep. and also remember dr. groff, the very first witness you heard for the plaintiff who said that mr. gelep was addicted, who did he rely upon? he told you that he interviewed paul and john gelep. that was the basis for his opinion that mr. gelep was addicted. now, mr. acosta spent a lot of time talking about dr. farone and all the things that he had to say. that has nothing to do with mr. gelep and the question you are being asked to decide today. it is simply a distraction. but i need to address it, so let me just say a few things about that. dr. farone testified that while he was at 97 philip morris, he and his coworkers did important research that benefited the customers of philip morris. he also told you that the work he did, in 4 his view, served the public's interest. he testified that he spent eighty percent of his time -- eighty percent of his time trying to make safer cigarettes while at philip morris. he said he was proud of the work he did. proud of that work. did he want to leave philip morris? no. he testified that he was hoping to become vice president of research and development. that is the position he was hoping to get. but then dr. farone was fired; you heard him testify about that. he was fired because he complained to his coworkers and he threatened to sue the company. he became angry and bitter because he and his wife did not get promotions that he believed they deserved. and now you hear him tell a story that is completely at odds with his statement that he expected to spend his entire career at philip morris running its research and development department. he talked about ammonia. but what he did not tell you is that philip morris obtained a patent from the united states government in 1967 based on 98 its use of ammonia in cigarettes. this was no secret. the government knew about it. the patent is in evidence. you can take a look at it. and as dr. farone told you, the government never told philip morris or any other tobacco company that they needed to take ammonia or any other 7 ingredient out of their cigarettes. where is the document from dr. farone where when he was employed at philip morris he said that ammonia or urea or acid aldehyde made cigarettes more addictive like he testified on that videotape? where is that document where he expressed any concern while he was an employee at philip morris as to any of those issues? mr. acosta did not show you such a document. i submit to you he is not going to be able to show you such a document. so despite the sensational allegations you heard from dr. farone on that videotape, dr. farone did not say any of those things while he was an employee at philip morris. and at the end of the day, recall what dr. farone admitted during his cross-examination. he admitted that despite everything he said on that videotape, he said, quote, i'm not trying to say whether or not one person is more addicted 99 than another. he told you he could not say that. he was also asked a very pointed question about all the ingredients that you heard dr. acosta talk about. he was asked, and you cannot tell that if there was some substance that increased the rate of absorption by a matter of only milliseconds, that that would make any difference whatsoever in the level of a person's addiction. right? and dr. farone said that is 10 correct. he admitted that was true. more importantly, what does this have to do with the issues in this case? what does this have to do with mr. gelep? absolutely nothing. absolutely nothing. paul said that mr. gelep was a sports fan. well, there is a saying in sports: keep your eye on the ball. keep your eye on the ball. do not be distracted. do not be distracted by things that are not relevant to the case. so let us look at the evidence that relates specifically to mr. gelep; the evidence that shows that he quit smoking for good in 1996 when he was motivated to do so, when he decided it was time to quit. i want to show you the verdict form again, and then an instruction so you understand how the 100 two go together. this one may be hard to read, so let me know if anyone cannot -- do i need to move this one closer? no? okay. let us talk again about the question you are going to be asked to answer in this phase of the case. this is the verdict form. again, ms. parker has addressed one aspect of it, and that is the medical causation issue. but i want to talk to you about the second -- the two other parts of the question, whether mr. gelep was addicted to cigarettes that contained nicotine, and if so, was 13 such addiction a legal cause of a primary lung cancer and his death. you are going to have to determine this question based on the legal cause instruction that the court gives you. let me read it to you. "addiction to cigarettes is a legal cause of an injury and death if it directly and in natural and continuous sequence produces or contributes substantially to producing such injury and death so that it can be reasonably said that" -- and this is the key phrase here -- "but for the addiction to cigarettes, the injury and death would not have occurred." 101 "but for" -- those are the key words. the instruction continues: "in order to be regarded as a legal cause of injury and death, addiction to cigarettes need not be the only cause. addiction to cigarettes may be a legal cause of injury and death even though it operates in combination with the act of another, some natural cause or some other cause if such other cause occurs at the same time as the addiction to cigarettes and if the addiction to cigarettes contributes substantially to producing such injury and death." that is a lot of words. but, again, the words "contribute substantially" are in the second paragraph, and they are all the way up here. and 16 the way it is defined, contributes substantially -- "contributes substantially" is defined "so that it can be reasonably said that but for the addiction to cigarettes the injury and death would not have occurred." that is the standard you have to apply. in order to satisfy this burden, the plaintiff must establish that mr. gelep's claimed addiction was an essential reason why he smoked -- essential so substantial of reason that if he 102 had not been addicted, he would have quit in time to avoid the injury, the injury that the plaintiff occurs to place in this case. so substantial that mr. gelep lost his free will and could not stop smoking. is that mr. gelep? does that sound like the mr. gelep you heard about in this case over the course of the last week or two? i would submit to you again that the answer to that question comes from the very first board i showed you. the simple truth -- i believe they provided you with the answer to the question on the verdict form. mr. gelep enjoyed smoking, mr. gelep made a personal choice to smoke, and mr. gelep always had the ability to quit smoking. and ultimately he did quit, when he was motivated to do so. and when he quit, he did so cold turkey without any assistance whatsoever. the ability to quit was always within mr. gelep himself. the 19 motivation, the persistence were always there. if you believe that the evidence supports these three points, then addiction could not have been the legal cause of mr. gelep's death, and you should check no on that verdict form. if you believe these three simple truths, then the plaintiff has failed to prove by the 103 greater weight of the evidence that mr. gelep's claimed addiction was the but for cause of his disease. the court will define the greater weight of the evidence as being "the more persuasive and convincing force and effect of the entire evidence -- the entire evidence you have heard over the course of this trial." ask yourself, could mr. gelep have quit smoking, whether or not he was addicted, whenever he decided to set his mind to do so? based on the entire evidence that you have heard, i submit to you that there is no doubt that when he was motivated to do so, when he decided he wanted to do so, mr. gelep could have quit smoking at any point -- at any point in time. and we know that to be true because he did, in fact, quit several times, and he ultimately quit for good in 1996. and, therefore, his claimed addiction is not the but for cause of his death in this case. why not? because alexander gelep always had it within himself to quit smoking. 22 so for all the reasons ms. parker discussed and all the reasons i've now explained to you, i would ask that you answer the question on the verdict form "no" and end this case now. answer 104 that question "no" and return a verdict in favor of philip morris and r.j. reynolds, the only verdict that i would submit to you is consistent with the entire force and effect of the evidence you have heard in this case. i want to thank you very much for your time and attention.