3 mr. acosta: yes, i do, your honor. thank you very much. good afternoon. and i want to thank you, first of all, for your service here and your patience with us for this lengthy phase one. 8 phase two is going to depend on how you answer the question that is before you to be answered in phase one. and phase two would be very short. i cannot tell you exactly how long it would be, but i think it would be really short -- very short, because a lot of the evidence that you heard is evidence that may not actually apply to the question that you have got to answer here in phase one. and it would carry over, and then you would consider that in phase two. for example, the brand of smoke -- the brands that were smoked is not relevant to the question you have to answer. and this is the question that you have to answer in this phase of the trial. this is the verdict. and the question is, "was alexander gelep addicted to cigarettes that contained nicotine and, if so, was such addiction a legal 5 cause of the primary lung cancer and his death?" yes or no? so that is what this first phase has actually been about, is to have you answer that question. and i'll show it to you one more time before i sit down. you will remember back in the opening, i said that there were a number of things that we hoped the evidence would show. you know, when you make an opening and you tell juries what you think the 11 evidence things will show -- as the judge told you, what we said then was not the evidence. what was the evidence is what you actually saw, and it is -- it is not always exactly the same. we cannot predict with one hundred percent accuracy exactly what is going to come into evidence and what is not going to come into evidence and so forth. so -- but there were a lot of things that we did show you in the opening that we showed you in evidence during this part of the trial. one of them was how much mr. gelep smoked. and if you recall, i had this board up previously. and he smoked up to 60 cigarettes a day. that is a tremendous amount of smoking by any measure. one of the records said that he smoked three packs a 6 day for 45 years. and you probably remember there is a lot of discrepancies, but by anybody's measure, mr. gelep was a heavy cigarette smoker. in fact, a couple of the records which are going to be going back with you into the jury room -- this big binder is filled with his records, and they document his smoking history together with this board here. and these are photos that were introduced into evidence. they are in this envelope that will go back with you. and you can see what we did is we put the dates on those that mr. gelep dated or on those where the date was on the back of the photograph. and, you know, here he is goofing 15 around. what we tried to do is to put these in an order from youngest to oldest. and you can -- in every single one of these pictures, he is either holding a cigarette or has a pack of cigarettes or smoking a cigarette. i think one of them might show that he had an ashtray sitting next to him, this one right here with his daughter. and you can see that -- you can see him grow older. you know, every few years, there is a picture of him smoking a cigarette or with a 7 cigarette from the earliest to the latest. this was a man that needed to have a cigarette with him basically all the time. 60 cigarettes a day is a cigarette every 10 or 15 minutes. so he was always with a cigarette. and this chronicles, you know, the years. so you can see it was pretty much continuous smoking back from the time he had his first cigarette in his mouth. and if you look closely, you can see this one is lit. i think mr. gelep testified he did not see that, but if you look closely, you can see there is about a half, a quarter-inch of ash on that one. we must prove our case by the greater weight of the evidence. and you will be getting a short instruction on that. and, you know, lawyers, 17 they -- oftentimes they stand up and they -- they weigh the scales and they say, you know, just a grain of sand is enough to tip the scales. well, that is true. all we have to do is win by the greater weight, which does not have to be a big weight. it can be a very small weight. but you are the ones who decide what that is. so it is not beyond a reasonable doubt. that is what you do in a criminal case where somebody goes to jail. 8 this is different. this is different. if we win by 51 to 49, we win. so when you are looking at this evidence, perhaps you should be thinking in terms of, well, what is more probable? is the evidence that was presented by the plaintiff in the case more probably true or not? if you do not think it is probable that mr. gelep was addicted to smoking as much as he did, if you do not think that is probable, then we would lose. if you think it is probable that he had an addiction to nicotine, which we think the evidence is pretty much overwhelming that he was -- and i'll explain that a little bit further in a minute, that he had an addiction to nicotine and that it was a cause -- if you remember on this verdict form -- i guess i did not point this out, but it is a cause -- a legal cause of his primary cancer and death. so i'm going to talk a little bit about his 20 addiction, i'm going to talk a little bit about his lung cancer, and then i'm going to talk a little bit about how the two fit together. one of the things that we did when we started out in our opening is we put up this board here. and this board, you know, is to show the different 9 reasons why people smoke. and dr. groff talked about that. and i think dr. cummings -- you might remember him -- he talked about some of these things, too. the one thing that exists, underlies all these other things is addiction. that is the thing that drives smoking. the defendants in the case have come out and, as i mentioned in the opening, they deny everything. they deny addiction. they deny it was lung cancer. they deny the addiction was one of the causes of the lung cancer. and, you know, in their world, the seller goes free and the person that uses the drug gets addicted and dies, pays the price. and that is the way these defendants have done business. they -- ms. parker: objection, your honor. the court: do you need to approach the bench? (the following proceedings took place at sidebar:) mr. geraghty: your honor, i do not see how the way the defendants approach business is 23 relevant to the question that we are talking about here. if he wants to talk about mr. gelep's addiction or addiction in general, that is one 10 thing. but i think this is out of balance given the issue in the case. mr. acosta: there was certainly evidence of it through dr. farone as to how they approach business and what they do and how they do it, and i think it is relevant. it goes to the choice issue. and, you know, i'm just arguing from the evidence that is in the record. i do not see anything wrong with that, judge. there certainly was not anything wrong with that question. ms. parker: company conduct should not be an issue in phase one. we object under that basis. the court: well, it is involved in phase one to the extent that the company knows and admits and is involved in the use of an addictive substance in their product. so to the limited extent that he touches on it in that way, it does not appear to be fault-based argument. so i'll permit a very limited discussion. ms. parker: and we can respond in our closing? the court: okay. (sidebar conference concluded.) the court: all right. thank you, counsel. excerpt - closing statements 3-24-09 11 mr. acosta: may i proceed, your honor? the court: yes. mr. acosta: so these cigarette company defendants, they are the seller. they are the seller and mr. gelep was the buyer. and they did things to their product. they did things to cigarettes on purpose, deliberate. it was not an accident. it is not just a natural product, you know, some leaf that contains nicotine, there is a lot more to it. and we showed that through dr. farone and through some of the documents that i've got. but the proof of addiction not only comes from some common sense because of the amount of cigarettes that he smoked and what he tried to do to stop, but you heard dr. groff. he was our first witness. he was the man with the white hair. he was the psychiatrist who met with the family and interviewed them, reviewed materials, and came to the conclusion that mr. gelep was addicted. dr. goldman, who is the chairman of the department of internal medicine at the usf medical school, who has treated thousands of smokers, you know, has been in the tampa bay area since the 12 early 1970s, works at the va hospital where there have been thousands of smokers on ailments, knows that mr. gelep was addicted to nicotine and cigarettes. he reviewed all the medical records. he knows what smokers goes through. he knows how hard it is to get smokers to refrain from continuing to smoke. then we had dr. cummings who came down from the roswell park cancer institute up in buffalo who runs clinics -- tobacco control clinics. he is a public health doctor, a ph.d., who said that mr. gelep was highly addicted. these are people that deal with this issue every day. dr. groff does not do it anymore because he is retired now, but dr. goldman and dr. cummings deal with it every single day. so they felt that he was addicted. and even dr. hansen, who was his family treating physician -- he came in. you might remember him. he was kind of quiet. he also felt that mr. gelep was addicted. and, you know, you might remember that mr. gelep, toward the end of his smoking, told dr. hansen that, you know, he did not want to cut back. he had -- he had cut back and actually quit 13 a few years earlier in 1987 and then had gained weight and then started smoking again. that is in the medical records that you were shown. 4 and then he -- he was smoking some. there is a record that says, i guess, in 1992 that he was smoking some. but then by 1994, he is up to two and a half packs a day. this is a resigned smoker, somebody that had smoked and smoked and tried and tried and was unable to stop. you might remember that, you know, there were questions asked about some of the witnesses from this book, the dsm-iv. there were questions asked from the 1988 surgeon general's report, which for some reason is not in there, but that -- those reports -- the surgeon general's report was all about addiction. and the witness that the defense put on was asked some questions about addiction and how it influences the choices that smokers make. it impairs their choice. you know, that is what an addiction is. the -- you know, the statistics about addicted smokers are pretty incredible. we are talking about 15 million people every year that try to stop, and only 3 to 5 percent are successful in that year to stay off cigarettes for 14 a year. that is a pretty -- pretty rough statistic. and you might remember in this book, the dsm-iv, you know, indicated that 45 percent were able to quit, implying that 55 percent are unable to quit -- 55 percent are unable to quit. i think you saw this record briefly on the 7 screen. it is an r.j. reynolds record dated 1982. and in this particular record, it indicates that most of the people that smoke would like to stop. you know, most of those who have for any significant time smoked would like to stop. that is what it says right here. but many -- but not most of those who would like to stop smoking are able to do so. so r.j. reynolds recognized that most smokers were unable to stop. there are other records that you will get to take back with you. here's one in 1959 from philip morris. it is called "psychological research." even back then, the number three reason that they thought people smoked was addiction. you were shown this record from philip morris in 1990. and, again, this is going back with you. this is one of those that says, all forms of nicotine are not behaviorally or psychologically 15 equal. remember we talked about free basing the nicotine and what the cigarette companies do to do that? well, we have another record in here which you could look at. it is an r.j. reynolds record. and this supports exactly what dr. farone told you. as the ph goes up, as they change the ph, you get more free-based nicotine. see, they do not do that for nothing. 10 here's another reynolds record. the title of it, "the nature of the tobacco business and the crucial role of nicotine." here's one that dr. farone discussed, "motives and incentives in cigarette smoking." you can look through these back in the jury room. they are just something that you can look at to verify what -- verify this other evidence that you have been told. you know, this is basically like -- it is worse than that. it is worse than this. it is worse than the fraternity guy that spikes the punch bowl with grain. you know, it is worse than that. this is killing people, and it killed mr. gelep. ms. parker: objection, your honor. mr. geraghty: objection, your honor. 16 ms. parker: same objection. the court: same ruling. mr. acosta: dr. farone talked to you about some of the things that the cigarette companies do to make cigarettes more addictive. they put ammonia in them. they put acid aldehyde in them, a chemical. they put the chemical urea in cigarettes. they put licorice in them. they put cocoa shells in them. they all have a purpose, and that purpose is to addict the smoker. these are choices. we talked about choices. and the defense is, well, mr. gelep had a choice, 13 had a choice to, you know, stop smoking whenever he wanted to. you know, he was finally able to do it when he was sick with a -- what he thought was an upper respiratory infection, it turned out to be a big tumor in his lung. and he was very sick. and then he goes on chemo, he is losing weight. he -- if you look at those records, you will see he lost about 40 pounds from somewhere around 168 down to somewhere around 130. eventually he had to go on oxygen. you will see in there that sometime in late spring, early summer he is on oxygen. he had radiation. he had chemo. he was sick. he was sick. 17 so we do have some records that suggest that, you know, maybe -- maybe he did not quit in '95 or early '96. the family does not remember him smoking after that, but there is a couple records that make you wonder whether he was still smoking or not. one near the very end said he quit just recently. now, does that mean nine months ago or does that mean a few weeks ago? that was -- that was dated in october of '96. and there was one where it said he was -- he is a smoker. and it was done in present tense. and i think that was in february. in fact, it may have been the one up at sloan-kettering. we talked about dr. farone a little bit, and so i want to show you some of the things that 16 dr. farone -- i just basically paraphrased these things from the information we have. but dr. farone said: "was one of your understandings at philip morris that the addiction to cigarettes altered the ability of the smoker to make choices about whether to continue smoking or not?" "of course it did." "from your conversations with philip morris executives and scientists, did these executives, 18 the vice president, and the president, the ceo, and other scientists from principal scientists on up believe that nicotine was a highly addictive drug back then when you were there?" "certainly." "did they accept the idea that the addiction would cause philip morris to sell more cigarettes?" "yeah. in my opinion they did, yes. that is why they kept it there, otherwise they would take it out a long time ago" -- the nicotine. "are those additives put into cigarettes by the cigarette companies for that purpose, to enhance the addictive nature of smoking?" "in my opinion, yes." "was urea added for that purpose, to free-base the nicotine?" "yeah. they did not need it for any other 19 purpose, so yes." "was it thought at philip morris that addiction was the reason people smoked?" "yes." "and why is that important?" "because it indicates the rationale behind the use of ammonia and other chemicals that raise 19 the ph and accelerate the delivery of free-based nicotine." "and does that pertain to the addictive nature of smoking?" "in my opinion, it does." "did you have an understanding as to whether or not the addiction affected the free will of the smoker?" "addiction always affects free will. i mean, yes. an addiction is just what it says. it is something that decreases your ability to stop doing that which you are addicted to." he was the one that was on the video. i probably should have said that first. but that is who those quotes were from, was that fellow who was on the video that we had the technical problems with a week ago monday. now, one thing to consider is that mr. gelep smoked for many years before the warning -- you know, for many years. no matter when you think -- no matter when you think this picture was taken, 22 he smoked for a long time. and so when the warnings came out -- the first one is the caution label, and then the second one is the warning. and his son paul is on him, you know. paul says, 20 you know, "look, dad, you have got to quit." and they would confront over it. and finally in 1974, we know -- and i'm not trying to skip over this. we know that he had cancer of the kidney in 1970. the only testimony about that came from mary gelep, who you heard about. and when i confronted the defense witness with the actual language in her deposition, which is what he relied on, it was obvious that she did not remember and was confused and did not know whether he was talking about 1996 or 1970. and she said that. so aside from 1970, in 1974, paul is going to duke. and they are playing the university of florida football team for homecoming, and he comes down and meets his mom and dad up there for the game, and dad's not smoking. i think he said it was a friday night to sunday morning or something like that. but for a full day, his dad was not smoking. they left, paul goes home at christmas, and his dad is smoking again. his brother john, he was the one with the mustache. you might remember he said that his dad told him he could not quit. and that was about 25 that same time frame. 21 so somebody tells you they cannot quit, what are they telling you? there is no evidence that he knew it was addictive. he just said, i cannot quit. then we -- you know, we are left with only the recollections of the family. and they were different when they lived at home in the later years at different times. and we do not know if mr. gelep tried to quit, who knows when? there is just no evidence of it because nobody can remember, you know, family history that well. we do know that he certainly was smoking all the time, but we also know that when paul had a baby in 1987, his first son, who he named alex after his dad, he writes a letter. he writes a letter to his dad as if he is his baby. you know, dear dad, you know, i really want to be around you as you -- you know, as i grow older so you can, you know, do things with me and so on and so forth. it was a letter to get his father to try again to quit smoking. and mr. gelep was able to stay off cigarettes for some period of time, maybe up to six months. nobody knows exactly for sure. but we do know that it was long enough for him to gain some 22 weight, and some significant weight, because the medical record the next year indicates that he feels better -- feels better now that he is smoking. so he was not feeling good when he did not smoke. of course, that is one of the symptoms of addiction. you know, smoking in the face of known danger is certainly a symptom of addiction. now, if -- if -- once he tried to stop -- and we know that he knew it was not good for him back in the early '70s because he threw john out of the house because john was smoking. now, is that a person who wants to smoke? you know, as a parent, he is telling his kids do not do it, throws one of them out because he is doing it, yet he does it. you know, how does that make him feel? i mean, this has happened to lots and lots of people, and it happened to him. i've used this example before. you know, everybody talks about motivation. well, if you are a smoker and you have smoked for ten years or so and you think, well, i'm going to stop smoking, well, how much motivation do you need? you do not know. now, what do you need when you are smoke -- now, by 1970, if he started even in 1950, let us say, you 23 know, you have got 20 years at a pack a day or more. 2 that is a lot of smoking. so how do you know how much motivation you need? if you are -- if you are lighting up a cigarette every 20 or 30 minutes, well, you need motivation for the first one, but then the second time -- the second cigarette time comes around, you need some motivation for that one, too. and you need it for the third one and the fourth one. you need to keep fighting it and keep fighting it until you get through those feelings that you have of not feeling good, of not craving the cigarette. and finally you get to the point where those receptors which were talked about, those receptors in your brain that when you smoke, it grows these receptors -- and you already have some to start out with, but when you smoke, it grows more. and those receptors are craving the nicotine. they have to be satisfied. and when they are satisfied, you feel okay until you need your next cigarette. and then the cycle just keeps repeating and repeating. well, is it like -- for some people, it is like climbing mount everest. some people can do that. there is probably people in this room that 24 could climb mount everest if they really wanted to, but most probably could not do that. no matter how much you want to do it, you have to work your way up. you have to be motivated all the way up. 5 well, smoking for some people is like that. and for mr. gelep, he never made it. he was -- he was one of the 55 percent or, under this dsm book, was unable to do it. or under the r.j. reynolds document, he was one of the ones that was unable to do it. now, i want to talk just a second about the defense witness the defense put on to say that he was not addicted. that was dr. seiden just the other day on friday. and dr. seiden came from shreveport, louisiana, down here to tell you to satisfy their denial, to tell that you that mr. gelep was not addicted. now, remember, this is a man who saw thousands of patients and only diagnosed nicotine addiction one time -- one time in his whole career. only one -- he only met one addicted smoker in his whole career. that is crazy. now, i asked him about some of the things the surgeon general said about how nicotine influences the choice of the smoker, and he admitted it did. 25 we talked a little bit about personal responsibility, you know, and i hinted at this during the voir dire. i'm going to mention it again. but i wanted first to tell you that, you know, dr. seiden said, you know, there is motivation and there is the behavior of the smoker who seeks to quit; and at the same time, there is 8 the nicotine that is influencing that behavior. he admitted that, you know. so you have this tension there, and that tension is always there. now, i just want to mention this personal responsibility aspect for just a second, because, you know, personal responsibility is connected to something. who -- who are you responsible to? you are responsible to yourself. you are responsible to your family. you are responsible to your community. you are responsible to the united states of america. you may be responsible to god. but should you have the same responsibility toward the company that did the things that these cigarette companies did to put you in the position that you are in? i think that personal responsibility sort of breaks down right there, because they should be responsible, too. they should be accountable for what they did, too. 26 ms. parker: your honor, objection. mr. geraghty: join, your honor. the court: sustained. mr. acosta: let me talk about lung cancer for a second. you saw this board that was not in black and color when i showed it to you, but it was black and white. too much weight there. well, this one is just not going to behave for me, so maybe i can get somebody to help me. 12 but you can see that the surgeon general had in the 2004 report -- that was the big book. let me grab this. it was in this big book here, the 2004 surgeon general's report. and it is model -- ms. parker: objection, your honor. this was impeachment, not evidence. the court: it is limited to impeachment. mr. acosta: i asked dr. seiden about this. i asked him about this chart. it goes from nicotine addiction, carcinogens, to dna, to mutation and other changes, to lung cancer. so what did the defense do? well, dr. seiden knows about nicotine addiction, right? but he says, well, i do not know about any of that other 27 stuff. of course, then they bring in dr. bennett. he talked about lung cancer. he does not talk about addiction. well, this is the whole story right here. now, dr. groff, the psychiatrist, he touched on the lung cancer and how addiction leads to that. dr. goldman, i mentioned to you, the fellow from usf, talked about smoking being a cause of primary lung cancer. and that is what you are being asked in this question -- that this was a solitary nodule up in the upper right lobe of the lung. it had gone in and made at least one lymph node one 14 centimeter in size, which is right at the dividing line of abnormal. we talked about how if cancer came from some other place you would see multiple metastasis in the lung. you would not see just one primary site like that. and i think that dr. bennett recognized that toward the end of the questions i was asking him that it is very rare for a tumor to come from some other place and just present as one big nodule. it does not happen. it is very rare. what is the probable thing? mr. gelep smoked a lot. cigarettes contain carcinogens. it is a 28 dose response disease, which means the more you smoke, the higher your risk. right? and by the way, he had already smoked enough and a lot by 1970. that was a sufficient amount right there to cause his lung cancer already. he gets a big tumor that is found in his lung. he goes to the doctor. they have chest x-rays, ct scan. they do the broncho- -- bronchoscope, putting that tube down his nose and into his lung and looking around. you know, we know the lung is a target organ for these carcinogens. so what is the most probable thing? it is probable that he has a primary lung cancer. all the doctors that saw him, according to dr. bennett, were wrong. he took little -- little pieces of little statements in there and then 17 construed them a different way and showed you what he thought was a different picture. you know, you have got to remember, he said he is a forensic doctor. well, that is a lawsuit doctor. he is testified a thousand times before 1994. and then he said that he is testified about 500 times -- i think he said three times a month times, what, 15 years? that is another 500 -- it is 1,500 times he is testified. 29 the doctors that saw mr. gelep were convinced of lung cancer. dr. dunn, who you saw, was a treating doctor. he is a treating doctor. he treats patients every day, you know. he came down and he told you that he looked and had that little brush and pushed the scope in as far as it would go and got to the point where he could not look any further. he says that the bronchus was thickened and that he found cancer cells inside. and he was convinced that it was a bronchiogenic carcinoma. well, even dr. bennett admitted "broncho" means airway and "genic" means that is where it starts. it is bronchogenic. it started in his airway. it is a primary lung cancer. mr. gelep wanted to live. they went up to sloan-kettering in new york, one of 15 cancer -- nci, national cancer institute, certified cancer treatment centers in the country to get a second opinion. he takes his stuff up there with him. 20 the pathologist up there in new york looks at the same slides. what does he say? morphology is bronchiogenic carcinoma of the lung. morphology means, looks to me by just looking at the slide -- just looking at these cells tells me that this is cancer of the lung. that is a primary cancer of 30 the lung. dr. goldman said that it was a primary cancer of the lung as well. that is what this man had, was a primary cancer of the lung. so think of it this way. in this case, based on all this evidence and all this stuff in the medical records, which is the more probable? is it more probable he had a primary cancer of the lung, or is it more probable that he had a colon cancer which no one ever saw? he had an mri of the abdomen. in that mri -- it is one of the records in there -- they did not see any colon cancer. i'm just about done. you know, it is cigarettes that caused the epidemic of lung cancer. it does not come from other things, and we know why. we know why. because people that start smoking them -- at least a lot of them -- cannot stop. a lot of them cannot, you know, depending on what study you look at, what statistic you look at. but, you know, when somebody in a family finds out that they have got cancer, you know, there is a -- there is a fear. 23 the whole family is afraid. the smoker's afraid. mr. gelep, you know, had -- he knew where he was headed, and he could not do anything about it. 31 you know, that is the tragedy of this is somebody that smokes all the time, tried to quit a couple times or more and is confronted with this addiction -- he was chained to a giant; basically chained to a giant. and he could not break from the chains from these cigarette companies. so what does he think? am i weak? am i a weakling? what am i supposed -- what do you do? what do you do when you cannot stop doing something that you want to do? you know, it is a tragedy. and now it is your turn. i'm going to ask, what are you going to do about it? and what you should do about it is check "yes" on this verdict form. we will come back, and i can just guarantee that this second phase will be very short -- very, very, very short. thank you very much. mr. acosta: may it please the court. this will just take a few minutes. 25 one of the first things that ms. parker 105 talked about is the fact that cigarettes are legal. everybody knows that they are legal. you know, they -- there is a lot of legal products that do not work well or a lot of legal products that you might find are unreasonably dangerous or defective or whatever, but they are still legal. you know, if you think about some of the things that have been -- pharmaceuticals, asbestos, there is lots of things like that. they are all legal. you know, the government does not regulate cigarettes. that is why there was some testimony from dr. farone. there is nobody to tell philip morris or reynolds or american tobacco how they should make cigarettes, what they should put in them, what they can put in them, what they cannot put in them; they are just not regulated. they are not regulated. so they make the choice of what they put in it. now, if they put a lot of bad things in it and they do it on purpose to addict people, then they can be held responsible for it. that is why we are here. that is why we are here. we came to court to ask you to ultimately hold them at least partially responsible for this. 106 ms. parker: objection. same objection as before. the court: same ruling. mr. acosta: now, one of the things that they talked about was, you know, mr. gelep, you know, this is about him. well, if you think about it, mr. gelep smoked about a million cigarettes. if he smoked, you know, 60 a day for 45 years, we are getting pretty close to a million cigarettes. and then you multiply that by what, eight to 12 puffs per cigarette? what do you have then, eight million doses -- eight million doses of carcinogenic chemicals, up to 40 in every cigarette smoke? eight million times. that is plenty to cause lung cancer. this was the board that was used by ms. parker. and i want to tell you that the top one, the location of the lung tumor, well, it was central. the doctors said -- i think even dr. bennett said, you know, that is where you find cigarette tumors -- the centrally located tumors. bronchiogenic is also where this was found, and that makes lung cancer. the cell type and the tumor. the death certificate -- and you will see in the records there 107 are quite a few places where it is identified as an 2 adenocarcinoma -- adenocarcinoma of the lung. well, that happens to be the most common kind of lung cancer. so that is lung cancer. lung cancer. pattern and spread. well, remember it was in the upper right lobe, and it was spreading into the mediastinum through the central part and they thought that they needed to give him radiation because of the possibility of what is called vena cava syndrome. and that is where the tumor pushes up against the -- it is a vein that comes back down from the head so that your head does not fill up with blood. so they radiated that area. but that tumor was invading into the mediastinum, it invaded into a rib, and you will see that -- the fifth rib -- in the records, and then there was the one centimeter node. that is the kind of spread you see with lung cancer. that is what you see with lung cancer. presenting symptoms. presenting symptoms. he had a cough. it did not go away. he had what he thought was a cold. dr. hansen said that he thought he had walking pneumonia. well, those are the kind of symptoms you expect to have and present with when you have lung cancer. 108 pathology staining. i showed you the report about cea. cea is cea, whether it is staining onto a slide or it is in a lab report. and it said it is nonspecific, it is high in smokers -- which his 5 was -- found in smokers, it is not specific, and you do not use it to screen. the -- you know, dr. bennett said that he sent his own cases up to sloan-kettering. this was the defense expert, the guy that testified 1500 times as a forensic pathologist -- he sent his cases to sloan-kettering. sloan-kettering looked at these pathology. if there was something wrong with this staining, if it was not enough, they would have said something. but you have got a second opinion from one of the best hospitals in the country. there was no necessity for dna testing. there was no necessity for an autopsy. why would you get an autopsy when everybody agrees it is lung cancer, and you find out later the cigarette company comes in and says it is something else? just a couple more points, and then i'm going to be done. you know, i do not know if you caught this, but a freudian slip is something that somebody makes -- 109 the court: counsel, i think you need to approach the bench. (the following proceedings took place at sidebar:) the court: let me guess, you are going to say that ms. parker has said that it caused his cancer. mr. acosta: she did. 9 the court: well, you are not going to be attributing a freudian slip to her comments in closing argument as some indication that somehow she believed that that is what the case is. she was in her counter alternative argument about addiction, which is only applicable if they reject her first argument about lung cancer. so i'm not going to permit this argument. mr. acosta: okay. (sidebar concluded.) mr. acosta: all right. we are going to forget about the freudian slip. and what we are going to talk about is mr. geraghty's discussion about the brands. one of the things that mr. geraghty did not talk about is helen's testimony. you might recall helen was up there testifying. and she is the one 110 that said back in her deposition a long time ago that her dad switched to marlboro around 1975 -- that is because she stole cigarettes from him before she graduated from high school. you saw her. and if you remember, john testified about true in '79 and '80. there is not anything sinister going on about these brands. what happened is these folks got together before the trial and looked at a bunch of -- all these photos to refresh their recollection so that when they 11 came in here they would be giving the best evidence that they could. when they signed -- the mom signed interrogatories a long time ago, they thought that was true then. but, you know, like most people, you think about it, you get in a lawsuit. and, you know, it is ten years later in the same lawsuit, so now you finally get to go to trial, and you look at the photos to see if you can put the whole thing together. helen also testified about merit cigarettes, which is, you know, another brand. so from '75 to '95, there was some philip morris -- and you can look at these photos and see what you think of the packages on the originals. and a lot of them 111 look -- the '79/'80 one looks like a true, and that fits with john's testimony. but some of these others do not, they look like marlboro. so, you know, that is what they said, and you just have to take it for what it is worth, but it certainly was not something that was said or done to be something sinister in the case. those are the only comments i have on this part of the trial, and so i hope to see you again. thank you.