mr. finch: thank you, your honor. good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen of the jury. as you know, my name is nate finch. i'm counsel for roger giddens, and i wanted to extend my thanks to you on behalf of mr. giddens, on behalf of my colleagues, mr. vince parrett and james ledlie, on behalf of my parallels, who really have helped me to keep from tripping on myself, laura holcomb in particular and anjana joshi, and also my colleague, elizabeth smith who plaintiff closing argument 1157 has really helped us. i'm sure you will hear from the defendants, when they get up in about 45 minutes or an hour, to thank you. the reason i'm thanking you is because you have been very attentive. you have spent almost a week, little over a week here, and you have been taking very good notes and you have been paying attention to what i imagine feels like a fire hose of information. the other reason that i'm thanking you is because you came in here and you are serving as a jury. you are a jury of peers for mr. giddens and also for the corporations who, under the law. are supposed to be treated as persons, too. (off record comments, microphone adjustments) mr. finch: jury service is the most important civic duty you can have, except for serving in the military, and the reason why, it is the only place i think where people can be on a level playing field with the government or people can be on a level playing field with other people or people can be on a level playing field with corporations or any kind of institutions. the way we resolve our disputes in this country is by a trial of a jury of our peers and that has been going on in anglo saxon tradition for 800 years. and i think that the -- the reason that you are here is to decide a very important dispute. this is a very, plaintiff closing argument 1158 very important case. it is a case about life and death. it is a case about personal responsibility. it is a case about corporations' responsibility. it is also a case about safety rules and what i mean by safety rules, i'll tell you when i get a little further into my summation, but it is basically, you all understand if you came here, you were in a car wreck case. you know the rules of the road. if you rear-end somebody, you are responsible. this is a little bit more difficult than that, but the basic concept is the same and the safety rules is that the idea is that you have to give people a chance to protect themselves. it is been a very long journey to get here. it is been a long journey for mr. giddens. he was -- he died 17 years ago as a result of conduct that was partly his conduct, but partly the fault of the tobacco corporations. that is -- that is a very long journey. the second long journey that is involved in this case is that you have taken a very big step back in time. you had to see documents that were written in the 1950s and in the 1960s, in the 1970s, in the 1980s. that is -- that is a very long journey over a very long period of time, but i will try to describe the evidence as you saw it that covers that long period of time. the 1950s, have to put your mind back there, plaintiff closing argument 1159 eisenhower was president, gallon of gas cost 20 cents. a new car might have been $1,500. it was 50 years ago. but one thing you should keep in mind, we are not asking you to judge the conduct by present day standards. the conduct that is at issue here was bad in the '50s and the '60s and the '70s and the '80s, and i will explain why. the third long journey is the journey of this case and this is called the engle case. i'm sure you feel like you have spent a very long journey sitting here watching us for almost the better part of a week and a half, and i do not know if you recall the very outset of the trial, judge magnuson asked you all a question, have you ever heard of the engle litigation, and virtually all of you -- i think all of you said no. so what is the engle litigation about? well, after i finish my summation and after the defendants, the tobacco corporations finish their summation, and after i get back up to talk to you a little bit more, judge magnuson is going to instruct you on the law. and judge magnuson wears those black robes for a reason. he says what the law is and what the law means. and he is going to tell you the rest of the story of this case, of which you are only a small but very, very important part. now, the rest of the story, when i was a young man growing up in roanoke, virginia, there was a radio station plaintiff closing argument 1160 called wrob and they had paul harvey. paul harvey, i'm sure a lot of you remember him. paul harvey was a man, he used to start off telling a story and then at the end there was a surprise. like, he would tell a story about a boy named walter who accidentally got scratched by an owl and killed the owl, it upset him so much he never did anything, you know, anything that had to do with hurting animals again. he turned his career into drawing animals. well walter's last name was disney. he became walt disney. that is the kind of the rest of the story. so what is the rest of the story here? the rest of the story is a piece of litigation called the engle litigation. you heard the tobacco corporation lawyers cross examining dr. burns and dr. cummings about all these cases they are doing in florida, and that litigation has been going on as a result of court proceedings that judge magnuson will tell you about in the jury charges. now, the jury charges he is going to give you, he will read them to you, and he will provide them to you, talk about the engle class membership and the engle case and what -- the first thing he is going to instruct you is as a matter of law, which means you have to accept what he says as a matter of law, in order to be a member of the engle class -- and let me back up. the engle class was a piece of litigation against the tobacco companies by a whole class of people. plaintiff closing argument 1161 ms. gallagher: your honor, i'm sorry, i object to this. it is outside the instructions and the evidence in this case. the court: it is final argument. he can give a little background on it. go ahead. mr. finch: the engle class action was a class action proceeding by a whole class of people defined as people who were addicted -- let me see if i -- people who were addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine and did they have a list of diseases that were determined to be caused by smoking. that is what the engle class is about. and if you find that roger giddens -- not the roger giddens who is alive and breathing, but that roger giddens, the man this case is about, if you find that he was a member of the engle class, and the judge is going to instruct you certain things are absolutely proven and you have to take them as a matter of law. so what of the -- you have your verdict forms. you do have the verdict forms here. there are two questions in order to be a member of the engle class. in order to be a member of the engle class, the plaintiff must prove by a preponderance of the evidence -- now what that means, i believe you are going to get instructions about preponderance of the evidence. just about every single of our claims is a preponderance of the evidence. that means you might have plaintiff closing argument 1162 substantial doubts but if the scales of justice tip just a little bit towards the side of the plaintiff on each question, then you find for the plaintiff on that question. and you should analyze as you take your verdict form, take your verdict form, look at that first question, was roger giddens, sr., addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine. now, my version of the form might have a couple typos in it or something because this is the one that i had this morning. the judge is -- oh, here's my younger brain handing me the final verdict form. the question is exactly the same. was roger giddens, sr. addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine. that is question number 1. that is what the judge is going to ask you to make a finding on. so let us talk about that a little bit. that is a question that asks was he addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine. it does not ask could he quit. it does not ask did he choose to start smoking. it does not ask is he at fault for doing that. it is just a simple, straightforward question, was he addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine. and as to that question, i think we have proved that beyond a reasonable doubt. now remember, we only have to show a little bit of the evidence tilting a little bit more in our favor. think of it as a football game, if it is a 14-13 game with the other team on the one yard line trying to score and i stop them, tackle them, i win. that is preponderance of plaintiff closing argument 1163 the evidence. or some other -- basketball, win 51-49, that is a preponderance of the evidence. just tip the scales of justice just a little bit. now, what did we hear? what evidence, evidence, evidence, evidence did we hear in the courtroom about the question of addiction? well first of all, you heard from dr. michael cummings who has treated addiction, wrote a pamphlet on how to quit smoking. he is studied the question of addiction. he is written lots of peer reviewed papers, and he came in and he said, i looked at roger giddens' smoking history, i listened or read the records, and i concluded that he, in fact, was addicted. there is -- that is the perspective of an expert. did they bring you any witness to say that roger giddens was not addicted? did they bring in anybody? anybody? they showed you some newspaper articles. they made arguments. remember what the judge said, what i say is not evidence, what ms. gallagher says is not evidence, what mr. walker says is not evidence. the evidence is what comes out of the witnesses' mouth and what exhibits are on that table, many of which we showed to you through the testimony of dr. cummings and a handful of the testimony of dr. burns. now, what did dr. cummings tell you and show you? can i have the slides? what we showed you is that addiction is a disease plaintiff closing argument 1164 of the brain. he showed you how addiction to nicotine in cigarettes affects, affects the brain. it is a medical condition. he defined addiction as -- addiction is defined as a chronic relapsing brain disease as characterized by compulsive drug seeking and use despite harmful consequences. now in addition, you heard from dr. cummings, you heard from dr. burns. dr. burns was the doctor who you heard about had the unfortunate accident before we started trial. he sat on the stand and talked for the better part of a day about medical issues. you may recall in opening statement, counsel for the tobacco companies said, well, this case is going to be about everybody but roger giddens. i asked dr. burns a lot of questions and except for some general things, like how does smoking generally cause cancer, all of the questions were about roger giddens and what -- dr. burns is a world renowned medical expert. he has been involved in the publication of every surgeon general's report since 1975. he has taught doctors on how to treat addiction. he has taught people in the field on -- on what it means to do that. he has examined the causes of lung cancer as a result of cigarette smoking. he spent his -- the vast majority of his career doing that. and what did he conclude? he concluded, next slide, that cigarette smoking is addictive and nicotine is the addictive agent. plaintiff closing argument 1165 well, one of the things you are going to hear when the judge reads the engle findings to you, judge is going to say, if you find that roger giddens, sr. was an engle class member, you must apply certain findings by the engle court and they must carry the same weight they would have if you had determined them, yourselves. these findings are: number 1, smoking cigarettes causes lung cancer and cerebrovascular disease; number 2, that nicotine in cigarettes is addictive. i think we have proved beyond any shadow of a doubt that the nicotine in the cigarettes is addictive. all you have to do is look at some of the tobacco companies' internal documents to know that. they were studying nicotine addiction back in the 1960s. there was exhibit 77, which was a document from 1962, where the tobacco companies write -- this is in evidence. it is going to be on the table. you will be able to look at it when you go back and deliberate. they know far more about nicotine than what is in the published literature. they have been studying it for years. another document that we showed you, which is exhibit 163, is that, and this is a document from 1963 -- now, i know it looks like there is a pile of paper on the table there but the vast majority of it is four big documents. there is the two surgeon general's reports from plaintiff closing argument 1166 2004 and 2010. there is a couple of federal trade commission reports we think are important. i'll get to those in a little bit. but most of the documents are short. i mean, one of the things about going back in time is that 50, 40, 30, 20 years ago, people did not have email. when they wanted to write a memo, they typed it up and they would pass it around, and the chairman of the corporation or his research guy signed it and it was a two-page letter, three-page, few documents longer than that, but you get right down to it, there is not a whole lot of documents to wade through. so if you were to look at exhibit 163, you would see that we are -- the tobacco companies are in the business of selling nicotine, an addictive drug effective in the relief of stress mechanisms. and i could walk you through many of the documents where they talk about how addictive their cigarettes are, and you saw the evidence. you saw the documents. the document i read to you on friday, exhibit 70, which is the -- remember the document where philip morris was talking about comparing people to rats and that the pushing the lever was a dose of nicotine, the addictive food was the rats. well pushing the -- smoking the cigarette is the dose of nicotine for the person. so the tobacco corporations know nicotine is addictive. and john, could i have this slide? so we know that nicotine is addictive and then plaintiff closing argument 1167 what dr. burns did, he analyzed mr. giddens and you heard the testimony from the people who knew mr. giddens best, you also heard testimony from people who did not have a dog in the fight, like sandra king who used to be his boss back in the early '80s and she testified by deposition as to how difficult it was for him to quit. her husband had a heart attack. she told everybody in the place not to smoke. roger was such a good employee they made an exception for him. he tried to quit, could not do it, tried to quit, could not do it, and they had to make a special little cubical for him that could vent the smoke out. we heard testimony from james ashley giddens and vera giddens, roger's brother and sister-in-law, about how he is a chain smoker, how he would light one up and sometimes the minute his foot hit the floor. so i think on the question number 1, which is a medical question, i think there is really no other answer but that roger giddens was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine. so i think when you are thinking about this, filling it out, the verdict form, which is the questions you have to answer, that has to be a yes. the second question, was roger giddens' addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine a legal cause of his death. so that is sort of a mouthful but let me break that into pieces for you. the judge is going to instruct you as plaintiff closing argument 1168 to what legal cause is, and you will hear when he instructs you that lawful conduct is the legal cause of someone's injury or damage, including the legal cause of damages resulting from someone's injury, if it directly and in natural and continuous sequence produces or contributes substantially to producing such injury or damages so it can reasonably be said that but for such wrongful conduct, the injury or damage would not have occurred. that is sort of a mouthful, but what it boils down to, is that if something is part of the events in a chain that leads to something else, it can be a legal cause. the other thing that is very important about legal cause is there can be more than one legal cause. you could find, yes, roger giddens was a legal cause of his smoking to death, but that really goes to putting the blame on him. it does not go to whether the addiction was a legal cause. that is a medical question. it is a combination of medical question and using your common sense. dr. burns testified that to a substantial -- reasonable degree of medical certainty and substantial degree of medical certainty that roger giddens' addiction to nicotine in the cigarettes caused his lung cancer and it caused his stroke. now, the engle findings, engle findings instruct you as to what doctors sometimes call general causation and what the findings are, if you find that mr. giddens is a plaintiff closing argument 1169 member of the engle class, they will -- the judge is going to instruct you as a matter of law that smoking cigarettes causes lung cancer and cerebrovascular disease. there is no exception in the engle findings for what kind of cerebrovascular disease. do you remember when i was talking with dr. burns yesterday, how we drew on the -- on the board, the stroke, cerebral hemorrhage, cerebrovascular disease, they are all cerebrovascular disease. there is no dispute that smoking causes them. and who came into this courtroom and testified that mr. giddens' addiction to nicotine from smoking cigarettes caused his death? dr. burns did. dr. burns reviewed the medical records, he is a world renowned expert on the subject of the causation of smoking related diseases. he wrote the book. he was the consulting scientific editor for two of those big fat documents. your honor, may i approach the exhibit table? i will not remove them. the court: you may. mr. finch: you are going to have up here the 2004 surgeon general's report and the 2010 surgeon general's report. he was involved in every single one of them and what he testified to was that mr. giddens' nicotine addiction and smoking caused his lung cancer and it caused a stroke and it caused his death. plaintiff closing argument 1170 john, let us just turn this off. i'll just talk. you heard that from dr. burns. did you hear the tobacco companies bring any witness to come in and challenge that? they cross examined dr. burns but he did not -- he did not vary his opinion. he said mr. giddens' nicotine addiction from smoking cigarettes caused his death. and there is sort of two questions in that. there is one, can smoking cigarettes cause cerebrovascular disease. the judge is going to instruct you that it can. the 2004 surgeon general's report, which is in evidence if you want to look at it, you should -- you actually should check, you should double check everything i say, just like you should double check everything they say. at page 395 -- now, there is different bates number. get the 2004, it is exhibit 574, and look at the evidence synthesis. you come to the conclusion that the surgeon general did, which is that smoking has been demonstrated and shows consistent associations of smoking with all major types of stroke. and i believe we have a board -- your honor, may i get my board over there? the court: you may. mr. finch: so, absolutely clear that the smoking caused the stroke. it is not even disputed that smoking caused the lung cancer. for years and years and years tobacco companies tried to argue that smoking does not cause plaintiff closing argument 1171 lung cancer but they did not even put on a single witness here to try to say that mr. roger giddens' lung cancer was caused by something else. they suggested it in opening statement. they said, you know, some lung cancer might not be -- might not be smoking related, might be related to asbestos or something. that may be true. did they put on a witness to tell you that, to swear under oath, that you know, in my opinion to a reasonable degree of scientific and medical certainty the cigarettes did not cause mr. giddens to die? now, on the -- on the cause of death, if you believe dr. burns, it is over. cause of death was smoking. if you want to go through the medical records, yourself, they are in evidence. we got nothing to hide. it is exhibit 3008. remember how i showed you with dr. burns, he had reviewed the records, the time frame was first there was a diagnosis in february of 1995 of primary and metastatic lung cancer by a doctor, walter p. scott, and then when -- that is on page 6 of the medical records. if you look at the medical records, a long bates number, go and find them, it is exhibit 3008. you will see at .006, there is a diagnosis of lung cancer. and then the medical records are kind of not copied in the order that they chronologically go, so i'll walk you through them, but when roger giddens had the stroke, he goes to the hospital -- and, john, can i have the plaintiff closing argument 1172 elmo? madam, may i have the elmo? there is dr. scott, sir walter -- not sir walter scott. not the guy who wrote ivanhoe, but dr. scott. dr. scott is the man that is treating this man for lung cancer. so he comes into the hospital for a stroke. they call dr. scott. prognosis, six months. they talk about the lung cancer in the records, undifferentiated cancer. the family -- this is a -- this is a piece of the record that i did not show you with dr. burns but you can take a look at it. it is page 192. they charted this and they said until further information, we would not recommend dnr. dnr, i believe i can say, means do not resuscitate, or at this time, we need information on tissue diagnosis and staging of cancer. that is the hospital roger giddens is in because of his stroke and the date of this record is july 26th. so what do they do? they get the tissue from dr. scott, and again, these are doctors. they did not come into the courtroom and testify, but they had the obligation to treat roger giddens and try to save his life. they were his treating doctors. i asked dr. burns about the hippocratic oath, which is the first thing, you do not do any harm to your patients. they were doing the very best they could to figure out how best to treat him. and what do they do in july of '95? you see they -- the 2/11/95, that means that is when the specimen, the tissue with cancer in it was plaintiff closing argument 1173 collected, and then on july 28, '95, it goes to university medical center department of pathology. pathology is the place where you look at the tissue under the microscope and you can see what it is. and what does a different doctor in addition to dr. scott -- dr. walter scott says, metastatic large cell undifferentiated carcinoma. what does that mean? lung cancer. so then this is a record from august 1st, 1995, and there is a discussion, end stage metastatic lung cancer, which means roger giddens had very little time left to live. dr. scott, unfortunately, was right on on his prognosis of six months. he said, you know, in july of 1995, six months to live. august, september, october, november, december, january. if the question is for a preponderance of the evidence what killed him, of course it is the -- it is the lung cancer. but even if you were to think, well, maybe it is the stroke, dr. burns said that the stroke is caused by the smoking, too. they did not bring anybody to come in and say that he is wrong about that. they just asked him some questions and tried to show him different studies that were much older and they were all in the 2004 and 2010, went back to the 1989 study. he was absolutely clear. and if you do not believe dr. burns, you absolutely should, because he is a doctor. he is spent his entire career working in the plaintiff closing argument 1174 public health service and the tobacco corporations are trying to demonize him. so the family tells the university medical center, do not resuscitate. they give him a dnr because the man has end stage metastatic lung cancer. roger giddens is going to die. he is going to die from his lung cancer and there is no point in keeping trying to resuscitate him. i think that, you know, they make a big deal out of the death certificate saying natural causes. well, they asked roger giddens about the death certificate. he is not a doctor. dr. burns was asked about it. i asked him. first, he said what that means as a medical doctor is that the lung cancer contributed to his death. did they bring anybody to come in here and say no, dr. wrong -- dr. burns is all wet, he is wrong, that is not how you fill out a death certificate, he just does not know what he is talking about. he is from california? did they bring somebody here to testify about that? remember, testimony is evidence, not what lawyers say. so back to my verdict form, the question of was roger giddens' addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine a legal cause of his death, i think the evidence is absolutely clear that it was. so now we are at question 3. please state as to each defendant whether smoking cigarettes manufactured by plaintiff closing argument 1175 that defendant was a legal cause of roger giddens, sr.'s death. that fits into the negligence and strict liability counts. and this is why, look, you have already made the determination that the smoking cigarettes manufactured by -- assuming you believe dr. burns, you have made a determination that smoking cigarettes was a legal cause of roger giddens, jr.'s [sic] death. is there any real dispute that he smoked marlboros? he smoked marlboros for 40 years. the testimony about exactly when he started, james ashley giddens said, well, i thought i saw him smoking at the time he went to the army. let us say he was wrong about that and he did not start smoking till he was 20. it is still 38 years and by the -- by the -- it was absolutely clear from the evidence and testimony you heard, he was an addicted, heavy chain smoker. so you have already gotten over the legal cause hurdle. now you have just got negligence. so if the engle case did not exist, which it does, then i would talk to y'all -- and i will talk to you, because i think you have to understand that negligence just means being careful. let us take cigarettes and think about what is going on here. think about what you heard the evidence was in this case. you heard evidence of a man, roger giddens, who picked up the first cigarette sometime in 1950s. you heard and saw evidence from the internal files in the tobacco corporations plaintiff closing argument 1176 that showed that they were not careful. why do we have safety rules? to allow people the opportunity to protect themselves. it goes back to the bible, leviticus 19:14, thou shalt not throw a stumbling block in front of a blind man. it is making your products safer, making your products less harmful. did the tobacco companies do that? were they careful? were they trying to make their -- make their products more safe? the reason that it is important for companies to tell the truth about their products is to give people the ability to protect themselves. you -- it is not against the law to make a dangerous product. we live in america. it is a free land. there is nothing wrong with that. but if you are going to make a dangerous product, particularly if the danger is hidden -- and in the '50s, the tobacco companies knew a lot more about the hazards of cigarettes than the public health community and they knew a lot more about the nicotine addiction. they did not tell the world. they did not admit to the world that they were trying to make their cigarettes addictive until after mr. giddens was dead. you saw the testimony from the ceos of the tobacco companies. the tobacco corporations got up there and swore under oath before congress that their cigarettes were not addictive. well, they are sitting on a pile of documents that said that they were. that is -- is that being careful? plaintiff closing argument 1177 is -- you know, you know what happens in a multi-car pile-up, the person, if there was three cars, they go bam, bam, bam. the guy in front, he is not at fault. the guy behind, he is at fault for not slowing down and he hit that guy. so he is careless. guy behind him, hit him, he is careless. all of them combined, all of their lack of care is what negligence is. strict liability is -- basically means that you got to be careful if you are making products. and you know, this is not -- this is not -- is not a new concept. we are not asking you to judge the tobacco companies' conduct by modern day standards. were asking you to judge their conduct by biblical standards. i went to a baseball game friday night, boston red sox. on the back of the ticket it talks about assuming the risk if you get hit in the head with a foul ball. now, how many people have gotten killed at major league baseball games? this was a spring training game. was not the red sox versus the yankees in the american league championship series, but closest i've ever been to a field where somebody's throwing a ball 97 miles an hour. but i assume the risk to sit there because i knew it was a hazard. they still tell you about it. the tobacco companies did not tell people. instead, they told the exact opposite. so negligence and strict liability ought to be plaintiff closing argument 1178 easy. and in fact, it is easy because the judge is going to instruct you that the engle defendants, including r.j. reynolds tobacco company and philip morris u.s.a., referred to as the engle defendants, placed cigarettes on the market that were defective and unreasonably dangerous. he is also going to instruct you that all of the engle defendants were negligent. now, you may all have different views about smoking in our society and that is fine. but you all swore an oath when you came in here that you would try to set those aside and that you would follow the law. the judge is the law. the judge is speaking as a federal judge what the law is in the state of florida. he is asking you to follow the law. he is telling you that it is already been determined. you should not revisit that. these tobacco corporations, they were negligent and they were guilty of strict liability. now, once you -- i think unless you are just going to ignore what judge magnuson tells you, i think you got to check yes as to both of these. now, r.j. reynolds may argue, well, you did not hear very much testimony about winston, and they are right about that but you can deal with that when you get down here to where you allocate the fault of the parties. that is question 6. question 3 and 4 is just are they negligent and plaintiff closing argument 1179 was the negligence a legal cause of roger giddens, sr.'s death. well, if you believe dr. burns, the cigarettes, all the cigarettes he smoked substantially contributed to his lung cancer and his stroke in the proportion in which he smoked them. you heard in response to ms. gallagher's question that dr. burns said there is no safe level of exposure to nicotine and tobacco smoke. i mean, he showed you the slides about how cancer forms from breathing in the smoke. what in doctor speak it is sometimes called the multi-hit theory of carcinogenesis. what he is saying, the more cigarettes you smoke, the more likely you are to get lung cancer. so the more cigarettes that mr. giddens smoked, the more likely he is going to get lung cancer, and he got it, and it killed him. so once you get to here, then the only question becomes -- i'm going to skip over 5 and 6. skip over 5 and and i'll come back to those in a minute. then the question becomes what percentage of responsibility that was a legal cause of roger giddens, sr.'s death do you allocate to the parties? and what that is is going back to my discussion of the rules of the road where you have the multi-car bang, bang, bang pile-up. instead of having three cars, this has five cars, and you are in the middle car. you are partly at fault for your injuries. so is the person behind you. another example i'm sure all of y'all have plaintiff closing argument 1180 seen -- i do not have my blackberry with me because i do not want it when i'm standing up in front of you. have you ever seen somebody walking down the street doing this and you have seen somebody else coming down the street doing this, and they run into each other? they are both at fault. so the question is, how much fault? what percentage of responsibility that was a legal cause of roger giddens, sr.'s death do you allocate to the parties? and the tobacco corporations want you to say a hundred percent. they want you to say, well, he could quit, he could quit, he could quit. i do not see the word quit on this form. some people get addicted to cigarette smoking and they quit. absolutely they do. dr. burns testified to that; dr. cummings testified to that. you get addicted to cigarettes, you can quit. that is wonderful and that is the goal of everyone. but some people are not able to quit. remember that graphic i showed dr. burns where he showed those age cohorts? i'm not going to try to pull it up. it is the one with the pretty rainbow lines. the point is that for the people in his age cohort, mr. giddens was like very -- you know, a big percentage of them. so what percentage of the responsibility is a legal cause of roger giddens, sr.'s death do you allocate to the parties? well first of all, roger giddens paid the ultimate price for his death. he died and that is his plaintiff closing argument 1181 responsibility. that is his responsibility. now, as a jury, you are the values of this community here in fort myers, florida, in lee county. you all came from different walks of life, did not know each other. you sat here for over a week and you are going to have your own very strong views about this and you should hash it out. now, we know roger giddens, sr. was at fault, some percentage of fault. is it ten percent, is it twenty percent, is it thirty percent? i think if it is thirty percent, that is -- that would be fair, but it is your decision. you get to say. there is no rule book that says. but what -- what i want you to consider, it is not a hundred percent. it is not a hundred percent because the tobacco companies did not tell the truth about their products. that is what the negligence piece of this was. they did not make safe products. now the tobacco companies might say, well you know, mr. finch and his colleagues just showed you snippets of documents or pieces or testimony, you did not see the whole picture, you did not see the rest of the story. well, let us talk about the rest of the story. the rest of the story for roger giddens is, let us say you say he is thirty percent at fault, then you got to decide, well, what about them, what about their conduct? so do not they bear some blame, too, just like the two guys who are holding the blackberries and run into each other? just like the people plaintiff closing argument 1182 in the bang, bang, bang car wreck? you bet they do. you are all intelligent people. you paid a lot of attention. you can allocate it between r.j. reynolds and philip morris however you think is -- is fair. but the rest of the story is not just listening to what you heard in this courtroom. it is also thinking about what you did not hear. they are saying, well, you took this stuff out of context. what we showed you was memoranda written by very senior executives in these tobacco corporations. they were not -- you saw -- the last thing you saw yesterday was the video, death in the west, and you saw the -- the senior executives from the philip morris corporation sitting there saying that they did not think that cigarettes were hazardous and they did not think that cigarettes were addictive, and that was in the late 1970s. they knew better than that. they were at fault. and so it is not like we have showed you a document written by a junior research scientist who is ten levels down. these are some of the most senior people in these companies and they created the tobacco information society, go out and publicize all this stuff to try to create doubt so that people like mr. giddens would have a hard time quitting. so at the end of the day, we think you should put no more than thirty percent -- i happen to think it should be less, but it is your decision. so let us say -- and then you plaintiff closing argument 1183 figure out the rest. now, damages. what damages do you find, if any, with respect to the following elements? number 7 is the estate's loss of earnings, medical expenses, and funeral expenses as a result of roger giddens' illness and death. there is a composite exhibit that we put together. it is exhibit 3009, and if you add up all of his medical bills and funeral expenses that we could prove -- it is been a long time, could not get all the records and we have the burden of proof it is more likely than not what they were. you will find that that adds up to about $20,000, the bottom line. glenda giddens, loss of support and services including interest on any amount awarded for such loss from the date of injury to the date of death. well, there was testimony that roger giddens, who was her husband, gave her $150 a week from 1985 until the time he finally had a stroke. do the math, $150 a week times 50 weeks a year, $7,500, times ten years. his life expectancy was 20 years, but you know, he may have died short of that and he may have stopped working, but i think the evidence is sufficiently clear that i think it is more likely than not he would have continued to pay her $75,000 over the rest of her life. and then we get to what i think is the hardest part of this, which is that what is the value of a man's life to glenda giddens? what is the value of that? there is a plaintiff closing argument 1184 movie from clint eastwood called unforgiven where he said, "kill a man, take away all he is ever been, all he ever will be." what is the value of a husband's life to his wife? people have all kinds of circumstances. i'm not going to stand here and tell you that i can put a number on that. different communities and different parts of florida will say in the context of the engle litigation different things. you know, the value of a life, the value of the harms and losses caused to glenda giddens from the death of her husband is something you have to decide and i cannot -- i'm not going to even suggest to you what the number should be. you should -- i can tell you that there is a lot of things about the world that do not make any sense. if a ball player making $20 million a year got run over by a bus, he could blackboard $20 million. is that fair? is that right? is that just? i do not know. maybe it is. but if a -- if you as a the conscience of this community put a number here, whatever that number may be, mr. giddens will respect it and we will respect it because you have helped the parties to achieve justice. and that is all i can ask of you, that is all my client can ask of you. the goal is justice. the law is a means to an end and the end is justice. now questions 5 and 6, please state as to each defendant whether roger giddens, sr. relied to his detriment on defendants' agreement to conceal or omit material plaintiff closing argument 1185 information concerning the health effects or addictive nature of cigarettes, and if so, was such reliance a legal cause of his death. well that is a two-part mouthful. but i -- excuse me, i'm sorry, i -- you know the question, the form you were sitting there looking at all weekend, it has negligence and strict liability broken out into two questions. and so when the judge renumbered it, i got thrown off and i apologize for that. but so it is now question 4 and question 5. it is fraudulent concealment and conspiracy to commit fraudulent concealment, and it is two pieces. as -- as my younger brains would say, two sides of that pancake. there is a -- there is what did they do and what did roger giddens do. the first question you have got to ask yourself is, did the defendants have an agreement to conceal or omit material information concerning the health effects or addictive nature of cigarettes, and if so, was such reliance a legal cause of his death. well, legal cause of his death is covered in question 2. so now question 2, did the tobacco companies lie about the dangers of their product? and they tried to show you a lot of information out there that was -- the surgeon general was saying this and there were warnings on the cigarettes but judge magnuson -- engle case has decided. this is what he is going to instruct you. you may not like plaintiff closing argument 1186 this instruction, you may totally disagree with it, but it is the law and you have sworn an oath to follow the law of this judge. what the judge is going to tell you is that the engle defendants concealed or omitted material information not otherwise known or available, knowing the material was false or misleading, or failed to disclose a material fact concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes, or both. he is going to instruct you that is what you have to determine. then he is going to instruct you that the engle defendants agreed to conceal or omit information regarding the health effects of cigarettes or their addictive nature with the intention the smokers in the public would rely on this information to their detriment. so, that is the first piece of this mouthful of a question. you have got to find they did something bad but how do you say -- how could roger giddens rely on something they did not tell him? there is an old saying, put your money where your mouth is. he kept buying their cigarettes and you heard the testimony of the big tobacco executive, robert heimann, who said it is reasonable for people to rely on our advertisement, it is reasonable for people to do that. you buy captain crunch cereal -- my kids buy, i buy captain crunch cereal for them. they like it because it is captain crunch. they rely on the advertisement. when you buy toothpaste, maybe you like the taste but you rely on the plaintiff closing argument 1187 advertisement. when you buy anything, you are relying on the advertisement and you are relying on the maker of that product to tell you the truth. you are relying on the engineers to take care. my father was an electrical engineer and the goal of an engineer is to solve problems and make products safer. did the tobacco corporation's engineers try to make cigarettes safer? did the tobacco corporation's engineers, did they try to get the nicotine out of cigarettes? what did they try to do? they tried to hook people. so they were not trying to make their products safer. they were doing just the opposite. so roger giddens, the question is of reliance, he kept buying the product and that is the best evidence of what was going on. if you do not believe the testimony of his son or the testimony of sandra king or the testimony of any of the witnesses, believe roger giddens' own words. he is dead, but exhibit 3040, which is in evidence, this exhibit, this is a -- the document that we showed to dr. cummings and it is a -- it is surveys, questions to roger giddens, sent to glenda giddens' house, roger's house, and in may of 1995, what is your current brand? marlboro. he was a marlboro man. he got stuff from marlboro. he kept buying their cigarettes. you saw that piece of a marlboro commercial. you think st. augustine, florida, was under some big magic bubble where cigarette plaintiff closing argument 1188 advertisements did not get into it in the '50s and '60s and '70s? sports illustrated is a magazine that people i know personally have gotten for 50 years. you start looking at the old ones in the '50s and '60s and '70s, full of cigarette advertisement. tv ads full of cigarettes. football games -- do you disbelieve roger giddens, jr? do you seriously think he was lying to you when he sat down on the couch and watched football games with his dad in the '60s? what did he see? what did his dad see? do you really think there was no cigarette advertising, no marlboro man ads? i mean, come on. so i think the answer to 4 and 5, put your money where your mouth is, conduct proves reliance. the fact that he kept buying the product proves it. if there is any doubt about that. there is an ftc report in evidence. james, what is the a1 ftc exhibit number? it is 129. it is a big, fat, 500 page document and what that basically says in 1981, the federal trade commission went out and it was looking at the effectiveness of cigarette ads and the effectiveness of the surgeon general's warnings and it concluded that people, particularly addicted smokers, at the very end of the conclusion section -- and i do not have time to show it to you now, but you can look at the very last part of exhibit 129 and see right there that it showed that people plaintiff closing argument 1189 were not getting the message. and why were they not getting the message? because remember, dr. burns showed you the wheel, the cycle of addiction and how doubt and controversy affected that? because smokers, some of them, the ones who get addicted, it affects some of them. i'm not saying it affects everyone. it affects some of their ability to process information. so, where are we? i think the answer to question 4, the fraudulent concealment as to r.j. reynolds has to be a yes; as to the philip morris corporation, it has to be a yes. they were in arms together. you heard about the meeting at the plaza hotel from dr. cummings in 1953, december, '53. there is one document that i'd like you to read. it is a document called the forwarding memorandum, because -- this was in 1953, the forwarding memorandum. we showed you parts of it. it was the -- it is a short document dated 1953. what did the tobacco companies do when they started to find out that their cigarettes were causing lung cancer? they hire scientists to help them get the carcinogens out of cigarette smoke? did they hire doctors to help advise them, what can we do to make our products less addictive? no, they hired hill and knowlton, public relations firm. go out there and spread a message to the world that, hey, there is another side to the question. and they continued this conduct all the way -- all the way up plaintiff closing argument 1190 through the time that roger giddens died. they put out press releases in 1988 saying that cigarettes were not addictive. they kept sending as an exhibit, exhibit 48 which is in evidence, which is a letter to someone from january 11, 1990, less than five years before roger giddens died, r.j. reynolds tobacco company, it is exhibit number 48, late 1948. the tobacco industry is also concerned about the charges being made that smoking is responsible for so many serious diseases. despite all research going on, the simple and unfortunate fact is that scientists do not know the cause or causes of the chronic diseases reported to be associated with smoking. 1990, they are saying this. i'm not saying that roger giddens ever saw that letter, but that is evidence of fraud. that is evidence that the judge is going to instruct you happened. so the last question on the verdict form -- or actually, there is two questions about when -- if you answered yes to the fraudulent concealment and if you answered yes to the question about the conspiracy, did it happen before 1982 and did it happen after 1982, or did it happen both before or after 1982. the reason why they ask you this question, i'm not going to get into. but i think the evidence is absolutely clear mr. giddens was buying cigarettes before 1982; he was buying cigarettes after 1982. he was getting so much cigarettes from marlboro he got this. plaintiff closing argument 1191 he was addicted. he was hooked. he was buying a product. he was relying on the ads but he was also relying on the fact that he was addicted to the product and he kept on buying and he kept on buying. so all their defenses, what he knew, what he should have known, all that, all that goes to, that goes to questions about conspiracy to commit fraudulent concealment and fraudulent concealment. that is the only one where there is reliance. that is the only ones that asked you about what he relied on and what he knew. the rest of them is was the cigarette smoking a legal cause of his death and if you believe dr. burns, cigarette smoking killed him. so now you get to the question of punitive damages and that is a question where we have the burden of proof by clear and convincing evidence, which is a higher standard than a little bit more than none. i have the privilege and the honor to go into courtrooms and ask people like you to consider the story of common senses. a lot of people say, geez, should not be, too much lawsuits, should not be suing lawyers -- lawyers should not be suing companies. but i'm proud of what i do and the reason i do it, i spend a lot of time away from my wife and little kids, is because i think, in front of a group of people like you is the only place left in this country where people can be on a level field, playing field with big corporations who lie to them, big plaintiff closing argument 1192 corporations who hurt them, big tobacco corporations who do not tell the truth year after year after year and lie to congress about it. i grew up in virginia. i live outside of washington, d.c. washington. d.c. is a cesspool. nothing gets done there because there is so much lobbying going on. there is so much stuff going on. this is the only place a jury, where a person can be on a level playing field with the united states government in a criminal case or a civil case. in any other -- imagine if this dispute were to happen in front of president obama. do you think roger giddens would get as much time in front of president obama as someone who is going to say yes, we will contribute to your campaign? of course not. you are the conscience of this community. you can listen to both sides of the story. they do not get any more time in front of you than i do. you can be fair. i think it is absolutely clear and convincing that the conduct here is not something that your community wants to condone. it is not something you want to say, yeah, it is okay, we will give that a pass. so i leave this in your hands. i trust people like you, client trusts you. he thanks you very much for your attention and time and patience. and at this point, i will just say that i think the just result here is a verdict 1193 for the plaintiff. the damages are in your hands. the case is in your hands. if i've misspoken, please do not hold it against my clients. i just am doing the best i can. i thank you very much. mr. finch: mr. walker has a different definition of brief, perhaps, than i do. i'll be done -- i'll be done in five minutes, maybe seven. i know y'all are tired, want to get out of here. i'm kind of tired, too. he said there was not much evidence about winstons. there was lots of testimony about cartons of winstons, that roger giddens smoked cartons of winstons and saw winston ads. he talked about legal cause and that i did not ask dr. burns whether something was a legal cause. i did not ask him whether something was a legal cause because he is a doctor. the question is for you whether something is a legal cause. and he showed you -- might i have the elmo, ma'am? he showed you the document from which you are going to get which is definition of legal cause. if it directly, in natural and continual sequence produces or contributes substantially to producing such injury or damages so it can be reasonably said but for such wrongful conduct the injury or damage would not have occurred. there can be more than one legal cause. plaintiff rebuttal closing argument 1254 i want to show you a big tobacco document from the 1950s. with one exception, the individuals who we met with believe that smoking causes lung cancer if by causation we mean any chain of events which leads finally to lung cancer and which involves smoking as an indispensable link. clearly, smoking is the indispensable link. dr. burns testified that both the lung cancer and the stroke caused and contributed to causing roger giddens' death, which is exactly the definition in the judge's jury instructions, and in the engle findings -- and oh, by the way, those engle findings do not have any exception for this kind of stroke or that kind of stroke. they say -- all this is about general causation. it is whether something can cause something else. the short answer is the 2004 surgeon general's report says that smoking causes all types of strokes and it caused roger giddens' stroke. and this is dr. burns' final opinions which you saw yesterday. the nicotine addiction caused his lung cancer. both his lung cancer and his cerebral hemorrhage contributed to his death, with lung cancer making a larger contribution. it is a medical question. they did not put on any evidence. they just had lawyers talk to you about what the evidence showed. i do not see anywhere on this verdict form a question what caused roger giddens to start smoking. do not plaintiff rebuttal closing argument 1255 take your eye off the ball. that is not a question. the questions are the questions. you will hear the instructions from the judge. the tobacco company lawyers are great lawyers. they are more eloquent, they are more articulate than me. the tobacco companies have been at this for a long time. they want to create doubt with you. can we have an open debate about smoking? we are not saying that roger giddens saw this ad in new york times. we are saying that they knew that their products kill people from causing cancer and they were wanting to create doubt. this is a r.j. reynolds tobacco company document. this is an internal secret document from the philip morris corporation which says, for nearly 20 years, this industry has employed a single strategy to defend itself on three major fronts, litigation, politics and public opinion. while the strategy was brilliantly conceived and executed over the years helping us to win important battles, it is only fair to say it is not nor was it intended to be a vehicle for a victory. on the contrary, it has always been a holding strategy, consisting of creating doubt about the health charge without actually denying it. and one of the tobacco corporation documents say doubt is our product. and why is that? because they know darn well that this is how addicted smokers think. this is plaintiff rebuttal closing argument 1256 how they -- the addiction affects their ability to make choices. and we are not saying that roger giddens had no choice. but he had a messed-up choice by the poisons in the cigarettes that he was addicted to. and i will come back to that in just a moment, but if you have any doubt about whether or not the tobacco companies' advertising campaigns were effective, this was a document i was going to read to you this morning that is a ftc document. federal government was investigating false advertising claims about the cigarette advertisers. it is exhibit number 129. just read the first couple of pages to tell you what it is about and just flip through it. it is a lot of information there, but the bottom line, 1981, in sum, cigarette advertising does not disclose material health and safety information. as a result, many smokers remain unaware of the very basic fact that smoking is hazardous to health and many more hold false beliefs about the existence, probability, and severity of these dangers. so john, can i please have clip number 9 from death in the west? death in the west is an exhibit that is in evidence. it is the exhibit that you saw at the end of the day. it is the last clip. madam court reporter? (video displayed, death in the west, clip 9) plaintiff rebuttal closing argument 1257 mr. finch: that is the darn good advertising. what do we know about mr. giddens' addiction? he smoked two packs a day for 30 or 40 years, day in day out, first thing in the morning. we know he got lung cancer in 1995. vera giddens was the person that had to empty the ashtrays and the one thing she was certain about was he got -- he got lung cancer and then he kept on smoking. and it was one other point of her testimony, i wrote it down because it was -- it was interesting to me, and it is important. it does not really -- you know, if you believe this testimony, absolutely he was so sick, he is just -- he is just addicted beyond belief, but what she said is that she and her husband were taking roger giddens from the nursing home to dinner at her house after he had the stroke and she said that roger -- and this is the last words we ever heard from roger in the case -- roger, the man who is dead, who this case is really about, this man said to his brother, "can i have a cigarette?" and james ashley giddens said back to him, "no, you have quit." does that sound like somebody who is quit to you? when your client is dying of cancer, when mr. giddens is dying of cancer and they are trying to suggest to you that he was not addicted, take a look at exhibit 34 one last time. this is the document they tried to suggest -- they tried to cast doubt on their own document. this is a document that plaintiff rebuttal closing argument 1258 comes out of philip morris' files. it is not something that i put together. it is -- they are saying it is inaccurate, something you should not believe. well, roger -- they misspelled mr. giddens' name but his birth date's accurate. the address, it is glenda's address. they keep -- they keep sending him stuff. it is got the -- it is got the jacket on it. he got it himself. it is got the jacket on it. and what is the last thing he says? what is your current brand? marlboro. he is addicted and in may of 1995, that is three months after his stroke -- no dispute, three months after the lung cancer and there is no dispute about that. i'm sorry i'm worked up about this. i want you to -- i want you guys to know that i -- i thank you so much for listening to me, but i want you to leave with one final thought. the lawyers remind us, i'm told, that the entire matter of addiction is the most potent weapon a prosecuting attorney can have in a lung cancer cigarette case. we cannot defend continued smoking as free choice if the person was addicted. and i want to leave you with a thought experiment. i want you to imagine -- we did not show you the frank statement to suggest that roger giddens saw it. we showed it to you to show what they were doing. i want you to imagine, look at this, every major tobacco company in the world, philip morris, r.j. reynolds, the tobacco industry plaintiff rebuttal closing argument 1259 research committee. they put this out at the meeting at the plaza hotel. imagine if instead of locking arms, arms in arms and they wanted to create this 50 year controversy of doubt, what if one of them just said, "hey, why do not we say our products can kill you if you smoke them?" imagine that. thank you very much. i appreciate your time. i appreciate your attention. my client does not want your sympathy. he just wants justice. you are the people in this community who can talk about this, spend some time looking at the documents. not suggesting you do it this evening. go home, sleep on it, whatever your honor requires you to do. but i think this is a very important case. and i, my client and i thank you for being here and we put our trust in you. thank you very much.