ms. gallagher: good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. i told you when we started this case, this case was about roger giddens and his decisions; mr. giddens, who made a decision to start smoking when he was an adult, mr. giddens who made the decision to continue smoking despite knowing the health risks associated with smoking and mr. giddens, who made the decision not to quit until he was diagnosed with lung cancer. and now the plaintiff is asking you to award money for those decisions, and the evidence in this case simply will not allow you to do so. now, mr. finch started by talking to you about the engle findings and the engle case. well, the engle jury who 1194 made those engle findings never heard any evidence at all about mr. giddens. those findings do not apply until you say they do. you are the ones who decide the evidence in this case and reach your verdict based on the evidence that you have heard in this courtroom. then you decide whether the engle findings apply to this case by your verdict. now, i told you at the beginning of this case there was a lot we did not know about mr. giddens, and i think after being here for a week, there is still a lot we do not know about mr. giddens. for example, when exactly mr. giddens started smoking. you have heard evidence that it is more probable, it is likely, in fact most of the evidence, the credible evidence points to the fact that he started smoking as an adult. you heard today from mr. watkins, his high school teammate who said he never saw mr. giddens smoking in high school. he was a four sport athlete. coaches did not want the athletes smoking. and then you heard from mr. ashley giddens, mr. giddens' brother, who said i do not know, i cannot remember, i'm guessing, i'm assuming, it is my impression he may have started at 16, 17, or 18, but he was not sure. the one thing that mr. ashley giddens could tell you is not an assumption, not an impression, but the picture that was in his head of when he first recalls his brother smoking is when he came home from the army, when he was 21 years old. 1195 the credible evidence in this case is that mr. giddens made an adult decision to start smoking. he was old enough to serve his country and he was old enough to decide if he wanted to start smoking. mr. giddens made the decision to smoke cigarettes despite the known risks of cigarettes. now, the plaintiff brought you dr. cummings who came in and say, oh, no, mr. giddens did not understand the risks of smoking and there were these things the tobacco companies did and one of the things he pointed to was the frank statement. remember, the frank statement that the plaintiffs had up here for most of the trial? the frank statement that you all know, although dr. cummings was not aware, did not appear in the st. augustine record, the one paper that we know mr. giddens read on a regular basis. it was not a town of over 25,000-dollar -- or 25,000 people. so here is dr. cummings bringing you the frank statement knowing that mr. giddens did not see it. well, why would he do that? it is because dr. cummings wants to make you think that might have something to do with this case. and why would he do that? because he is rooting for the plaintiff to win. he told you that. he may not be, in his words, a friend or foe of the tobacco companies, but he is proud to be the general in the war against tobacco, and he is proud to be part of the plaintiff's team. 1196 you will remember when mr. parrett stood up at the very beginning of this case in opening statement and he introduced everybody on his team. and he said -- he introduced mr. giddens, jr. as the most important person on the team. although any money awarded in this case is supposed to go to glenda giddens, but she cannot be the most important part of the team because she did not even want to be on the team. she wants nothing to do with this lawsuit and she is the one who has something at stake in this lawsuit. but she is not the only one who has a stake in this lawsuit. dr. cummings does. dr. cummings travels from town to town in florida, city to city, county to county, testifying on behalf of plaintiffs. he does that for $500 an hour, and although he cannot tell you how much money he is made because he is never sat down and added it up, he can tell you that he has earned about a million dollars testifying against tobacco companies in his war against tobacco. now, dr. cummings brought you all sorts of statements, different things that he said the tobacco companies said or did, like the frank statement, that we know mr. giddens did not see. we brought you the evidence of things that mr. giddens at least could see because they were in publications that he was reading. they were on the news and you know that he was watching news channels. 1197 for example, in 1964 -- libby, could we have the lights dimmed, please? thank you. for example, you have seen this before, in 1964, the surgeon general's report. you recall this was the big, huge news story that you are probably tired of us talking about now, coming out and saying lung cancer -- smoking causes lung cancer in men. and here it is, the 1964 surgeon general's report on the front page of the st. augustine record. cigarette smoking is cause of cancer, other deadly disease, the panel reports. this was the newspaper mr. giddens was reading on a daily basis. his wife told you that. he also read reader's digest. we brought you some of those reader's digests. my eyes are going; i cannot see. these are reader's digests. they published 39 different articles on smoking and health between 1924 and 1964, years before mr. giddens was even born. with things -- with titles like cancer by the carton, i quit smoking or cooper's last stand, how harmful are cigarettes. you will see all these. these were the things that were read in today and you will have the entire articles if you want to look at them. but we brought you reader's digest because there is testimony in this case that mr. giddens actually read it, so he could see these things, unlike the statements dr. cummings was putting up that he cannot tell you and he 1198 never even tried to link to mr. giddens. today we showed you some other news articles, and these are just a sampling of some of the articles -- i'm sorry, is this in anybody's way? juror: yes. ms. gallagher: it is? sorry. is that better? sorry. these are different titles of different articles that were in the st. augustine paper during the '50s and the '60s talking about the dangers of cigarette smoking. and these are all in evidence for you to look at. and the reason we brought you these is because we know these are things that mr. giddens saw. these were things that were telling him that smoking was dangerous, the reader's digest articles that were telling him that smoking was addictive. these were all things in his world, not in dr. cummings' world. we also brought you public service announcements. i'm not going to play those for you again. you saw some of those today and we did some with dr. cummings. all right, let us talk about smoking in the news. that is fine, juan. leave that up. you heard from various witnesses in this case that mr. giddens watched the news. he watched the local news and he watched the national news and you will recall these 1199 different clips that we played you, walter cronkite, see it now from the 1950s, and then harry reasoner, the one you have heard this morning, who said it was your decision whether people would continue to smoke in the face of the surgeon general's report in 1964. these are the things mr. giddens saw. we also played psas for you, these public service announcements that you saw from the american cancer society, the one with ed asner who we showed you two. when dr. cummings was testifying, we showed you the one where he was going to participate in the great american smokeout for the first time, and said it is just one day. and then today, you saw the one from a year later where he had been successful. remember, he said i picked -- i did not smoke for one day, then i did not smoke for another day and here i am a year later, why do not you try it, too. and ed asner was on the mary tyler moore show. you heard that mr. giddens liked mary tyler moore and you saw these others, do not be a loser from the movie star on perry mason. and then larry hagman, who also did the one in the 1980s. these were things that were on tv, mr. giddens could have seen. not as clear that we know he saw all of these because we know he was a tv watcher, but we do not know exactly what he was watching but these are things mr. giddens could have seen and we know he saw things in the 1200 newspapers and magazines that he read. like ninety percent of the people who were polled in 1984, mr. giddens understood there were health risks associated with smoking and that it could cause lung cancer, and you do not have to rely just on him reading about it, seeing it in the newspapers, seeing it in the news, seeing it in reader's digest because you have experiences from his own life that tell you he was aware of the dangers of smoking. goes back to selling insurance policies to his brother. remember when ashley giddens' testimony was read in and he said, my brother sold me two policies? remember, he made the joke, he must have needed another sale. he sold him one policy and he sold him a second policy and ashley said i had to -- that he was charged a higher rate. remember, mr. giddens -- and you can look at the social security earnings that are in there -- he sold insurance from 1960 to 1971. during that period, he sold his brother these two policies and he had to sell the policies at a higher rate because his brother was a smoker. these are the policies that mr. giddens is selling to people. this is how he is making his living is selling life insurance policies and having to sell some of them at a smoker's rate because of the increased risk of injury and dying early. or smoker's rate, as dr. cummings called it, the smoker's penalty, the higher rate you pay for insurance. mr. giddens 1201 was doing this in the 1960s. he was clearly aware of the health risks of smoking. then you have heard from mrs. king who owned the dealership. remember when the dealership went non-smoking? she told all her employees, this is bad for you, she was handing out pamphlets, and she specifically told you that she told mr. giddens, smoking is bad for you. and what was his reaction? he shrugged it off, and then instead of trying to quit, asked to be moved back to the service center so he could continue to smoke. that was his reaction in the face of somebody telling him, you need to quit smoking. now, the other thing i told you is that mr. giddens quit smoking with his lung cancer diagnosis. and i know you have heard different things about that and so i just want to review the testimony with you. you heard from the plaintiff in this case that his father quit smoking in february of 1995 after his lung cancer diagnosis. and although the plaintiff has changed what he said about other things in this case, he has been consistent on that. through the verified worksheet that was read in this morning, through his deposition testimony, and when he testified in trial, he was consistent on that one point, is that his father, he never saw him smoke another cigarette after his diagnosis in february of 1995. mr. giddens' brother told you the same thing. and 1202 remember, at this point, mr. giddens, sr. is living with vera and ashley and mr. giddens has been diagnosed with lung cancer and his brother is taking him to his radiation treatments. for four weeks after his diagnosis, mr. ashley giddens is driving his brother back and forth, five days a week, and he would know if mr. giddens was smoking. he would see him do it, he would smell it if he was smoking and then got back in the car with him. that is the credible evidence and that is that mr. giddens quit smoking at his cancer diagnosis. now, who told you something different? that was vera. his sister-in-law. and she thinks that mr. giddens continued to smoke after his diagnosis. well, vera was very upfront that there is one thing she is not good with and that is dates. and in fact, she told you if the plaintiff's lawyers had not told her before her deposition when all this occurred, she would not have been clear if it was 1996, the year 2000; she is just not good with dates. i mean, it is been 17 years. it is hard to blame someone for not remembering things, but i think if you look at what mrs. giddens said, she is a little confused. remember, she said that she thought mr. giddens was diagnosed with his stroke in january. remember, she said he smoked after his diagnosis but after -- but did not after his stroke because she thinks his stroke was in january and not july. that 1203 would fit with him quitting in february of 1995. and of course, she remembers emptying ashtrays because when mr. giddens moved in with them, he was still smoking. he lived with them for some period of time, was diagnosed with cancer, and then continued to live with them. so yes, she cleaned out ashtrays, but she is just confused about the dates and that is why her testimony is different, her -- from mr. giddens, jr., and from ashley giddens, who both clearly remember that after his diagnosis, he never smoked again. then you have dr. burns. and i do not know what to do with dr. burns because he has mr. giddens smoking in the nursing home, and you did not hear anything about that. we know that when mr. giddens was in the nursing home, he had profound deficits, and how he is going to be wheeling himself out of the nursing home, finding cigarettes -- i'm sure they are not selling them in the nursing home -- and lighting them up, i do not know what you do with that. but if you look at the credible evidence here of the people who were around at the time, i think it is clear that mr. giddens quit smoking when he was diagnosed with his cancer. now, you have heard a lot of different facts and testimony and judge magnuson is about to instruct you on the law and then it is your job to put those two together when you deliberate, and you are going to have as much time as you 1204 want to do that. but i'm going to spend my time here focusing on a few of the questions instead of trying to go through the entire verdict sheet with you. and i want to focus for a minute on the second question which is -- y'all have these -- was roger giddens, sr.'s addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine a legal cause of his death. and i told you at the beginning when we started this case that that is really two questions, and one question is was mr. giddens' addiction to nicotine so strong that he was simply unable to quit smoking in time to avoid his injury. and the second part of that is did he die of a smoking related disease. now, to answer these questions, you have got to look at legal cause. libby, can i have the elmo, please? and you will have this instruction in front of you when you are deliberating and mr. finch read you a part of this. and it says wrongful conduct is the legal cause -- and it goes on for a while, but the part i want you to focus on is, so it can reasonably be said that but for the wrongful conduct, the injury or damage would not have occurred. but for. and the "but for" is the part i'm talking about, is that was his addiction so strong that but for that addiction, he would have quit in time to avoid his injury? 1205 now, i want to back up because this legal cause instruction is in all the questions that you have been asked to answer by judge magnuson in this verdict form. but let me back up and talk about the second part of that first, and that is, did mr. giddens die from a smoking related disease. and let me say, when we are talking about this, the plaintiff has the burden of proof here and the plaintiff stood up here and did the scales of justice and said he just had to tip it. well, that is not quite accurate because the plaintiff has the burden of proof to prove every element of his case to you. he does not start here and just have to tip over. he starts down here and has to bring you the evidence all the way up to prove his case to you. and as i told you at the beginning of this case, you cannot guess, you cannot speculate, you cannot assume, you cannot say would have, should have, could have. you have got to have evidence to answer these questions. and if you get to a question, any of the questions on this verdict form and you do not think you have the evidence to answer it, then you cannot rule for the plaintiff. you have to put a no there because the plaintiff, since they are the ones bringing the lawsuit, have the burden to prove their lawsuit to you. they have to provide you those answers. so let us talk about mr. giddens' cause of death. i told you at the beginning, and it is still true after 1206 sitting here for a week, that nobody knows what caused mr. giddens' death. now, plaintiffs brought up the death certificate. juan, would you pull up the death certificate, please? thank you. and this is the death certificate. it is in evidence, and what the death certificate says -- it was filled out by his attending physician and what the attending physician put was natural causes. the attending physician, who was the one who saw mr. giddens in the nursing home, did not determine a cause of death besides natural causes. now, dr. burns showed you this part when he was testifying, natural causes, and then he said the death certificate also said that mr. giddens had died from lung cancer. well, mr. burns -- dr. burns was not showing you the whole thing, because if you read the box where it says lung cancer, what it says is -- this is a different part of the death certificate and this is the part that dr. burns did not talk about and did not show you. what it says is, "other significant conditions contributing to death but not resulting in the underlying cause given in part i." so what this is saying is the man had lung cancer, but it did not result in his death. dr. burns did not show you that part. he just said the death certificate says lung cancer. that is kind of misleading because that is not what it says. 1207 the attending physician, the doctor who knew mr. giddens when he died, did not say it was lung cancer that was the cause of death. he did not say it was a stroke that was the cause of death. he did not say it was some combination of those two that was the cause of death. all he could say was that it was natural causes, the man who was there at the time. but dr. burns now can tell you the cause of death? dr. burns, who has joined the plaintiff's team, who suffers from the same problem as dr. cummings, he is an anti-tobacco advocate. you took an oath to be fair and impartial in this case. the witnesses, particularly the expert witnesses, did not. dr. burns is on the plaintiff's team following the same play book. when he was deposed before trial, he was asked, can you say in reasonable medical probability what the cause of mr. giddens' death was. and he could not. you saw that when -- some of the last questions i asked him about the medical issues in this case, and i said, can you say in reasonable medical probability what caused mr. giddens' death. he said, yeah, i can. in this courtroom, in this trial, he is saying it was lung cancer. but back in his deposition, he said no, i cannot. i think lung cancer and a stroke may have contributed to it, but i cannot tell you which one is more dominant. i cannot tell you 1208 which one is the cause. well, his deposition was given last year. there have been no new medical records found, there is been no new medical discoveries. it was not until he got in this courtroom that he now says, i know it was lung cancer. and why is he doing that? because now plaintiff's team has realized, well maybe stroke really was not a part of this. maybe the stroke was not caused by cigarette smoking, so now it is got to be lung cancer. dr. cummings -- dr. burns has changed his testimony on that. so let us talk about the stroke. dr. burns told you that the greatest risk factor, the biggest cause of all different kinds of stroke is hypertension, including hemorrhagic stroke, which is the kind mr. giddens had. that is the biggest risk factor. now, dr. burns kind of went back and forth with this because he would not say that mr. giddens had hypertension or that it was under control. remember when i asked him if hypertension was the biggest risk for having a stroke and he gave me that answer, well you have to have hypertension for it to be the biggest cause. he was very not forthcoming on the whole hypertension issue. he kept fighting about, well, hypertension might be the biggest risk, but you have to have it. that is kind of silly, but what we know from looking at the medical records is that mr. giddens had hypertension. 1209 ho is history of. that is how doctors write, untreated hypertension and then pmhx is doctor speak for past medical history. and in there, it says hypertension, untreated. and you know that mr. giddens had hypertension because vera told you that. she knew. she said he had hypertension and mr. giddens was not treating it. ashley told you, mr. giddens did not go to the doctor. in order to get medications to treat hypertension, you have got to go to the doctor because it is prescription medication. so we know that mr. giddens had hypertension. what dr. burns told you is the biggest risk factor from having any kind of stroke, including the kind of stroke that mr. giddens had. now, if you left hypertension go untreated, as dr. burns explained, all sorts of bad things can happen because hypertension builds up the -- attacks the walls of the arteries and after a certain amount of time, those arteries can start leaking, and hypertension can cause kidney damage, heart damage, and damage to the arteries in the brain -- a stroke, which is exactly what happened here. but now dr. burns comes into this courtroom and says, okay, that the stroke was caused by smoking and he used this part of the surgeon general's report, the conclusion -- remember, the evidence, the synthesis of evidence that there is association of smoking with all major types of stroke. but then when you look at it in more 1210 detail, as we did yesterday, the surgeon general broke it down to between ischemic and hemorrhagic and then the surgeon general got specific and cited studies and what those said was that ischemic and subarachnoid, those strokes you are at increased risk for if you smoke, but not the hemorrhagic, the kind mr. giddens had. juan, can you pull up the 2004, please? this is from the 2004 surgeon general's report and it says the meta-analysis reviewed 32 case control and cohort studies. now, meta-analysis is just when they take all these different studies on a topic, they look at all the data again and they come to conclusions. and they said, there is an increased risk for smoke, but the ischemic, you have a 1.9 relative risk, which means you are almost twice at risk, and 2.9 for subarachnoid hemorrhage, this kind of hemorrhagic stroke. that means almost three times the risk if you smoke for getting that kind of stroke. but for cerebral hemorrhage, there was no elevation in risk. that is this one. remember when i went with dr. burns and said what are different names for this kind of hemorrhage? the surgeon general says that there is no increased risk from smoking for that particular type of stroke. and the surgeon general repeated that in 2010. the 2010 report please, juan. here again, in the 2010 report, are those exact 1211 same statistics reported again and they even cited to the exact same study. dr. burns was a reviewer. remember, he told you he was a senior scientific reviewer for both the 2004 and the 2010 report? he obviously did not have a problem with this when it was written in the 2004 report, the 2010 report. he did not ask for that to be taken out. and this is the specific information about the specific type of stroke that mr. giddens had. again, dr. burns is not showing you the whole picture. now, let me mention something here because mr. finch talked about the engle findings and how the engle findings said cerebrovascular disease and stroke, that that was binding on you. the way that this works is that you decide whether the engle findings are binding by your answers to the first two questions. and in answering the first two questions, you have to decide whether mr. giddens suffered from a stroke that was caused by his smoking. that is based on the evidence you hear in this case and not on the engle findings. so you have to look at what you heard, what you did not hear from dr. burns to make the decision as to whether mr. giddens suffered from a smoking related disease. now, why would dr. burns change his testimony in this case? why would he say that cigarette smoking was responsible for this stroke? why would he say that lung 1212 cancer was the cause of death? well, when you are looking at that, i want you consider one of the other instructions that the judge is going to give you. libby, may i have the elmo, please? this is one of the instructions you will see. the judge gave us the instructions first so we could use them if we wanted but he is going to give them to you. one of the instructions here, instruction number 4, is on expert witnesses and it tells you different things to consider about expert witnesses, but what the judge has instructed you is when a witness has been or will be paid for reviewing and testifying concerning the evidence, you may consider the possibility of bias and should view with caution the testimony of such a witness where court testimony is given with regularity and represents a significant portion of the witness' income. now, we do not know how much dr. burns has actually made testifying in litigation or how significant it is to his income because he cannot tell you whether he is made $2 million doing this, $3 million doing this, or $5 million doing this. all he knows is that he has made millions and millions of dollars testifying against the tobacco companies in these cases and under the judge's instructions, you need to consider that when you are considering the testimony of dr. burns. 1213 so getting back to the medical, what do you know from the evidence that is been presented in this case? you know that in february of 1995, mr. giddens was diagnosed with lung cancer. you know that mr. giddens was responding well to treatment. you heard that he was still working after he was diagnosed with lung cancer. you heard vera giddens say he was doing okay, and you heard his son, the plaintiff in this case, saying i did not ask him to come move with in with me because he was doing okay. well, he was doing okay until july of 1995 when he had this severe hemorrhagic stroke. when vera giddens found him, he was unresponsive, he could not move. and when he got to the hospital, he had really severe problems. and i did not put these up with dr. burns yesterday because we were trying to get dr. burns out of here fairly early. juan, could you put up the composite? and these medical records will be in there for you and what these show are the different issues that mr. giddens was having when he was in the hospital because of his stroke. he was -- had hemiparesis, which is he was paralyzed on the right side because the bleed was in the left side of his brain. he could not talk; he could not walk. he had what they call alphabet speech, where people just cannot get anything out. he had difficulty swallowing. he had to have somebody around him when he was eating or 1214 drinking anything so that he would not aspirate, so he would not get things in his lungs and develop another problem like pneumonia. he had severe deficits as a result of his stroke. and the result of his stroke was that he had deficits so severe that he could not take care of himself. and mr. finch talked to you about the do not resuscitate. the first time a do not resuscitate was ever discussed about mr. giddens was after this stroke. there was no conversation about a do not resuscitate when he was diagnosed with lung cancer. there was no conversation about a do not resuscitate when he was treated for his lung cancer. the only time it came up as to when the family had to decide are we going to put a dnr order on mr. giddens was after his stroke. and there were two options. he could have gone home with his son and had 24 hour round the clock care, or he could go to the nursing home. and he went into the nursing home because of his stroke, not because of his lung cancer. so getting back to what i said was question number 2, the first part of question number 2 was did mr. giddens die of a smoking related disease, and we just do not know. we do not know because there are no medical records from the time he left the hospital in august of 1995 until he died some five months later. there is no description by any doctor of what his condition was like 1215 during that time. there is no description from any of the family members that testified in this case what his condition was at the time. and there was nobody there with him when he died. you do not know and the evidence has not shown you what the cause of death of mr. giddens was. it could have been complications from his first stroke. it could have been complications from his lung cancer. it could have been a second stroke, because all we know is that when he left the hospital in august of 1995, nobody is treating his blood pressure. there is no indication that he left the hospital with any blood pressure medication. in fact, if you look at the discharge summary, you will see a medication scratched out that is for blood pressure. he may have had another stroke. he may have died of heart damage. there is simply no evidence in this case to tell you what mr. giddens died of, and if you do not know what he died of, then you cannot say that he died from a disease that was caused by smoking. so the other part of question number 2 is whether addiction was the legal cause of mr. giddens' death. and as i said, what legal cause means is was mr. giddens' addiction to nicotine so strong that he was simply unable to quit smoking in time to avoid his lung cancer. and the answer to that is yes and because the answer to that is yes, mr. giddens' addiction to nicotine, if you believe he is 1216 addicted, cannot be the legal cause of his death. think about dr. burns' testimony. dr. burns told you that if somebody quit smoking 15 years before, then their risk of -- then it is more probable than not, reasonable medical probability that they will not get lung cancer. so 15 years before mr. giddens' diagnosis, if he had quit smoking in 1980, then based on reasonable medical probability, he would have never had lung cancer. if he had quit back in 1964 when the surgeon general's report came out, it is stronger than reasonable medical probability. his risk would have been back down to almost that of a nonsmoker, and he would not have contracted lung cancer. so let us look at the efforts mr. giddens made to quit smoking. well, you know that there is been no evidence of any efforts to quit smoking in the 1950s, no evidence of any efforts to quit in the 1960s or the 1970s. during that period, from 1964 to 1979, 30 million people in the united states quit smoking. and there is no evidence in this case as to why roger giddens could not have been one of those 30 million during that time period. now, you did hear some about mr. giddens' quit attempts and i want to talk to you about those and ask you the question, how hard was he trying to quit? you heard from mrs. king that she thought there was a time, two times when he was working at the dealership when he was trying to 1217 quit. remember, she said he was less productive, he was having a bad day, but i want you to think about that because mr. giddens' family does not remember him ever trying to quit before the early 1990s. so how hard was he really trying? was he really going a day without cigarettes? if he was irritable and cranky and was having a bad day, do not you think the family would have noticed and he would have said, "i'm really irritable and i'm really cranky, bear with me because i'm trying to quit smoking." they might not remember the dates but you would think they would remember the events. unless it is that mr. giddens was just trying to quit for a few hours while he was at the dealership so he could tell his boss what he knew that she wanted to hear, that he was trying to quit. the only other evidence is the quit attempt in the 1990s that the plaintiff described that he said he was not there for. now, you heard from dr. cummings that the surgeon general defines a serious quit attempt and not just telling somebody you are going to quit, but a serious quit attempt is 24 hours. we do not know if the time sandra king remembers were even 24 hours. if mr. giddens did quit for a week in 1990, the early 1990s, then by the time he picked up another cigarette at the end of that week, all of the nicotine was out of his body. the withdrawal symptoms that dr. cummings described as a few uneasy moments would have 1218 been gone. for whatever reason, he picked up that cigarette again. now, think about it this way. if you knew somebody who was unemployed for over 35 years and they said, you know, during this 35 years, i have filled out three job applications, would you think that they were looking very hard for a job? how hard was mr. giddens really trying? mr. giddens did not give you any -- you heard no evidence of any outward concrete things he did to quit smoking. you know, dr. cummings says he tells his people in his quit smoking classes to throw away your ashtrays, throw away your lighters, do not have a place to put a cigarette out, do not have something convenient to light it up with. remember, he goes around and has rocky going on and has everybody throw their cigarettes away into a trash can so that you do not have the cigarettes on you. there is no evidence here that mr. giddens ever threw away his ashtrays. we heard a lot about the ashtrays. never threw those away. never threw away his lighters. in fact, you heard he never even threw away his cigarettes. how hard are you trying to quit if you still have the cigarettes in your pocket? how serious is that an attempt to quit smoking? you know, all the things that dr. cummings told you about this constrained choice, these brain changes, the brain changes that dr. cummings says is permanent, the 1219 nicotine receptors that he says are permanent, that dr. burns says, no, are not permanent, the wallpaper of ads, all of these things that dr. cummings talked about, there are 60 million people who have had these brain changes, who have had these constrained choices, who have been exposed to this same wallpaper, and they have quit. now, the plaintiff's lawyer, mr. finch, was telling you that it is a legal cause -- that addiction has to be a legal cause. well it sounds to me like they are saying mr. giddens' failure to quit was also a legal cause. by putting the percentage, by saying mr. giddens started and he did not quit smoking, well in this situation, his addiction is not a legal cause of his getting lung cancer because you know he could quit because he did quit. and if mr. giddens could quit smoking in february of 1995, there is no reason he could not have quit smoking earlier. if he had really tried earlier, if he had tried back in 1964 when dr. burns told you it would have been easier for him to quit, we might not all be here today. if he had made a serious attempt to try to quit smoking, we would not be here. plaintiff, on question 2, has failed to prove to you that mr. giddens died of a smoking related disease and he has failed to prove to you that mr. giddens' addiction was so strong that he simply could not quit in time to avoid his lung cancer. addiction is not the legal cause of 1220 mr. giddens' lung cancer, and for those reasons, you have to answer question number 2 no. now, questions 3 also talks about legal cause and i'm not going to go back all over that because i've already talked to you about legal cause, and i want to talk to you about questions 4 and 5, which are the fraudulent concealment questions. and these are questions that are basically asking you, did the tobacco companies conceal information and if they did, was the concealment the legal cause of mr. giddens' death. and judge magnuson will instruct you that you are not supposed to consider any evidence of concealment after 1982, and that is that last question back here on your verdict form, question number 8. so let me talk to you a little bit about these questions. the plaintiff spent a lot of time showing you various documents in this case and let us start with where they left off. the very last thing they showed you, the last piece of evidence in the plaintiff's case were these snippets of the tobacco company, the philip morris executives from death in the west. death in the west, which the plaintiff knows, dr. burns knows, dr. cummings knows, mr. giddens never saw. this documentary that was pieces of things put together that a court said could not be shown anywhere that was shown in san francisco, was not shown in the state of florida, they knew that mr. giddens did not see 1221 it, and they showed it to you anyway. and why are they doing that? to make you mad. to make you mad about the ridiculous things that these tobacco company executives said back around 1970 and to distract you from the real issues in this case, which is what does that have to do with mr. giddens? the frank statement that dr. cummings showed you, what does that have to do with mr. giddens? he never saw it. the plaintiff spent time talking to you about filters and low tar and how this was not something that was helpful, it was no more healthful. what does that have to do with mr. giddens? the only evidence you have is that he started smoking a filtered cigarette and that when he quit smoking, he was still smoking a filtered cigarette, that he never switched from a high tar, high nicotine cigarette to a low tar, low nicotine cigarette. he was not a switcher. remember dr. burns talking to you about compensation and people smoking light cigarettes, the low tar cigarettes or switching from unfiltered to filtered cigarettes but they just smoked harder and so they are getting the same amount of tar? does not apply to mr. giddens. he always smoked the filtered cigarette. he was not a switcher. he did not switch from high tar to low tar. so this whole thing about filters and compensation and low tar cigarettes, again, what does that have to do with mr. giddens? not a thing. 1222 now, the plaintiff's team spent time reading to you from philip morris and rjr documents and saying that these documents were secret and this was stuff only the tobacco companies knew. only the tobacco companies knew that cigarettes were addictive and that cigarettes caused disease. well, from what you saw from dr. cummings, from what i had up there maybe half an hour ago, the popular press, reader's digest, the st. augustine record, harry reasoner, see it now, the psas, the american cancer society, dr. burns, himself, who said, you know, in 1981, ninety percent, 95 percent of the people have heard that smoking can be bad for you and ninety percent of them believe it. in 1975, dr. burns said that more people knew that smoking caused lung cancer than knew the president of the united states and somehow, the plaintiff wants you to believe that the tobacco companies were the only people who knew this information. well, that is just not right. reader's digest was reporting on it back in the '20s before mr. giddens was ever born. mr. giddens knew that smoking was bad for him. he ignored the surgeon general's report. he ignored the warnings from his own boss. he ignored the packages, the warnings on the cigarettes. he ignored the public health community, and now the plaintiff wants you to believe that had the tobacco companies come out and said, you know what, 1223 cigarette smoking is addictive and it causes lung cancer that that somehow would have changed any of mr. giddens' smoking decisions. when he knew and heard of dangers of smoking, he simply shrugged it off. now, one of the things that plaintiff has to prove on these questions, 4 and 5, if you look at it, it says whether mr. giddens relied to his detriment. so it is not only was there concealment, was there a misstatement, but did mr. giddens actually rely on it? so let us go back over -- go over what you heard about reliance in this case because dr. cummings never said mr. giddens relied on the frank statement. dr. cummings never said mr. giddens relied on any statement of the tobacco companies. he never told you that. he cannot even tell you whether mr. giddens ever saw them, so he cannot tell you he relied on them. but he did tell you that mr. giddens relied on two things, and those two things were ads and the marlboro miles program. those are the things that mr. -- that dr. cummings specifically said mr. giddens saw and relied on. and then dr. cummings brought you these ads, most of them from the late '50s, early '60s and never even tried to connect those ads to mr. giddens. instead of trying to connect those ads to mr. giddens, he talked about the wallpaper, how ads were just everywhere, and that somehow that must have affected mr. giddens. 1224 now, there are millions of people who saw that same wallpaper who never started smoking. take the plaintiff, for example. he came in and told you that he specifically remembers that when he was 8 years old, he and his father watched monday night football and eight years old for the three months and ten days that there were advertisements on monday night football, he remembers seeing marlboro ads. he never started smoking. forty percent -- dr. burns told you that forty percent of people in mr. giddens' age cohort, forty percent of the men never picked up a cigarette, never became smokers. remember those, the graph with all the colors on it? forty percent of the people who were exposed to the same wallpaper, all these same ads, they never started smoking. and dr. burns also told you that by 1980, over half of those people had quit in mr. giddens' birth cohort. in dr. cummings world, every smoker smokes because of ads. there is no room for anything else. in dr. cummings' world, mr. giddens had to start smoking because of ads which is very convenient in this case since there is no evidence whatsoever of why mr. giddens started smoking. we do not know if he started smoking marlboros because his parents smoked marlboros. we do not know if one of his army buddies smoked marlboros and that is why he started smoking them. we just do not know. 1225 in dr. cummings' world, there is no room for anything except ads made you do it. ms. virginia, who was here on our jury panel before y'all were selected does not fit into dr. cummings' model, everybody has to start smoking because of the ads. well, what ashley giddens told you was that mr. giddens smoked marlboros and winstons. remember ashley giddens said, "i cannot stand those cigarettes." he smoked something completely different. so here are two people exposed to that wallpaper smoking completely different products, and if dr. cummings' theory made sense that everybody started smoking because of ads, a, why would not everybody be smoking? b, why would not everybody be smoking the most popularly advertised cigarette? if he is true that people rely on these ads and if philip morris was the most heavily advertised cigarette, then why is not everybody smoking a philip morris cigarette? why is not everybody smoking marlboro? now dr. cummings -- juan, can i have the warnings, please? now, dr. cummings admitted to you that none of the ads that the tobacco companies put out, philip morris or rjr put out said that cigarette smoking was safe. none of the ads ever said cigarette smoking is not addictive. none of the ads ever said cigarette smoking will not give you lung 1226 cancer. in fact, what every cigarette pack had, from 1966 on, was some version of one of these warnings. so the advertisement, the pack that dr. cummings talked about, what it actually told the smoker was that smoking is dangerous to your health that is what the packs show. thank you, juan. now, dr. cummings also told you besides ads that the specific thing that mr. giddens relied on was marlboro miles, the program that started in 1993. and i want you to -- when you are back, you will see the marlboro miles database printout and i want you to look at it and see just how accurate you think it is. there are entries on there that mr. giddens redeemed coupons for benson and hedges. there is been no testimony he ever smoked benson and hedges. on there for one year, it says his primary brand was bucks. have you ever seen a bucks advertisement? there is a entry on there that he redeemed a coupon for virginia slims. remember the cigarette that dr. cummings told you was marketed to women? there is no testimony that mr. giddens ever smoked virginia slims. so look at that with those things in mind. but let us get back to dr. cummings saying that mr. giddens relied on marlboro miles. well, what marlboro miles was, you are familiar now, you clipped off the coupon off the cigarette pack and when you collected enough of them, you could get stuff sent back to you. so what we know 1227 is mr. giddens relied on philip morris to send him stuff when he sent in the proofs of purchase. he got a -- a hat, a can opener, some shirts, the jacket that you have seen here today, and what that tells you is mr. giddens liked to redeem coupons to get stuff. what these questions ask you about on your verdict form is if roger giddens relied on statements or lack of statements from tobacco companies about addictiveness and health, that he smoked and relied on the cigarette companies' statements about addictiveness and health. somehow a jacket has become a statement about addictiveness and health? marlboro miles does not have anything about sending mr. giddens statements about anything about cigarettes. what mr. giddens did was smoke the most popular brand of cigarette for a while and it shows that he liked to get free stuff in the mail. that is the sum total of what dr. cummings is telling you is the reliance that mr. giddens had on philip morris. that he saw the ads, which we still do not know whether it had any effect on him picking his brand, and that from 1993 on, he redeemed proofs of purchase to get merchandise. that is not reliance. and there is another reason marlboro miles cannot be any sort of reliance that was the legal cause of mr. giddens' death and that is because by the time mr. giddens started participating in the marlboro miles program, he would been smoking marlboros for decades. it is not 1228 as if he started smoking marlboro cigarettes because of marlboro miles. he would been smoking those since 1959 when glenda giddens met him. did not cause him to smoke those cigarettes. and you also know from dr. burns that by 1993, it is too late for mr. giddens to quit. remember how he went through the whole development of cancer? in 1993, it was too late for mr. giddens to avoid getting lung cancer. so marlboro miles cannot be the legal cause of mr. giddens' death. now, let me talk a little bit about the question 6, which is the percentage of responsibility question. and when you think about this, i want you to think about mr. giddens' smoking. mr. giddens picked up the first cigarette. dr. cummings told you it is a learned behavior, that smokers do not like the first cigarette. they have to learn how to smoke. he made the decision to pick up the second cigarette, to finish the first pack, to start a second pack. no one forced him to smoke those cigarettes and the plaintiffs have already told you that he is partially at fault. well, i will tell you -- and he predicted it -- i'm going to tell you that if you get this far, which i do not think you will, but if you get this far, i'm asking you to put a hundred percent on mr. giddens because they were his smoking decisions and he is the one 1229 who is responsible for them. dr. burns and cummings told you that. they told you that the smoker has the responsibility to make the decision to quit. and as dr. burns said, nobody can light that cigarette for you and put it in your mouth. the smoker has to do that and has to make that decision. for question 8, which are the damage -- question 7, which are the damage questions, all the money that they are asking to be awarded here goes to mrs. giddens; mrs. giddens, who does not want to be on the plaintiff's team, who does not want anything to do with this lawsuit, who had no idea that this lawsuit was even filed. now, when you are looking at these damages questions, i want you to think about and contrast what mrs. giddens said versus what the plaintiff said. for example, the plaintiff told you that mrs. giddens was totally reliant on mr. giddens for support. what did mrs. giddens tell you? she paid all her own bills. that mr. giddens was giving her money for the mortgage on their house. either the plaintiff does not have a clear recollection of what was going on there or he is exaggerating in an effort to get you to award money. think about what he said about the contact his parents had after they were separated. in his deposition, before he got on this trial team to ask you to award money, you saw it over his head, he 1230 said that he did not think his parents ever saw each other once they separated. then he comes into this courtroom and tells you not only that his parents see each other, they were cordial, they still loved each other, and they were about to move back in together. well, then mrs. giddens took the stand, and what did she tell you? she had not had contact with her husband, they had lost contact once they separated. on few occasions she saw him. she did not ask him questions about his life because she did not want to pry. is that consistent testimony? as far as the questions that ask for specific amounts, all i can say is mr. giddens tried to get you to believe -- mr. giddens, jr. tried to get you to believe that mr. giddens was making $40,000 a year. it was not until mr. heise cross examined him that he said, oh, yeah, i have no idea what the expenses were. the 40 is gross; i have no idea. all i can tell you is if you get to these questions, look at the social security earnings reports and let those be your guides on these issues. the last question on the verdict form is about punitive damages and as mr. finch told you, that is the different burden of proof, a much higher burden of proof, clear and convincing. and i do not think you will get to this question and remember that it is a higher burden of proof 1231 and i think what this has shown, what the evidence has shown in this case is that the plaintiffs have not proved by a preponderance of the evidence that anything philip morris or rjr did or said had any effect on mr. giddens' smoking decisions and they certainly have not proved that by clear and convincing evidence. now, i told you when i stood up almost an hour ago that this case was about mr. giddens and it was about the plaintiff having to prove his case, and the plaintiff has failed to prove fundamental issues in this case. the plaintiff has failed to prove that mr. giddens died of a smoking related disease. the plaintiff has failed to prove that but for mr. giddens' addiction, he could have quit in time to avoid this injury. the plaintiff has failed to prove that mr. giddens relied on anything the tobacco companies said or did not say in making his decisions. the evidence just is not there. what this case is about is mr. giddens, who made an adult decision to smoke, who decided to continue to smoke despite the health risks and decided not to quit until he was diagnosed with cancer. i'm about to sit down, and unlike mr. finch, i do not get to come back up here. so as mr. finch, after mr. walker talks -- forgetting about mr. walker -- when mr. finch gets up here and he is saying things, keep in mind 1232 that we do not get a chance to come back up here, and think, what would ms. gallagher say about this? this is what i would -- last thing i'm going to say, is mr. giddens had the legal right to make the decisions he did about his smoking. he is the person responsible for those decisions. philip morris and r.j. reynolds have nothing to do with mr. giddens' smoking decisions. they did not affect his smoking decisions or his smoking behaviors. those were decisions that he made and those decisions should not be second-guessed in this lawsuit when the plaintiff is asking you to award money to mrs. giddens, who does not want it. thank you very much for your service here over the last week and thank you very much for your attention. we appreciate it. mr. walker: thank you, your honor. good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. it is a pleasure to be able to address you again, and i know you all did not forget about me even though i was all the way over there. i guess the first thing i wanted to do is to remind you of what you already know about me. you know that my name is john walker. you know that i'm here on behalf of r.j. reynolds tobacco company. you know that i'm going to be brief. and you know by now that once you see me on my feet, we are just about to the end, and that is going to be true now as well. 1233 i've been sitting all the way back there, but even from over there, i could see that you all have been very diligent in this case. you have been model jurors. you have been paying attention. you have been taking notes, and most importantly, i could see just from the looks on your faces that you took to heart when the judge said to keep an open mind and as you were listening to the evidence. i could tell that you were waiting to hear what the responses would be from the defendants. you heard a very good summary of the evidence from the other attorneys that have addressed you. before i begin what little i have to say, i just want to thank you again for your service. i want to thank you from me and also from my client at reynolds. i'm not really going to repeat what ms. gallagher has already said. you know by now from the evidence and from her summation that mr. giddens began smoking as an adult, knew and understand -- understood the risks of cigarette smoking the whole time that he smoked, continued to smoke cigarettes not because he could not quit but because he did not want to quit. he was not fooled by any tobacco company or any organization that was representing the tobacco company. he did not make any of his smoking decisions based on advertisements and when he was ready to quit, he quit. 1234 and that the evidence in this case is that no one really knows why he died, what the cause of his death was. you heard a lot about that already. i'm not going to go back through that in the detail that you have already heard about. what i do want to do, however -- and this relates to what you heard from ms. gallagher -- is get back to the plaintiff's burden of proof because the plaintiff has the burden of proof in this case as to every defendant, including mine. and i want to remind you of what i told you when we first started in opening statements, i guess it was last week now. i told you then that the evidence about the winston smoking, that is the product that reynolds makes, that the evidence that you would hear about winston smoking would be vague, that it would be confusing, and that it would be inconsistent. and it was exactly that. and i want to show you what you heard about the -- about mr. giddens' smoking of my client's products. may we dim the lights a bit? thank you, madam clerk. i'll come over to this side. so what did we hear? we heard from the plaintiff, himself, that mr. giddens smoked winston. that was the -- one of the first bits of information that we got. but we also heard from mr. giddens' wife of 26 years, at least when they were living together, glenda giddens, that she was not 1235 sure that he did smoke winston and then when i reminded her that she had actually been asked about it before, that her sworn testimony originally was that mr. giddens did not smoke winston. then you heard in this case that, from mr. giddens' brother, that he actually never saw mr. giddens smoking winston cigarettes and you heard -- have the next one, please -- from dr. cummings, that was the paid witness that you heard so much about, that he is not at all sure when mr. giddens smoked winston cigarettes. you may remember that because he testified that there were 28 different types of winston cigarettes, that they were modified over the years and it was -- when it was my turn to stand up and ask him questions, i said, you said there were 28 different kinds, which kind did mr. giddens smoke. and he said i cannot tell you because there is no specificity about when he smoked winston. you also heard from one of the plaintiff's own exhibits about mr. giddens possibly smoking winston in march of 1992. that was one of the documents that ms. gallagher described to you. we cannot even be sure it is an accurate document. but even if that document, plaintiff's own exhibit, were accurate, it showed that he was smoking winston on march 11th of 1992, but not before. that was a different brand. and not after; that was a different brand. 1236 and then finally, we have the next one -- or not finally. you heard from mr. giddens' sister-in-law, vera giddens, and she said well, mr. giddens' mother smoked winston, maybe he was smoking winston when he was living with her, when he ran out of his own cigarettes. and then early on in the case, i asked the plaintiff pointblank, is not it true that you would describe mr. giddens' winston smoking as occasional and he agreed with me. this is the evidence about winston. this is the evidence that has my client and me in this case today. now, i want to talk to you about why that is important, and it is important because you are going to have to decide whether or not winston smoking or mr. giddens' smoking of any product made by reynolds actually made a difference to mr. giddens and one of the people that you heard about the causation issues from, actually the only person, was dr. burns. he was here yesterday. he was the plaintiff's paid expert who you heard about, the $2 million and $3 million, he was the gentleman that came all the way here from san diego with his arm in a cast and his jacket was -- i guess it was this arm was in a cast. his jacket was falling off because of cast. the plaintiffs brought him all that way to talk to you about medical causation, about what was the cause, according to dr. burns, of mr. giddens' injuries and death. and i want to talk with you about what 1237 dr. burns had to say about that. he did not say a single thing about winston. he did not mention winston. he did not mention reynolds. he did not mention any product made by reynolds. he did not say that winston was a legal cause of lung cancer. he did not say winston was a legal cause of a stroke. he did not say winston was a legal cause of mr. giddens' death. he did not mention it at all. what are you to believe when the plaintiff that has the burden of proof in this case pays $500 an hour for dr. burns to come all the way across the country and he does not even say anything about my client's product? it is because there is simply no evidence that the winston smoking was a legal cause of any injury to mr. giddens. there is just no evidence of it. if there were, you would have heard about it and you would have heard about it from dr. burns. now madam clerk, may i have the elmo? i want to show you why this is important. what i have is a copy of the jury instructions similar to what you heard from mr. finch that you all will have at the end of the case. these are from the judge and he is given us a preview of what the instructions will be. so i want to show you why this is important. all right, up at the beginning -- and i'm going to get to the verdict form in a moment. one of the judge's instructions will be that an issue for your decision on both 1238 plaintiff's negligence and strict liability claims against the defendants is -- this is important -- as to each defendant, whether smoking cigarettes manufactured by that defendant was a legal cause of roger giddens, sr.'s death. and then on the page right before that, because some of you might have been wondering before this case, what on earth is legal cause, you are going to get an instruction that says right at the top, legal cause defined. you will not be able to miss it. and it is explained, you will get from the judge about what legal cause is. the key language is exactly the language that ms. gallagher already showed you. it is right in the middle of the paragraph. but for. in order to be a legal cause of injury, the smoking, or whatever it is that the plaintiff is saying is the legal cause, must produce or contribute substantially to producing such injury or damages so it can reasonably be said that but for such wrongful conduct, the injury or damage would not have occurred. but for. and i just want to circle another couple of key language, key words, contributes substantially. i have a feeling that when mr. finch stands up, he is going to read from you -- read to you from the rest of this and if he does, he is going to read you this part at the bottom, contributes substantially. they are the same words. they all mean "but for". now, this is the verdict form that you all have a 1239 copy of. i'm not going to say a lot about the first page because ms. gallagher has already addressed it and she is already let you know that your answers on page 1 should be no. i do want to say this, though. at the bottom of the page, you are going to be told that if your answer to question 2 is no, and it is the same for question 1, please do not answer the remaining questions. please sign and date this verdict form and return it to the courtroom. if you answer no to either of the first questions, you come to a screeching halt on the first page and your service will be completed after you turn in the verdict form. but because it is my job to talk to you about the rest of the verdict form, i do want to show you the second page. this is the page where you will have to decide whether cigarettes made either by my client or by philip morris were a legal cause of mr. giddens' death. this is the question that relates to the instruction that i just read. the answer, as you have already heard from ms. gallagher, should be no. because i represent reynolds and i wanted to check the no box for reynolds here and we will be asking you to check no to question number 3 because given the confusing, inconsistent, and vague evidence in this case, dr. burns' failure even to address this issue, and the plaintiff's failure to put in evidence on this issue, how could you or anyone else determine that mr. giddens' winston 1240 smoking was a "but for" cause of his death? how could anyone determine that it was even a substantial contributing cause when we do not even know how much winston cigarettes he smoked or for how long he smoked them? can we please switch back to the power point? now, the next thing i want to talk with you about relates to all of the advertising evidence that you heard. you were shown some exhibits about winston ads and the question that you are going to have to decide, i'm going to show you in a minute on the verdict form, is whether or not any of the ads that the plaintiff showed you or dr. cummings showed you or that you heard at all in this trial has anything at all to do with mr. giddens. did he rely on something that he heard or did not hear from my client or from philip morris? i want to show you what the evidence was about whether or not mr. giddens relied on something from reynolds. these three bullet points are from the plaintiff's own testimony in response to my questions on cross examination. he told you in no uncertain terms that mr. giddens never mentioned reynolds, that he never discussed reynolds ads with the plaintiff, and that the plaintiff said he never heard mr. giddens ever say that he relied on anything he got or did not get from reynolds. that is the plaintiff in this case. the same person who is 1241 come to court asking for an award of money damages told you, once he was asked, that his father never said he was relying on reynolds. there is simply no proof at all in this case that mr. giddens relied on anything he got or did not get from reynolds. now, also at the beginning of the case, i said as you have heard from ms. gallagher that this case is only about one smoker. it is only about roger giddens, sr., but i predicted in a case like this you would hear a lot of evidence that really was not about mr. giddens at all. i predicted that you would hear evidence that was really a broad-based attack on all cigarettes and all cigarette companies and that some of the experts that you would hear from, like dr. cummings, we talked about him in opening, would bring you the same generic presentation that he gives every jury when he is paid to give it and that it would not have anything to do with mr. giddens. and that is exactly what you saw in this case. can we have the next slide, please? you should be asking yourself why, in a case about roger giddens, sr., did the plaintiffs, and specifically dr. cummings, bring you this evidence about the frank statement that there is no evidence mr. giddens saw and that ran on one day in newspapers that mr. giddens did not read. why did the plaintiff show you the flintstones? remember, i 1242 asked dr. cummings about that and he agreed with me that he is got 600 or so tv ads he had to choose from, that he read the depositions and he saw that there was no evidence that mr. giddens ever watched the flintstones but there was evidence that he looked at other shows. nevertheless, dr. cummings brought you the same flintstone clip that he uses in every case because it is a generic presentation and it is not about roger giddens. it never was. it never has been, for dr. cummings. why did they show you all those documents from the 1960s and 1970s about pre-smokers and learning smokers and people who were just beginning to smoke at a time period when roger giddens, sr. was in his 30s and had been smoking for 10 or 15 years by that point? why did they bring you those ads from winston and dr. cummings said they were about a snowy white filter. remember? and then i pulled them back and put them on the elmo and we actually looked at them. there was nothing in them about snowy white filter. they were ads about taste and favor. there was no health message there. why did he talk about an article from the new york times entitled can we have an open debate about smoking? the new york times? mr. giddens was not reading the new york times. he was reading the st. augustine paper that dr. cummings did not even look at. why did you see the open 1243 debate article from the new york times? because that is in dr. cummings' generic presentation and every jury that hears from dr. cummings hears about that article. then you saw a snippet -- i do not know, maybe it was 20 seconds long -- of some congressional testimony from 1994. that was the one where there were a number of different tobacco heads in the line and if you blinked you missed it because it was awfully quick and when the executives started standing up, the second executive in the line was the one from my client, reynolds, and he did not say that cigarette smoking was not addictive. what he started to say was that cigarette smoking does not meet the classic definition, and he got cut off. he started to say there is no intoxication, which all the witnesses have conceded, and he got cut off and they moved on. and then when i cross examined dr. cummings, i said dr. cummings, you know good and well that those hearings were a lot longer than that 20 second clip you showed and you know that the reynolds executive had a lot more to say than that little clip that you showed. he said yeah, he knew that. why did you only see that little clip? because that is what is in dr. cummings' generic presentation that every jury that hears from dr. cummings hears regardless, regardless of whether it fits the facts of the case. none of this evidence on this screen was about 1244 mr. giddens, none of it. but every question that you have to answer on the verdict form is about roger giddens and at the end of the day, if plaintiff simply has not proved their case about roger giddens. so we have just talked about the evidence of reliance and how this generic evidence does not apply to mr. giddens. i want to go back to the verdict form, if i might. can i have the elmo once again? this is one of the instructions that you are going to get. remember, i just said the questions on the verdict form are not about the new york times and all that. they are about roger giddens. what is the judge going to tell you? the issue for your decision on this claim, this is the next one, is whether roger giddens, sr. relied to his detriment on the concealment or omission of material information concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes, and if so, whether such reliance was a legal cause of his death. there is that word again, legal cause, that we talked about earlier. a material fact is one that is of such importance that roger giddens, sr. would not have acted as he did but for the -- there is that "but for" term again -- but for the defendants' concealment or omission. the next claim, and we are going to look at these together on the verdict form in just a moment, asks the very 1245 same question. the issue for your decision on this claim is about roger giddens, whether he relied and whether reliance by roger giddens -- i'm sorry, whether reliance was a legal cause of his death. we just went over question number 3. question number 4, please state as to each defendant whether roger giddens, sr. relied to his detriment on the defendants' concealment or omission of material information concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes and if so, whether such reliance was a legal cause of his death. i showed you the slide where the plaintiff, himself, admitted that his own father never said he relied. your answer to question number 4 should be no. your answer to question number 5, same question, as to each -- similar issues as to each defendant, roger giddens, sr., did he rely, was there legal causation? the answer should be no. now, ms. gallagher has already talked about some of the other questions. since i'm on this page, i'm just going to kind of go through till i get to the next one i want to talk about. she told you, and i agree, that the evidence in this case supports a finding of one hundred percent responsibility on the very first line. the only thing i'm going to add to that, and i highlighted it to remind me, is that you should write zero on the second line for reynolds. 1246 number 7 is the question about damages that ms. gallagher already discussed with you. and then you have questions 8 and 9 that you will only answer if you answered yes to two of the questions earlier where we put a no. the last question on the verdict form relates to punitive damages and that is what i want to talk about next. if you answered yes to questions 4 or 5 as to a defendant, please state whether you find by clear and convincing evidence that punitive damages are warranted against that defendant under the circumstances of this case. you heard from ms. gallagher that that answer should be a no. i'm going to put a no for reynolds as well, as i believe you should. now, before i leave these instructions, i want to show you a couple of the instructions about punitive damages. i cannot make it any bigger without the words going off the side so i hope this is at least a little bit legible. i know it is a long way away. but punitive damages, you will hear from the judge, are in addition to compensatory damages. that means if you get to punitive damages, and i do not think that you should -- none of us on this side of the room think you should get anywhere near this question -- but if you do, you need to understand that this -- this is money that the plaintiff is asking for over and above full compensation. full compensation; punitive 1247 damages would be on top of that. down near the bottom, punitive damages are warranted if you find that plaintiff has proved by clear and convincing evidence that -- and the conduct that you are looking at is conduct causing roger giddens, sr.'s injuries and death. and once again, every question on the verdict form is about roger giddens, sr. and the question of legal cause. last instruction i want to highlight is what is clear and convincing evidence, because it is going to be really important, especially when you think about the evidence we looked at for winston. clear and convincing evidence is evidence that is more compelling and persuasive. it is evidence that is precise, explicit, lacking in confusion, and of such weight that it produces a firm belief or conviction without hesitation about the matter at issue. and once again, there has to be a substantial legal cause. may i have the power point again, please? now, as i've just shown you, the basics of punitive damages are what are on this slide. they can only be even considered for conduct that legally caused mr. giddens' death. i said at the outset, and i'll say it again, if there is any statement that the evidence shows that mr. giddens actually saw or heard or read from a defendant, from reynolds, that is fair game. but the evidence in this 1248 case that relates to reynolds is not fair game because it has nothing to do with mr. giddens and had no effect on mr. giddens. punitive damages, as you heard, are awarded only to the plaintiff, mr. giddens, jr., on behalf of the estate and his mother. and as i -- as we saw in the jury instructions, punitive damages are in addition to full compensation. now, i've already tried to explain to you that i do not think you have seen any evidence in this case of evidence -- i'm sorry, of conduct that actually affected mr. giddens that merits punishment. but you did hear some evidence in this case about what kind of company r.j. reynolds tobacco was over the years. and i said at the outset that tobacco companies now and for a long, long time have faced a lot of very harsh criticism about their business practices, but you have a unique opportunity in this trial to hear a little bit more about what the real story is. and here's some of what you have heard that i will submit to you is not punishable conduct. first, you heard that reynolds and other companies funded research by nobel prize winning scientists. you heard that scientists at reynolds like dr. rodgman, he was the one that dr. cummings said was a good scientist, scientists like dr. rodgman and others at reynolds published peer reviewed articles. this is a case about concealment, 1249 according to the plaintiffs. you have already heard what was out there in the public and you heard through my cross of dr. cummings that reynolds was actually doing research and publishing about it. next you heard about the american tobacco company. that is one of the companies that has been merged into r.j. reynolds and you heard about the big document, remember dr. cummings was trying to -- i asked him why it was called a green monster and he says because it is green. because it is a monster, it contains over 6,000 articles, abstracts of articles about smoking and health issues. it is one of the documents that the surgeon general relied on in creating the 1964 surgeon general's report. you heard evidence that reynolds and other companies were thanked by the surgeon general for providing that, that literature. next, you heard, as i just mentioned, about good scientists at reynolds like dr. rodgman who were advancing the science of trying to find out what is in cigarette smoke. for a long time, no one knew what was in cigarette smoke. reynolds' scientists invented a lot of the technology that was used to answer some of those questions and, as i mentioned, published about it. the next one, you heard evidence just yesterday, i think, that the companies, including reynolds, actually reduced tar levels over time. that was something that the 1250 public health community was asking for and that is something that the companies were able to do over time. next, you heard from dr. cummings about the technology that reynolds developed to heat and not burn tobacco in cigarettes and dr. cummings called that a responsible effort on reynolds' part. ladies and gentlemen, this is not punishable conduct. it just is not and the things that they say we should be punished for, had no effect on mr. giddens. now, there are a couple of other things that i think should not be punished, and many of us, anyone who is ever worked in a company that employed other human beings has probably worked in a company where there were other people who have thoughts and ideas and opinions that we would never want to be representative of the company where we work. the fact of the matter is reynolds should not be punished for the opinions of some of its employees. you heard a lot about dr. teague and one of the very first documents you saw from dr. teague was something that he wrote when he was 25 years old and dr. cummings said he was a couple years out of school. companies should not be punished for some of the stupid things even their more senior employees might have to say in some documents. companies should not be punished for failing to publicize risks about cigarette smoking that were 1251 already being publicized in the press and in the media, and i want to be specific in my example about that. this is just one of a number of examples you heard about the environment in which reynolds and the other companies were making decisions. daniel horn was from the united states national clearinghouse on smoking and health. this is what he said in 1968. you could stand on a rooftop and shout, "smoking the dangerous," at the top of your lungs and you would not be telling anyone anything they did not already know. this is not something that someone in the government said in 2013 or 2010. this is 1968. now, what you are being asked to do in this case is to punish reynolds for not saying something, for not talking about the health risks of cigarettes, even though the public health community at the time was saying that you would not be telling anyone anything they did not already know. and that is especially true for mr. giddens, because of all the evidence you heard in this case that ms. gallagher talked about and i will not review again, that mr. giddens, himself, knew and understood the risks the whole time that he smoked. for that reason, i'll be asking you to reject the plaintiff's request for money damages in this case. i'm going to be asking you to check no to every question for reynolds. and frankly, it is the same is true for philip morris. the plaintiff just does not have the evidence in 1252 this case to back up their request for money damages. now, at the end of the day you are going to begin your deliberations and maybe i spent a lot of time telling you what this case is not about. in openings i said it is not about sympathy, it is not about this, it is not about that, it is not about generic issues. just as ms. gallagher said, it is issues about roger giddens. it is about the adult choice he made to started smoking, the adult choices he made every single day when he lit a cigarette to continue smoking, and the adult choice that he made in the '50s, '60s, '70s and beyond not to quit smoking or even try. when he got serious about quitting, he quit. that is not a basis for awarding money damages to that smoker's son or even his wife that he was separated from. for all of those reasons, i'll be asking you to return a verdict in favor of r.j. reynolds -- in fact, in favor of both of the defendants. i want to say thanks, again, for your patience. i have tried as best as i know how to summarize the evidence and be brief, like i said i would be. and i'll tell you as you heard from others that we are in your hands. we are asking you to apply the law, not some modern standard or i think there was a mention of a biblical standard. the standard you apply of the law that you get from judge magnuson, we are comfortable with that. we are comfortable plaintiff rebuttal closing argument 1253 with you applying that law to these facts. we are asking for a verdict in favor of reynolds. and with that, i'm going to go back to my corner. thank you.