closing argument mr. reilly: thank you, your honor. good morning, everybody. the jury: good morning. mr. reilly: i would like to begin my closing argument in much the same way that mr. patacca did, and that is, you know, at the beginning of this case when you were being selected we talked about a jury system being a backbone of our legal system, right? and we talked about how important it was to pick fair and impartial jurors, and then we talked about what your responsibility was to receive the evidence and then to receive the law from the court. and in order for the system to really work well, you guys have to be attentive throughout the trial. now, i tried very hard not to look at you during the course of the trial, because you have your job to do and i think that if i look at you, i'm sort of intruding on your space, so i do not do that very often. but every time i occasionally looked over here, i saw you guys were paying close attention, taking notes. so you have done exactly, exactly what we -- all the parties, all the lawyers, the judge, everybody hopes that you will do to make this system work. you did it. so on behalf of dana, melody, myself, philip morris, all the lawyers, all the parties, we thank you for your work in this case. it is not quite over yet. you still have to do the ultimate task that we ask you to do, and that is to resolve this civil dispute. but in terms of what we hope jurors will do, you guys have done it, okay? now, you remember in my -- the very beginning of my opening statement -- and i'm not so high tech. i'm just a -- going to use boards. you know, i put this board up, and i said you can distill this case -- and that is pretty lopsided. let us see if i cannot get that better. i think i have to extend the whole leg. sorry. is that better? a juror: uh-huh. mr. reilly: now we are not at sea. okay. remember i said this case could be distilled down into three words. control. who was in control of mr. gil de rubio's lifestyle decisions, particularly in this case, his decision to smoke? and now, having heard the evidence in the case, you know that his -- it was not a single decision; it was multiple decisions. it was a decision to begin smoking in the first place; a decision to quit smoking -- remember he quit smoking -- everybody's in agreement he quit smoking in 1951; his decision to not smoke for another dozen years; and then his decision to begin smoking again in 1963 as a 40-year-old adult. and then you know he made a decision to continue to smoke and then he made a decision to quit smoking on thanksgiving in 1978. so he made a series of decisions in connection with his smoking, right? who was in control of those decisions? and i think in order to look at that issue in its entirety, you have to look at how mr. gil de rubio lived his life as a whole. causation. what was the cause of mr. gil de rubio's cancer and death? because there is no question he had cancer and that he died. and you now know what the issues are in connection with whether he had a cancer that started in his lung. did they actually prove he had a cancer that started in his lung? did mr. gil de rubio -- if he had a cancer that started in his lung, was it caused by smoking? there is no claim that if the cancer did not start in his lung that it was caused by smoking, no claim at all. so did they prove that mr. gil de rubio's cancer was actually one that started in his lung, was caused by smoking? and i'll show you a little more that they have to prove in just a minute. and remember i said once you -- once you know the answer to these first two questions, then you can determine -- you can do your ultimate job, the one we have asked you to come here and do, and that is to determine who, who, if anybody, has responsibility in this case. i also said, look, you will not see those three words anywhere on the verdict form. these are distillations, right? these are distillations. so now let me show you the verdict form. and i'm going to show you -- we are still a little at sea here. i apologize. better. not perfect. cannot hang a picture. so what is the verdict form going to look like? well, here are the first two questions that are going to appear on the verdict form in this case. and you can see the first one's pretty straightforward: did raymond gil de rubio have a primary lung cancer? the second one is actually several questions all at once, so let me just read it straight through and then i'll break it up for you. was raymond gil de rubio addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine manufactured by philip morris usa, and, if so, was such addiction a legal cause of his lung cancer and death? so that is really several questions. the first one is, was raymond gil de rubio addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine manufactured by philip morris usa? you could put a period right there, because that is a question you guys have to answer. depending upon how you answer that question, you have to answer the next question, and that is: and, if so, was such addiction a legal cause -- and you have not even heard the definition of legal cause yet; i told you there is legalese in this case -- a legal cause of his lung cancer and his death? now, why do they -- why does this question ask lung cancer? because it assumes that if you answer no to this question, the case is over. you just stop. so you do not come to question number 2. if -- only if you answer yes to this question do you go to this question. and in that case you have already decided whether it is a primary lung cancer or not. so there is no presumption here that this is a lung cancer. the court's not -- the instruction comes from the court. he is not trying to tell you, hey, this is already decided. that is for you to decide. so the issues you have to decide, all in this question, are, first of all, was mr. gil de rubio addicted? and only if he was addicted do you go on and say, was addiction a legal cause of his lung cancer and death? well, okay. let us get to the really hard part. what does legal cause mean? and this is a lot of legal language. but you are going to get this instruction from the court. addiction is a legal cause of loss -- and you can just substitute there cancer, death, whatever you want to put -- addiction is a legal cause of cancer if it directly and in natural and continuous sequence produces or contributes substantially -- in other words, it is the reason why -- or it is a substantial reason why such a loss -- to producing such loss so that it can reasonably be said that, how substantial, how producing is it, so that it can reasonably be said that but for the addiction, in other words, without the addiction, the cancer would not have occurred, the death would not have occurred. now, that is kind of a hard concept. law students go to school for three years and try to figure that out. lawyers practice law all their lives and try to figure that out. and we give it to you. but you cannot ignore it. you cannot ignore it. you receive the law from the court and you have to apply it. so what you have to do as part of your job in this case is, if you get to this question, only if you get to this question, you have to decide whether or not addiction -- i want to go back to it. if you decide that mr. gil de rubio was addicted, you have to decide whether his addiction was so strong that it was either the producing reason why he smoked and developed cancer or it was such a substantial reason why he continued to smoke that without it, without addiction, he would not have smoked and he would not have gotten cancer and he would not have died. that is what that means. that is the burden the plaintiffs have in the case, if you get this far. if you get this far. now, that is what control is all about. you can condense all of that into that single word "control," because it is all about who was in control of mr. gil de rubio's decisions about beginning to smoke, continuing to smoke, quitting smoking, starting again, quitting again. all right. there is a second part to that, legal cause. it is even more legalese. it basically says that addiction does not have to be the only substantial cause; there could be other causes that go along with it. but this really does not reduce the obligation that the plaintiffs have of establishing that addiction is so substantial a cause that without it mr. gil de rubio would not have developed his cancer and would not have died. that is a job you guys have to perform. all right. so where do the answers to these questions -- where do we find the answers and the evidence? and that takes me back, right back to where i started with you guys at the very beginning of this case in my opening statement. let me use this one so i have a little more room. that is a little better. in order to know the answer to who is in control, you have got to know how mr. gil de rubio lived his life, right? i mean, that is the way you make that decision, you know how he lived his life. and mr. patacca has spoken to you for about an hour now, and how much do you know -- how much have you been reminded of what you heard about how mr. gil de rubio lived his life? but i've put my timeline back up, and i just want to walk through it again quickly -- i guess it cannot be done totally quickly, but quickly -- just to remind you of what the evidence turned out to be. because this is mr. gil de rubio's life story. you remember he was born in puerto rico in 1923. shortly after he was born, his whole family -- he is got -- he was one of five siblings, right? and in this case you heard from his sister patti christian. that was one of the -- and i have to tell you, you guys suffered through a lot videotaped depositions. you suffered through a lot of read depositions. i know -- i've been practicing law a very long time, and -- longer than some of you have been alive -- and i know how hard that is, to pay attention to that, to get out of it -- i mean, the depositions are not even really structured in a way that gets the information to you succinctly and effectively, but -- but you hung in there and i saw you paying attention and taking notes. that is all we can ask you to do. but you heard from patti christian. you know that this was not a family that smoked. you know that within a few years of moving here to the united states mr. gil de rubio's mother died so he was raised in combination by his father and his grandmother. you know that he reported late in life that he had his first cigarette when he was 12 years old. and that is the sum total of what we know about his smoking until 1946. the sum total. we do not know whether he ever smoked another cigarette until 1946. we do not know what he smoked. we know that, as patti said, she never saw her brother smoke. never saw her brother smoke. we know that -- and, as i said, we know that in that family people did not smoke. so when did mr. gil de rubio have his next cigarette? do not know. why did he have that first cigarette? do not know. we know that mr. gil de rubio served in the army from 1940 to 1942. may he have smoked there? we know a lot of people smoked in the military. that was the time when world war i was beginning. he may have smoked. we do not know. was there any evidence that philip morris was involved in any way in his first cigarette or if he smoked in the army? none. there is no evidence. there is no claim that philip morris had anything to do with any smoking he may have done in the '40s. when do we catch up with mr. gil de rubio and know that he is made the decision to actually be a smoker? well, the first time that occurs -- and you can see on this timeline that we have colored that in, when we know he is smoking, in a different color green, right? so we know -- you saw his cousin, manuel betancourt, testify by videotape. and you know that manuel said, i saw my cousin in new york city at a restaurant. had not seen him in a long time. and you know he said that, when i saw him then he was a taxicab driver. he drove at night. that is when he made the money. and you know he said, it is a stressful job, and he was a smoker. now, he did not remember exactly how much he smoked. he said he was a regular smoker. he did not know what he smoked, but he did say, he is a smoker. so we know that at some point in his life mr. gil de rubio began smoking and was a smoker by the time he was 23 -- 23 years old. that, we know. how long does he smoke? well, we actually know that, right? we know that because it is agreed upon, it was stipulated to, and his honor read the stipulation. he smokes until he moves in -- now, i should back up a step. we also know that he was married. he married his first wife, lucy. we do not have the date of the marriage, but we know he is married when he meets his cousin manuel betancourt. and we know that in 1951 that marriage is on the rocks. he moves out of his -- wherever he is living with lucy. he needs a place to stay, and he goes to stay with his sister patti christian. and you heard her testimony. it was read to you. and you heard her say, in my house you could not smoke. ray came. he was not a smoker. and it is stipulated, no debate about it, that from the moment he is with his sister in 1951 he is a nonsmoker. now, how did mr. gil de rubio decide to become a nonsmoker? we do not know. what had he been smoking before he quit smoking? we do not know. did mr. gil de rubio ever say to anybody, i had any difficulty quitting, it was hard for me i had to try a hundred times? no. there is no such evidence in this case. no such evidence in this case. what we know is that mr. gil de rubio smoked. we know he was a smoker from 1946 until he quit in 1951. that is what we know. he made a decision in 1951 to quit smoking, and he did. now, from their expert -- you may remember the first live expert that they brought to this trial, a dr. proctor. remember, he was the professor from stanford who was the professor of the history of science. he had that kind of odd collar on his shirt, that narrow collar? and remember he said, well, back here in 1950 there were some scientific articles being published that began to connect, on a scientific basis, smoking and lung cancer. remember, the very first studies were statistical studies looking at who got cancer more often, smokers or nonsmokers. and dr. proctor told you all that, well, there were a lot of folks who -- this got a lot of media coverage. and when i asked him on cross-examination were there tens of millions of american men who were smokers at the time who quit as a result of seeing this news, as a result of seeing this news, he said, yeah, there were tens of millions of american men who quit as a result of seeing this news. now, we know that mr. gil de rubio was smart. we know he read the paper. we know he watched the news. is that why mr. gil de rubio quit smoking in 1951? perhaps. i do not know. we do not know for sure. does it make sense? is it consistent with what dr. proctor said about tens of millions of american men at that moment? it is consistent. i do not know. what we do know is that he stays quit for 12 years, for a dozen years. stipulated to. no debate. what else happens in 1951? well, we know that mr. gil de rubio got a job working for the commonwealth of puerto rico, a good government job, but it makes him move to chicago. we know that while he is in chicago he attends the university of chicago, a very prestigious and difficult school. now, he does not graduate from there, but he is smart enough to get in and he is smart enough to stay in classes. so is mr. gil de rubio a smart guy? no question about it. no debate. nobody questioned it. nobody disputed that. all right. let us go to -- well, you know what, let us go to 1954, because in his closing argument mr. patacca put up -- remember he showed you the frank statement and he talked about the frank statement again? and you remember i talked to dr. proctor about that frank statement. i said, well, dr. proctor, what is the whole title? it is not just a frank statement. it is a frank statement to smokers, right? this is a targeted message. this is 1954, a targeted message. he said, oh, yeah, it is a targeted message. who is it to? it is to smokers. it is to smokers. i said, well, if you are not a smoker -- if you are not a smoker in this time frame, what is the probability that you pay any attention to the frank statement? he said, well, it is pretty low, pretty doggone low, because it is not to you. makes sense, right? you could think of a thousand products. there can be an ad in the paper or info, a notice in the paper. if you are not one, what is the likelihood you are going to pay attention to it? and that is what dr. proctor said. well, mr. patacca spent the first 20, 25 minutes of his closing argument talking about things that the cigarette companies, tobacco industry, did in the '50s and the early '60s. what do they have to do with this case? this case is not about the public at large. this case is not about behavior in general. this case is about raymond gil de rubio's decisions to begin smoking, continue smoking, quit smoking, resume smoking. this is a case about the decisions of raymond gil de rubio, his life. and what is going on in raymond gil de rubio's life from 1951 to the fall of 1963? he is a nonsmoker. that is a fact. that is an undisputed fact. he is a nonsmoker. 1956, mr. gil de rubio moves back from chicago. he is divorced from lucy. he is still working for the commonwealth of puerto rico. you remember that he moves into an apartment building owned by his dad. living in that same apartment building is hilda colon gil de rubio. you saw her on video. lovely lady. you remember that they dated for about six months and then they married. raymond's second marriage. now, you remember she described their lives. she said, you know, ray and i, we did not smoke. we did not drink. we did not dance. we did not go to nightclubs. we were home people. occasionally we would go to movies, but generally we stayed at home. and what do they do right after they get married? well, they start to have children. that is the kind of life that they had. within a year they have raymond, jr.; within two more years -- 1957 they have raymond, jr.; in two years they have anthony, their second child. two boys. and what happens with his job? now, you know that hilda colon gil de rubio was from puerto rico. she lived there, i think she said, until she was about ten years old. so he gets an opportunity to go down to puerto rico as part of his job. it is like going home for her. and she said he could have stayed in puerto rico for as long as he wanted. as long as he wanted. but now we see change. now we see change. there is going to be -- this is -- this is going to be a point in mr. gil de rubio's life when he starts to make changes in how he lives. and they are going to be become dramatic. and that is why i say you have to look at all the decisions that mr. gil de rubio made his entire life path. the first decision he makes -- and, by the way, they have their third child, ron, born in 1961. so now they have three small boys. now, mrs. gil de rubio -- i'm sorry, mrs. hilda colon gil de rubio is a housewife. she does not work outside of the home. with three little boys she is got plenty of work, but she does not work outside the home. that is the nature of her life. in 1961 raymond says, you know what, i'm not staying here in puerto rico. i'm moving back to new york city. and that is what he does. still working for the commonwealth, he moves back to new york city. and he begins to go out at night on his own. how do we know? because he goes to a joint dinner of the commonwealth of puerto rico and the medical -- the new york medical college where mrs. -- then she is elsie jackson -- goes because she has an interest in -- i think she said she was interested in a doctor who was at that school. so they go to this dinner dance, do not know each other. they meet each other and they talk, they dance. they become at least interested enough to take, i think she said, the d train home, home to her car. and then she said they went -- in her car they went one place or another. ultimately she ends up taking mr. gil de rubio home to his father's house. home to his father's house. now, why he goes to his father's house i have no idea, because you heard from hilda that he is still living at home at the time. how does she know? because sometime later he comes home and he announces that he is separating from her, he is found a new woman that he is interested in and he is going to be with that woman. he leaves and never returns. now, i was interested in -- and this is -look, mr. patacca could get back up here. he has a chance to get back up here again. and in his opening -- in the opening part of his closing argument he said i could not wait to tell you that mr. gil de rubio left that house and he never returned, when i told you that in my opening statement. in fact, ladies and gentlemen, this is just mr. gil de rubio's life. all i'm doing is telling you how he lived. this is not ken reilly passing judgment on how mr. gil de rubio lived his life. now, mr. patacca just got up and told you what a great dad he was. you know, this is not about -i mean, he never sees two of his sons ever again. so this is not -- to me, anyway, this case is not about whether or not mr. gil de rubio's a great dad or not. he sees -- the one son he sees, he does not see him for seven years, and then he sees him for a year or two because hilda cannot handle him. and after about a year and a half, he goes back to live with hilda and then he sees his dad again about four years later for a couple months. so to me this case is not about whether mr. gil de rubio's a great dad. but that is the facts. that is the facts. am i in a rush to tell you that? absolutely not. it is just part of the timeline. now, there is going to be a huge change in how mr. gil de rubio lives his life. he is going to make a whole series of decisions about how different his life is going to be from what it was in -- from his life with hilda. and here are these two different lives, of which smoking is just a piece. smoking is just a piece. but mr. gil de rubio is 40 years old. he is a grown man. he is in the middle of his life. as it turns out, he is more than in the middle of his life, right? but he is clearly in midlife. maybe this is a midlife crisis, i do not know. but he is going to make a dramatic change and he is going to move in the direction of, frankly, much greater excitement, much greater pleasure and much greater risk, no doubt about it. what is the change? well, here's the change. life with hilda from 1956 to 1963 involves no smoking, drinking or dancing. he is got three young boys. they are all under the age of seven. three boys under the age of seven. he is got a steady, modest-paying job working for the commonwealth of puerto rico. his trips are to the movies, and mostly there are family nights at home. and you remember that he has his mother-in-law living with him. now, that is a pretty domestic-oriented, small family life, small children family life. now, he meets elsie and becomes interested in a whole different kind of life, a whole different kind of life, of which smoking is a part. with elsie, right out of the box there is going to be smoking, drinking, dancing, no small children. shortly he is going to borrow money from his father, risk. he is going to borrow money from his father and he is going to buy a travel agency. he is never been self-employed before in his life. and this travel agency is going to be in a very dangerous part of town. he is going to carry a sidearm to work. he is going to have a shotgun by the safe. this is a big -- this is -- i do not know how many of you have jobs where you carry a sidearm to work and you have a shotgun by your safe, but that is the nature of -- you know, but there is -there is an opportunity to do much better than at the commonwealth. there is going to be travel. there is going to be travel around the world. in their case in chief and their evidence they showed you pictures of mr. and mrs. gil de rubio in colom— in colombia, as i recall. and they told you about -- mrs. gil de rubio told you about trips to spain, france and all around, many trips to puerto rico, a lot of traveling, a much more exciting life. much more exciting life. they are going to throw -- they are going to have homes where you can throw parties and have a bar in your house, and they are going to own two or three boats and they are going to have a vacation home on long island. much more pleasure, much more excitement, and smoking's part of it. these are two pictures that they put in evidence. and this is a -- this is a lovely evening on the town, fur coats and wine and -- do you see hilda colon in this picture? some years later, this is another dinner -- i do not know exactly what it is. they did not describe it exactly. but, you know, there is -- there is alcohol, there is cigarettes. it is a much different life, a much different life. now -- smoking as part of it. there is conflicting testimony as to whether when they meet mrs. gil de rubio is a smoker already. her son -- her son harold says, yes, my mother was a smoker before she met mr. gil de rubio. does it really matter? it does not really matter, because together they smoke. and, yes, she is a public health nurse. she is got her master's in public health. she is ultimately going to be an associate professor of public health at the medical school of new york -- new york medical school -medical college. sorry. it is 1963. does she know the health risks of smoking? remember i asked their expert, dr. proctor, will people who have nursing degrees in public health in 1963 -- will they have the knowledge and belief that smoking causes lung cancer? he said, oh, sure. sure. of course. you remember -- well, so here is their lives. and smoking together is part of it. now, mrs. gil de rubio said, i did not smoke until i met him, and together we smoked. together we smoked. all right. that is okay. you remember -- you remember the surgeon general's report comes out in january of 1964. this is -- this is the fall of '63. in january, a couple months later, it comes out -- the surgeon general comes out -- that is terrible english. a couple months later the surgeon general's report is published. there is a big news coverage. you saw harry reasoner just yesterday, that eye on america cbs report. that thing's a half an hour long. i did not show it to you for half an hour. it has the surgeon general talking; it has a whole bunch of stuff. but i just showed you -- actually, dana showed you just the, really, core part of it, where harry reasoner looks right at you, the american public, and he says, okay, it is up to you now. nobody here in america is going to tell you you cannot smoke. nobody's going to tell you it is good for you. it causes cancer, and filters are not going to keep you from getting cancer. and he looked right at -- you could say he looked right at these two people, looked them right in the eye, and said, there. that is it. now, did mr. gil de rubio, when he is 40 years old -- he is smart. he is educated. he is -- he is someone that pays attention. you remember you also heard from diana hearon. that is the daughter of elsie. and she meets mr. gil de rubio for the first time in the fall of 1963. and she is smoking. she is beginning to smoke. and she said her mother did not want her to smoke. she told her several times, do not smoke. mr. gil de rubio talks to her about smoking. she remembers -- okay, so he said to you do not get hooked? i do not remember that word, but that is what i remember the feeling was. he was using himself as an example. i'm a long-time smoker, and he said, do not get started. do not start. and you remember i asked their expert, dr. proctor -- we were talking about -- we were talking about how you know from what they say to other people whether somebody knows or does not know, believes or does not believe about the health risks of smoking, about the potential for -- whether you call it addiction, habituation or just plain hard to quit, how you tell whether somebody believes it themselves by what they say to other people. and i said, for example, if someone were to say, i do not believe that smoking is dangerous, or if they were to say, i do not believe that you can get hooked on cigarettes, that would indicate a level of knowledge and a level of belief, right? yes. meaning it would indicate that you did not know or you did not believe. but if, on the other hand, if you were to advise someone who is smoking, i think you should not smoke because you can get hooked on it, it is bad for you, that would indicate a different level of awareness and belief, right? yes. so here you are. here's diana hearon, her daughter, saying, when i first meet mr. gil de rubio in 1963 -- that is when he is starting to smoke again after not having smoked for a dozen years. he is starting to smoke and has started an overall change in his life-style. he and elsie are beginning to smoke at this moment together, a public health nurse. who is in control? who is making this decision? now, let me ask you this. is he smoking philip-morris-manufactured cigarettes? you know he is not. you know that it is undisputed in this case. and mr. -- mr. patacca showed you a couple of ads from the '50s for marlboros. was mr. gil de rubio smoking marlboros in the '50s? was he responding to ads for marlboros in the '50s? you know he is not. it is stipulated. he was not smoking in the '50s. is there any evidence in this case that mr. gil de rubio started smoking in 1963 because of a marlboro ad? no. the evidence in this case is that mr. gil de rubio started smoking something else entirely. harold jackson said he started smoking lucky strikes. mrs. gil de rubio thought it might have been salems. whatever it is, it is not marlboros. now, did anybody in this case say mr. gil de rubio then began smoking marlboros because of an ad for marlboros? nope, nobody did. in fact, what they said was that mr. gil de rubio began smoking what everybody in mrs. gil de rubio's family was smoking, which was marlboros. remember, they were going to the card games at night and everybody on her family's side was smoking marlboros. and so -- now, when does he start smoking marlboros? is it 1964, as mrs. gil de rubio said, or was it 1966, when her son harold said? i do not know if it really matters. the bottom line is nobody said it was because of something that philip morris ever said or failed to say about the health risks of smoking. nobody ever said that in this case. nobody ever said that mr. gil de rubio ever smoked a marlboro cigarette because of an ad. as a matter of fact, the only testimony in this whole case about ads, marlboro ads, was when harold said -- elsie's son said -- or maybe it was diana, i forget -- said that they made fun of the marlboro ads. made fun of the marlboro ads. that is it. that is the sum total of the testimony in this case about marlboro ads. 1964, the surgeon general's report. did -- did elsie and raymond talk about the surgeon general's report? now, they have only been smoking -- or he is only been smoking for a very short period of time, a month or two or three. very short period of time. because that report comes out in january of 1964. here's the testimony of diana hearon. she says -- now, what do you recall about your mother discussing the surgeon general's report from 1964 with your father -- with raymond gil de rubio, your stepfather? sorry if i'm going too fast. the answer was that the surgeon general had come out with a report that smoking may cause cancer and be bad for your health. now, this is elsie gil de rubio's own daughter remembering a conversation that she heard between her mother and raymond from 40 years ago, 45 years ago. it is undisputed. there is no denial. did raymond gil de rubio know the choices he was making, the decision he was making? is anybody saying that he is addicted, that he is under the influence of philip morris, that he is mesmerized by marlboro ads when he, as a grown man, at age 40, makes the adult decision to begin smoking again after not having smoked for a dozen years? no. did mr. gil de rubio enjoy smoking? well, here's the testimony from -- these are all members of elsie's family. here's elsie. she testified he liked smoking cigarettes, they were pleasurable and sociable. her daughter, you saw -- you heard her deposition read. she said it looked like smoking was an enjoyable experience for him. and here's her son, harold jackson, saying it appeared he enjoyed smoking very much. very much. remember the requirement. they have to bring you a bigger mountain of evidence than i'm bringing you, than dana bradford and i are bringing you, about why mr. gil de rubio smoked. why did he begin smoking? why did he continue to smoke? all right. 19- -- it is either 1964 or 1966 that he switches to marlboros. if it is in 1964, it is after the surgeon general's report. if it is in 1966, as harold remembers, it is after the first warnings go on the packs, caution: cigarette smoking may be hazardous to your health. january of 1966. now, does mr. gil de rubio know, as a 41- -40-year-old man, 41-year-old man, 43-year-old man, what he is getting himself into, the risks he is taking if he begins to smoke at this point in his life? i do not think there can even be a scintilla -- and people ask me, well, how big is a scintilla? well, it is doggone tiny. there is no evidence in this case that mr. gil de rubio did not know the health risks that he was taking on. matter of fact, all the evidence points in the other direction. at age 40, 41, 42, 43, when he begins to smoke marlboro cigarettes, does he know what he is doing? absolutely. who is in control of mr. gil de rubio's decisions? let us go to 1970. ray and elsie get married in 1970. both are still smoking. this is when -mr. patacca said he was an excellent father. this is when, for the first time after seven years, he gets back together with -- his son arrives on his doorstep. it is not like he asked for his son to come live with him. hilda said, i cannot handle him. you have to take him. i cannot handle him. he is a problem. so he lives with his father. and you heard he lived not only with his father but with the son of his first wife. now, that is not a son of mr. gil de rubio. it is a stepson of mr. gil de rubio. but together those two boys lived. so he lives with him, and ray, jr., said, i was surprised he was smoking. now, that also gave ray, jr., an opportunity to comment to you guys about how much ray, sr., smoked. and he said he was a -- an average smoker. he was not a heavy smoker. i know heavy smokers. he was an average smoker. how much does mr. gil de rubio smoke? in the medical records -- and this is not disputed -- in the medical records mr. gil de rubio reports himself as being a pack-a-day smoker. a pack-a-day smoker. who knows best how much you smoke? same year the warnings on the packs of cigarettes change, and now it says, warning: the surgeon general has determined that cigarette smoking is dangerous to your health. is there any indication in this case that ray or elsie give any consideration to quitting smoking, to giving up any of these life-style features that they have taken on as a couple? this is what they have taken on as a couple. 1971, 1972, letitia diaz, you heard her deposition. again, it was read to you. she is the one who owns a partial interest in the vacation home that elsie has out at the end of long island. she says -- this is another view at how much ray smokes. she says, i remember that they -- that he smoked a lot during those card games, those poker games that they had until the very early hours of the morning, but you know what, i really do not remember him smoking any other time. i really do not remember. mr. patacca said that there was a moment sometime in the '70s when it was brought to elsie and raymond's attention in a very vivid way that smoking can cause cancer, and that was when elsie's brother phillip was diagnosed with throat cancer. but did mrs. gil de rubio say that either she or her husband gave any consideration to quitting smoking because of phillip's throat cancer? remember she corrected me on how to pronounce -- i called it laryngeal and she said laryngeal cancer. i do not care. bottom line is neither she -she did not say that either she or mr. gil de rubio gave serious consideration to quitting smoking at that moment. but mr. gil de rubio quits on thanksgiving in 1978. and there is no debate about how that happened. the turkey tasted bad and so he said, that is it. i am not smoking anymore. now, he did not have any planning. there is no indication that he was giving consideration to quitting until that event happened. you know, there was no he is been going to the doctor and looking for help, or he would gone to a hypnotist. there was none of that, none of that in this case. the turkey tasted bad so he quit. did he have significant withdrawal problems? no. mrs. gil de rubio said he went in the living room and spent a quiet afternoon. i asked her, did anybody talk about the fact that he quit? and she said, no, no one talked about the fact that he quit. it was not a topic of discussion. did he backslide? did he ever smoke again? no, he never smoked again. did he ever complain about it? did he ever say to anybody, boy, this is hard, i'm struggling, i'd really like a cigarette? no, never again. in fact, the only thing that is ever said by mr. gil de rubio to anybody ever again about smoking is when he tells his granddaughter, i cannot stand the smell of smoke. that is it. in this whole case. they get to get back up again and say, no, no. here's the rest of the story. no, no, there were plenty of times. but there are not. there is no more evidence. that is it. that is the end of the story. he quit. he quit for good. he quit like that. quit like that, because the turkey tasted bad. 1982. oh, and, by the way, he goes back to work the next monday. life goes on. there is still parties. there is still poker games. there is still fishing. there is still -- everything remains the same, except he just does not smoke. control? that is absolute control. has he demonstrated control, absolute control, on two occasions in his life? absolutely. he retires. remember they bought their retirement home in st. augustine in 1980. they spent a year or two getting it ready, and then he sells the business and they retire to st. augustine on the waterway with his boat in 1982. and they live -- no question about it, they live a wonderful life of retirement, wonderful life of retirement, until october or november of 1992 when he is diagnosed with cancer and he dies. all right. so now let us talk about some other -- on this issue of control. let us talk about whether he is addicted. and, yes, they brought you actually two experts to address this issue of addiction, how do you tell when a smoker is addicted? the first person they brought you was dr. david burns. remember, he was the very first witness. he came by videotape. now, he did not know anything about mr. gil de rubio. he had no information about him. but he did say what he thought -- he talks about real nicotine addicts. that was his phrase, real nicotine addicts. how do they look? how do they look? because, you know, you cannot take a blood test. you cannot take a urine sample and say, oh, this person's addicted or not. so there is a lot of -- it is observational. and that is exactly what dr. chacko told you. it is observational. and so what did dr. burns say? well, they suffer withdrawals. they say things like they cannot live without cigarettes. they keep going back to smoking. they smoke in the face of being ill themselves. for dr. burns, their expert, that is his description of a real addict, a real nicotine addict. now, what did dr. bailey say? and, again, mr. patacca said i could not wait to talk about his personal history of addiction. i'll tell you who could not wait to talk about his personal history of addiction, was dr. bailey. he was so anxious to tell that story that mr. patacca had to tell him two or three times, slow down, buddy. i'll get to it. i'll get to it. and it is a sad story. there is no question about it. and dr. bailey is truly an addict. there is no question about that. there is no question about that. he is an addict for life. i seriously doubt that he could ever be around fentanyl again and not once again totally succumb to it and be overwhelmed by it. he did it three times. he went through months and months of rehabilitation. he is a true addict. and that is the lens through which he sees addiction. there is no doubt about that. that is how he -- that is his whole point of view. and that is how he described all addicts, right? he said, everyone who uses a drug is addicted and they all are just like this. this is the nature of addiction. he is an addict. he was in and out of rehab. he lost his job. he put his patients at risk. he described all that. he described all that on direct examination to mr. patacca. i did not even come up to it until well after in cross-examination. he is the one who said, on direct examination, yes, i was under the influence of those drugs when i put patients to sleep, when i gave epidural blocks to laboring mothers when they are having -- when they are giving birth. he said all that on direct examination. that is an addict. that is an addict. but let us look at mr. gil de rubio. let us look at mr. gil de rubio. he quit in 1951 for 12 years. on thanksgiving he quit suddenly, with no plan, no preparation, no help, no complaints. quit cold turkey, never smoked again. after he quit, the only thing he ever said about it was, i do not like the smell. and he did that whether he was smoking a pack a day, two packs a day, whatever the number is. that is what he did. the physical evidence tells you what he did. the physical evidence tells you what he was. who was in control? did cigarettes control mr. gil de rubio or did mr. gil de rubio control cigarettes? and, by the way, when did mrs. gil de rubio quit? after all those years of smoking along with mr. gil de rubio, she quit when he quit. mr. patacca said that i brought you -- and, oh, by the way, dr. bailey, when did he begin having any involvement with addiction at all, other than his own? do you remember i -- i finally asked him to try to tell me just exactly when he actually began to deal with, as a student or in any way, shape or form, with addiction medicine. and it was not until -- what was it -- 2006, when he went to work at the refuge, 2005, 2006, when he went to work at the refuge as -- on a fellowship as a student, and he worked there for two years. and you remember i asked him, i said, how many smokers did you deal with at the refuge? and you remember he said 203. and i said, did you just make that number up? and he said, yeah, i just made that number up. and that was his involvement with people with addiction. what is he doing today? he is providing care for people who have chronic pain. yes, sometimes those people have addictions. does he take care of their addictions? no. he sends them to someone who takes care of their addictions. now, i did bring you dr. -- and i cannot pronounce his first name. dr. dev chacko. and he did say that in his opinion mr. gil de rubio was not addicted. he said, i use the diagnostic and statistical manual as a guide. he said, i also -- i really rely -- this is my guide, but i also use my 35 years of dealing with addictions, drug abuse of all varieties. 35 years. and you heard his experience. you heard that he used to run -- he used to be the number-one addiction expert at the largest va outpatient clinic in this whole country. and i do not think i have to tell you how many addictions occur in -- that is the level of expert that i brought you. and he said, i've never seen an addict -- an addict quit like mr. gil de rubio. i mean, that is impressive. i've never seen an addict quit like mr. gil de rubio. and the fact that he did not smoke for 12 years and then after thanksgiving of 1978 he never smoked again, dr. chacko said that is not a sign of weakness. that is not a sign of weakness. that is a sign of control. how could it be otherwise? so was mr. gil de rubio addicted? i think the answer's pretty obvious from the physical evidence in this case. i think the answer to that is no. but even if you disagree, even if you apply some -- some standard and you say, no, i think he was addicted, that is not the end of the question. that first question, even if somehow you disagree, even if you said, no, you know what, anybody who smokes a pack a day to me must be addicted, your job is to determine whether or not that addiction is so strong that it is a legal cause of his cancer and death. nobody came here and said that mr. gil de rubio's addiction -- even the people who said he was -- even dr. bailey, who said he was addicted, did not come here and say that his addiction was so strong that it caused him to develop his cancer. nobody said that. nobody. now, i know they have an opportunity to come back up -- oh, and they said dr. chacko did not give examples of people who are or are not addicted, signs of being addicted. you remember that on cross-examination he was asked, you know, if you smoke first thing in the morning, is that a sign? if you smoke -- if you get up in the middle of the night, is that a sign? if you smoke in the face of health risks, in other words, you have an illness, is that a sign? and there were about five items all in a row. remember that? and i got up and i said, well, let us go through the testimony in this case. when did mr. gil de rubio -- and mr. patacca just said it again in his closing argument. he said, when did mr. gil de rubio smoke his first cigarette? well, it was within the first 30 minutes of when he gets up. and dr. chacko said, you know, really addicted people -- if that pack of cigarettes is on the nightstand, before their feet hit the floor, real addicts light up their first cigarette of the day. and, yes, i remember harold jackson said on one occasion out at the end of long island he saw mr. gil de rubio at midnight smoking a cigarette. but when we asked mr. jackson -- when we asked elsie gil de rubio, did your husband get up -- did he get -- did your stepfather get up in the middle of the night? the answer was no. so i asked dr. chacko, what is the evidence in the case? and the evidence in the case is mr. gil de rubio is not a guy who got up in the middle of the night. did mr. gil de rubio continue to smoke in the face of an illness? no. he did not have an illness. did mr. gil de rubio meet any of those individual little tests about being addicted? no. did he resume smoking after having quit because he cannot stop? no. now, i'm not ignoring the -- the information that mrs. gil de rubio came up with in the last couple of months where she said that she saw a kit kat bar somewhere and that refreshed her recollection that mr. gil de rubio had quit for a week each on two occasions sometime in '72 and '74 or thereabouts and that after a week he would gained some weight and so he decided he was going to go back to smoking. i'm not ignoring that, but i have to -- i have to weigh that in light of her testimony. she is the woman that lived with him. the testimony she gave in march and may -- this should also say -- oh, here's the may. the testimony she gave in march and may when she was asked: did he indicate to you before that dinner that he was considering stopping smoking? no. had he ever stopped smoking before that time? no. so here's no plan, no intention of quitting smoking. and, yet, he quits just like that because the turkey tastes bad. had he ever stopped smoking before that time? no. had he ever attempted to stop smoking, to your knowledge and recollection, before that time? no. and then in may, a few months later, she is asked the same series of questions. not to my recollection, and he did not make any efforts to quit before then, and i do not know. so i do not think even if those -- even if the new information is true, it does not change the landscape. mr. gil de rubio still quits just as he had, just as you know he did, like that, on thanksgiving because the turkey tasted bad. all right. so the answer to the first question -- actually, the second question is, was mr. gil de rubio addicted -- well, let us see if i can find it again. was raymond gil de rubio addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine manufactured by philip morris, and, if so, was such addiction a legal cause of his lung cancer? the physical evidence in the case, the testimony of the people in this case, indisputably answers this question for you. indisputably. now, let me move to this first question. and, by the way, the findings from that prior jury have nothing to do with these questions. when you get the whole verdict form, nothing to do with these questions. this is all up to you. you are not influenced by anybody else but just you folks when you are addressing these questions. now, first question, did raymond gil de rubio have a primary lung cancer? well, it is difficult. and that is exactly what people said. mr. patacca: your honor, can we approach? the court: all right. ladies and gentlemen, if you want to step back into the jury room for just another short break. [#deleted sidebar#] [#deleted recess#] the court: all right. mr. reilly, you may proceed. mr. reilly: thank you, your honor. the court: uh-huh. mr. reilly: as i was saying, in answering those questions, those are all up to you to answer. no influence by any other jury at any other time. that is just for you guys to decide. all right. and the same way with the question of whether or not he had a primary lung cancer and whether or not, if he had a primary lung cancer, whether his lung cancer was, in fact, caused by an addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine. so it has to be not just smoking, but it has to be an addiction and the addiction has to be the legal cause. it is a lot of hurdles. a lot of hurdles. all right. so let us look first at -- this is the same board i used in my opening statement. let us look and see what i said and if the evidence did not turn out to be that way. i said that there were going to be three doctors that were going to come here, and i could have added dr. schwartz down here, the pathologist. but i said, you know, there are three doctors who are going to come here. these two doctors are going to say that they think it was a primary lung cancer. they are the treating oncologists. i told you that right up front. and i told you that i was going to bring dr. fernando keller. and you saw him. he was here the day -- the day before yesterday. kind of time gets away from me, but -- and dr. keller said, you know what, in my practice, i've had too many experiences where without that abdominal ct scan, without really looking, you can miss cancers that start someplace else but look -- and he gave you that perfect example that had just happened to him not very long ago, where it turned out to be a pancreatic cancer and he thought he had a classic lung cancer. and he said, you know what, here, because of so few records, so few pieces of information and such a terrible -- no criticism of the doctors at all, but such a terrible specimen, that it was -- well, you know, a very challenging case. it was a very challenging case for everybody but dr. francis robicsek, the fellow who was an expert in everything. you remember i asked him, well, doctor, you are not an oncologist? oh, yes, i am. you are not a pathologist? oh, yes, i am. you are not a pulmonologist? oh, yes, i am. he was everything. but what he really is is a cardiothoracic surgeon. and here are the treating oncologists, who -what did they tell you about whether or not smoking was a cause of mr. gil de rubio's cancer? this was dr. goldstein. and so he is asked the question -- and it was all on the video -- "so is it fair to say that in this case you do not know what caused mr. gil de rubio's lung cancer?" he said, "although i would suspect the risk is higher, no, i do not know for sure what caused his lung cancer." that was dr. goldstein. how about dr. lynch? question: "so to a reasonable degree of medical certainty, you would not know whether his smoking history constitutes a sufficient history to result in a significantly elevated risk for lung cancer, do you?" he said, "that is fair." there is no testimony from dr. lynch in which he says, it is my opinion to any degree of medical certainty -- any degree -- that smoking was the cause of mr. gil de rubio's lung cancer. none. how about -- wish i had a marker, but i do not. i would add dr. schwartz's name down here. why does this -- why is this case so difficult? and, you know, neither dr. goldstein nor dr. lynch really knew mr. gil de rubio's smoking history. all they knew was that he had quit; he would smoked for some unknown period of time and then he would quit for years. that is all they knew. they did not even know that there was this long 12-year gap in the middle of his life from 1951 to 1963 where he did not smoke, either. they did not know that. and you remember, this is the chart that came in in dr. burns' testimony where they were talking about what happens when you quit smoking. and dr. burns put this chart up and said, you know what, after 15 years, whatever that excess risk is, it is declined by eighty percent. eighty percent. it is gone. that is right. that is why it is so hard for any doctor except for dr. robicsek in this case to say what caused mr. gil de rubio's cancer, even if it was a lung primary. i already told you about dr. robicsek. he said this is a slam dunk and you do not need -- an autopsy was not necessary. well, i agree that what dr. arnold schwartz, their expert pathologist -- i agree that what he said is undisputed. and here's what he said. i said: "all right. so, doctor, this was a difficult case for you to review and for the pathologists who were involved way back 18 years ago to review in light of the nature of the specimen that was obtained when the biopsy was performed on mr. gil de rubio, correct?" and this is what he said. this was near the end of his testimony. he said, "it was a challenging case, correct." here's the contrast. here's the only physician who came here and said smoking was the cause of his lung cancer. he said it is a slam dunk and an autopsy was not necessary. here's their own pathologist saying, "this is a challenging case." and here's what else he said. this is what he said about an autopsy. he said -- i asked him, "an autopsy would have allowed any pathologist, any treating physicians who have not only identified whether or not this truly was a lung primary but also what kind of cancer, what kind of lung cancer it was if it was lung cancer, or what kind of cancer it was if it was not lung cancer?" and he said, "that is correct. an autopsy would give us much more information." and i said, "an autopsy would have been exceedingly helpful in this case, would not it?" he said, "as in all cases." how do you put these two guys together? this is a slam dunk, an autopsy is not necessary; an autopsy would have been -- given us much more information and it would have been exceedingly helpful, and this was a challenging case. that is their experts. they have the burden of proof. i do not -- mr. bradford and i do not and melody manning and i do not have the burden in this case of disproving anything. they have the burden of bringing a bigger mountain of evidence than we have, stronger evidence than we have, that this was a lung cancer caused by not only smoking but by an addiction, an addiction so strong that it was a substantial, a but-for cause of why mr. gil de rubio got cancer and he died. that is their burden on the first two questions of this case. all right. sorry to take so long to just get through the first two questions, but they are clearly the most important questions of this case. all right. i have to go through the rest of the verdict form because -- while i do not think you are going to get to any other questions, i'll go through it anyway just in case. it is a big form. and, by the way, if you answer either one of the first two questions no, your work is done. all right. what are the rest of the questions? was philip morris, incorporated's negligence the legal cause of the death of raymond gil de rubio? yes, there are prior findings from another jury. you are bound by them. but you still would have to find that the negligence, whatever it is, is a legal cause, a but-for cause -- in other words, something philip morris did actually was a but-for, a substantial cause, of something that mr. gil de rubio did. the same with whether or not the -- and that prior jury found that something about philip morris cigarettes was defective and unreasonably dangerous, and you are bound by that. i'm not trying to dissuade you of that in any way. but you would have to find that as a result that they were somehow a legal cause of mr. gil de rubio's cancer and death. those are questions 3 and 4. question 5: did raymond gil de rubio reasonably rely on statements made by philip morris, incorporated, that concealed or omitted material information concerning the health effects and/or the addictive nature of cigarette smoking -- smoking cigarettes, and if so, was such reliance a legal cause of death? this answer -- this question is so easy. there is no evidence in this case at all, none, that mr. gil de rubio heard anything from philip morris or was waiting to hear something from philip morris. remember i asked each one of you in voir dire -- you all made decisions about whether you would or you would not smoke. and i asked you whether or not a cigarette company -- you were waiting for any message from a cigarette company, whether you would or would not smoke. you do not leave your common sense at the door when you come in here and sit down and act as jurors in this case. there is no evidence in this case that raymond gil de rubio was somehow different from -from folks, that he was waiting to hear something from philip morris before he would decide whether as a 40-year-old man he would begin smoking or not smoke, or as a 41- or 43-year-old man he would begin to smoke marlboros cigarettes. and then 6 was: was any act taken in furtherance of philip morris usa's agreement to conceal or omit information regarding the health effects of cigarettes or their addictive nature with the intention that smokers and the public would rely on this information to their detriment a legal cause of raymond gil de rubio's death? it is really basically the same thing as number 5. and, again, there is no evidence in this case that raymond gil de rubio was waiting to hear anything from the cigarette company before he would decide as a 40-year-old man to smoke. the rest of the verdict form. i really do not think you get here, but if you do, let us talk about it. if you get here, you have to assign some percentage of responsibility to philip morris and some percentage of responsibility for raymond gil de rubio. mr. patacca said he was not going to suggest any number to you, but then, frankly, he sort of suggested fifty percent, right? and that is about -- because he said elsie gil de rubio is accepting some responsibility on behalf of her husband for his decisions. and this was her testimony. this was, again, on direct examination. the question was: "i'm not asking you what he knew or what he believed he knew or what you believe he knew. i'm asking you, as the personal representative of his estate, if you feel your husband raymond shares responsibility for his own death with the marlboro cigarettes he smoked." and the answer was: "i say yes, because he knew. he knew. i mean, he read, also. that is what i'm trying to say. he read what i read. so he did not stop. so i guess you are responsible if you do not stop." well, sure you are responsible if you do not stop. this does not even address the decision he made to start at age 40. of course he has responsibility. i mean, it is just like harry reasoner said. now it is up to you to decide whether you are going to smoke or not, whether you are going to take the chance of the smoking or not. so how is this -- i mean, what role does philip morris play other than they made a legal product, cigarettes, and they put them on the market and they made them available to people like raymond gil de rubio to buy that wanted to buy them? talking about the awareness of mr. gil de rubio -- i really need to put all three of these up at once. i apologize. i do not have three -- i'll just put it on the ground there. can everybody see that? okay? yes, no? sorry. i'll pick it up. i'll do it better. all right. this was the testimony of dr. proctor. i was asking him, "let us look at men who are 40 who are professional and proprietary business owners." i was describing mr. gil de rubio, because, of course, dr. proctor knew nothing about mr. gil de rubio, right? so i said, "well, if you look at the category of men who are 40 who are professional and proprietary business owners and have some college education, the percentage of those folks who know and believe that smoking causes lung cancer is overwhelming, is not it?" and he said, "well, it is certainly higher than the ordinary uneducated population." i said, "it is like 75, eighty percent, is not it?" "yeah, it would be something like on that order." and then i said, "if you are in the public health part of the health industry, you would be more inclined to know earlier, would not you?" and i thought is not that interesting that he said this. "especially if you were dealing with public health issues." i said, "sure. if you work for a public health agency as -- remember, mrs. gil de rubio, at the moment she met mr. gil de rubio, she is working for a public health agency, planned parenthood." and he said, "yeah." so then here's the $64 question. i said, "okay. now, smart people at 40 years of age can be aware that smoking can cause lung cancer, that smoking can be addicting or habituating or whatever you want to call it, hard to quit, and they can decide they want to smoke, cannot they?" i asked their expert, dr. proctor, that. and he said, "yeah." and i said, "millions of them do?" and he said, "yeah." so what percentage of responsibility do you assign to somebody who is just like -- just like i just asked dr. proctor about? 40, you know, and you decide you are going to do it. and i also thought it would be good for me just to put up this chart because i thought it was very interesting. remember, this was from a document that the plaintiffs put in evidence. it is a philip morris document from this dr. dunn. and what is he saying here? that during the -- the bulk of the time that mr. gil de rubio is smoking philip-morris-manufactured cigarettes, marlboro reds, what is happening to the level of nicotine delivered to the smoker in marlboro reds? it is going down, down, down, down. that is what philip morris was doing to the nicotine delivered in marlboro reds, smokers who chose to buy that brand. here is the final part of the verdict form. i'm almost done. sorry to take so long. what is the amount of damages sustained by elsie gil de rubio? i do not think you get anywhere near this part of this verdict form. you have stopped long ago, i think. but if you get here, there is no debate about what the amount of the funeral expenses are. i think they were like $1500, something like that. i have no idea what the amount of that is. i'm sorry. that is funeral expenses. this is support and services. this is $1500. i have no idea what you assign for that. but here i know that what plaintiff's counsel is asking for is -- he said five million at first, and then he said two million, $2 million. he would like you to make mrs. gil de rubio a multi-millionaire because of the decisions that -mr. patacca: objection, your honor. we are going to need to approach. the court: okay. [#deleted sidebar#] the court: all right. mr. reilly: thank you, your honor. what they have asked you -- and i realize it is inferential, not direct. mr. patacca did not say that they were directly asking that you compensate mrs. gil de rubio two or $5 million. he just said some people may think this is the value. but i -- i do not think that the concept was that vague. and i simply have to say that this compensation -- this request for compensation is based on decisions that were made by mr. gil de rubio as a grown man and for which mrs. gil de rubio was right there at the time they were being made, the entire time they were being made. all right. i'm done. the court: all right. mr. reilly: oh, well, not -the court: i'm sorry. mr. reilly: i spoke too fast. the court: when you said done, i -mr. reilly: when you say you are done -the court: you might not be. all right. mr. reilly: i'm going to have to find a new line. i'm almost done. the court: all right. mr. reilly: now i sit down and mr. patacca has the opportunity to get back up. and i have no idea what he is going to say in the minutes that he has remaining, but because they have the burden of proof, because they have to persuade you that they have proved their case, he gets a second shot, a second bite, a second opportunity to talk. and so all i would ask is, because i cannot anticipate what he is going to say -- he may -- he may bring up more old documents from the '50s or -i have no idea. but i would only ask you guys to keep your eye on the ball, and if he does, ask yourself, what does this have to do with the decisions made by mr. gil de rubio about beginning to smoke, quitting smoking, beginning again at age 40 and quitting at age 59 because the turkey tasted bad in 1978? thanks.