closing argument mr. patacca: before i start, i would like to first say thank you very much. we appreciate all the time you have given us in the past two-and-a-half weeks. on behalf of evan yegelwel and bruce anderson, we have had the pleasure of representing elsie gil de rubio, and we do appreciate the close attention you have given us. but i'd be remiss if i did not thank our legal assistants. you have seen them coming in and out. because we did not walk into this courtroom without their help. ms. baygents, ms. cheney, mr. alsup. i'd like to thank them for helping us out. two-and-a-half weeks. you would think the voice would be a little clearer this morning, but it will get better, just as it did on the opening. as we look at the closing argument, as i look at it and try to present what do i need to tell you, what can i help explain to you, what needs to be shown to you, i thought the best way to describe it would be to say we believe you have two jobs here today. your first job as a juror is to fix what can be fixed, help what can be helped, and make up for what cannot be fixed or helped. and when i sit down for the last time today, we are going to ask you to do that first job, make up for what cannot be fixed and what can no longer be helped. and the second part of your job -- the second part of your job -- we would suggest that when you go back into the jury room, the second part of your job is to explain to your fellow jurors why you have decided the way you have, to help them understand how you saw the evidence and how you will help make up for what cannot be fixed or helped. so i'd like to give you some tools today and talk about what we have seen in the past two-and-a-half weeks, or at least two weeks of evidence, so that you can fulfill both of those jobs. we started when -- in that opening i said we were going to go back quite a few years. it is december of 1953 and the telegram goes out. it is the holidays. families are coming together in thanks, thankful for what they have, ready to shut down the year. businesses are thankful. and yet there is one industry that is getting together not for a holiday party, not because business has not been good, but because now is the time to strike. the medical professionals are coming out in 1953 saying, we have now decided that smoking -- there is that association. smoking causes cancer. and it is got the captains of industry worried. so while most of us -- most families were sitting down for christmas and the holiday dinners, they were at the plaza hotel in a boardroom, and that is where the meeting took place, the meeting where an agreement was reached, handshakes were exchanged, and for the next 50 years they would make public statements, create doubt and controversy, to further that agreement. they came out with the frank statement. in an unprecedented move and within two to three weeks' time, the entire industry came together and said, we are going to issue a statement that will be published in almost every newspaper in america, from maine to california, from alaska down to florida. the frank statement was to smokers to reassure them, we are doing everything we can. there is still a debate. reassure. at the beginning of the case i told you we would be, during the course of this, providing you documents that had -- before litigation had never seen the outside of a boardroom. and we have given you quite a few documents, and you are going to take those back, and one of them was the forwarding memo that i just looked through a moment ago. as you recall in opening statement, they did not bring scientists and doctors to the plaza hotel. they brought public relations people. and what they told the public relations people made it very clear what their focus was going to be for the next 50 years. they made statements like, what if our company was the first to create a cancer-free -mr. reilly: your honor, may we approach? the court: all right. mr. reilly: i hate to do this. (a sidebar conference was held outside the hearing of the jury as follows:) mr. reilly: judge, twice now -- i hate to interrupt his closing argument, but twice now counsel has mentioned this goes on for 50 years. there is no 50-year time frame in this trial. counsel's done it twice. this is not an accident. i thought the first time perhaps he just made a mistake. but there is not a 50-year time frame in this trial. i object to it. i believe the jury should be instructed -- either a mistrial should be granted now or the jury should be instructed to ignore counsel's reference to 50 years. this is a -- this is improper, and i object to it. mr. patacca: your honor, it was a mistake. i was not try to suggest it today. i'll take it to '78. i'll do the math. i'm sorry, twenty -the court: okay. mr. patacca: -- five years. the court: you can just go back and tell them you misspoke. mr. patacca: i misspoke. the court: and i'll deny your motion for a mistrial. mr. patacca: it was not intentional. the court: okay. (the sidebar conference was concluded, and the following proceedings were held:) the court: all right. mr. patacca, you may proceed. mr. patacca: thank you, your honor. so the agreement was reached, and over the next 25 years till 1978. everything they did publicly was in furtherance of that agreement, reassure our smokers to keep them smoking. when you read the forwarding memo, you will see. if cigarette smokers quit just one cigarette a day, that would be worth billions. the point of what i'm getting at at this very early meeting in the '50s was philip morris, who was at that meeting and part of the agreement, knew back in the '50s what the scientists were telling the public, that smoking did cause cancer. you saw one of the documents on the screen, and you will get to take it back, march 31st, 1954. one of the officers is chastising his brethren, saying, how can you make a statement to say if we find something dangerous we will take it out? how can you do that? and in there he says, should i sell my stock now? they knew it caused cancer in the '50s, despite the frank statement and despite the statements they would make through 1978. philip morris had to change the way they promoted their products. you heard from dr. pollay from vancouver, who came in and talked to you about advertising, the intent of advertising, how you deliver a message, how you make it an indirect message, you know, the message where you give the information and everyone forgets where did it come from. before this time they always promoted the health aspects of cigarettes. it is better for your health; it soothes your throat. and now it changed. indirectly let us talk about health. so they started rebranding the product. let us deliver them the goods. came out with a flip-top box. they started talking about filters and how it will not get in the way of your flavor. marlboro went from a women's cigarette in the early '40s and '30s and now they decided, let us rebrand marlboro. the birth of the marlboro man. did not wear a cowboy hat at first. they marketed to intellectuals, intelligent men, men's men. ultimately it would be rebranded to what we know as now the marlboro country and the cowboy. while they were doing that, they were still talking behind the scenes about the cancer problem. and it was a problem. this document, you are going to see two complexes, a compound and a campaign. take your time to read these documents. it talks about how we as an industry have repressed a guilt complex. and they talk about that guilt complex as the fact that we may be actually promoting cancer. our product may be bringing on early demise. what they say in that document, and you will have it in there, is certain additives must go -- or not additives, excuse me -- certain carcinogens must go. benzopyrene must go. when you read this document -- it is exhibit 48 -- you are going to see that not only are they talking about, let us remove it if we can, but if we can, let us spin it as a marketing advantage. goes back to that first pr statement. would not it be great if we could be the first to create the cancer-free cigarette? we would beat the competition. see how they talk about trying to get on the smokers' good sides. we could announce these improvements. to build an image of a brand as a brand that was made and sold by people who were generally concerned about the health of their customers and did not believe in taking chances with the health of their customers. marlboro was starting to gain their vision, the entire country, their vision to be number one. the flip-top box and the flower filter. again, the indirect marketing now. the filter removes the smoke, removes the dangerous particles that we still do not agree exist. reassure the smokers. what you saw for two weeks was that for philip morris their product was nicotine. and they had two brands, doubt and confusion. if we can reassure the smoker, they will keep smoking. if they keep smoking, we are profitable. as you heard from dr. pollay, they undertook a massive advertising campaign, started sponsoring shows like "route 66." back then there was three networks. you really could not watch tv without seeing a tobacco advertisement or a sponsorship. their goal, number one. now, the marlboro man. the marlboro man is not just one man. we saw him as the intellectual at first. we have seen the cowboys on the range. but as dr. pollay explained to you, the marlboro man is really the customer. marlboro country is not out west; it is everywhere. it is in manhattan, the skyline. in marlboro country there is no sheriff. in marlboro country you are the sheriff. that was their target. they sought people who wanted that image. in 1963 and 1964 they got them. raymond gil de rubio switches from a filterless product, as told to you by harold jackson, to marlboro. he was smoking non-filters and at some point switched to marlboro. now, i'd like to take you back to what we heard about raymond gil de rubio then, at a time in his life when he was 40, an intelligent man. he was having a little bit of frustration with his job. he was working for the commonwealth of puerto rico. his former wife, hilda, told you that. checking the classifieds, a little frustrated that promotions were not coming. so what does he do? he goes out on his own. he is a businessman. and he becomes a very successful businessman. he becomes the marlboro man. he takes charge of his life. and that is the brand he smoked. and that is what they intended. we heard from 1963 and 1964, the turn of the -turn of the year, he smoked marlboro until he quit on thanksgiving 1978. for 15 years as little as a pack a day, as much as two to three packs a day. within 30 minutes of when he gets out of bed to right before he went to bed. sometimes he got out of bed to smoke. he smoked at work. he smoked in the car. he smoked on the boat. he smoked around the kids. he smoked everywhere. marlboro and ray went hand in hand. he smoked until 1978, when he finally had enough. and as you heard the rest of the story, until 1992, when cancer took his life. after quitting for 14 years, in 1992 he gets diagnosed with cancer. now, one of the issues that you are going to be asked to decide is whether or not raymond gil de rubio had a primary lung cancer. you see, as we walk into this courtroom two weeks after the evidence, philip morris does not agree that what was in his lungs and what spread throughout his body was lung cancer. and so we had to prove that to you. we brought you professionals like dr. schwartz, a board-certified pathologist from george washington university, trained at harvard, mit, went to the university of miami school of medicine, to come in and tell you, i looked at the pathology and i've looked at the clinical records, and i can tell you this is a primary lung cancer. dr. robicsek, a cardiothoracic surgeon who is been practicing in charlotte since the '50s, who is undertaken more than 35,000 operations, who is probably given surgeries to 7- or 8,000 cancer patients, lung cancer patients, who told you in his experience 90 to 95 percent of the people who get lung cancer get it from smoking. and nearly two-thirds of the people that he diagnoses with lung cancer are actually in the former smoker category. and that was not enough. we brought you two oncologists; one we read, dr. lynch, and one dr. goldstein. the people who actually put their hands on ray, the ones who examined him, the ones who looked at the films, looked at the records that were available then. and they came in and told you, in my opinion, lung cancer. that will be the first question you will reach on the verdict form, did raymond gil de rubio have a primary lung cancer? and i would suggest to you there is no evidence there is any other cause for his cancer. they brought you one doctor to dispute it, dr. keller, a pulmonologist, who when the end of the day came and he sat on that stand, he had no other opinion other than, i just cannot tell. he did not have an alternative. he is not a pathologist, not an oncologist, not an epidemiologist, not an endocrinologist, not a gastroenterologist. and his opinion for you was -- $20,000 later is, there is just not enough records. i cannot tell where it is from. there should be no question raymond gil de rubio, unfortunately, died of a primary lung cancer, and that is all the evidence is. even dr. keller at least conceded there is some things he can rule out; the bone cancer, the prostate cancer. if philip morris thought that anything that dr. schwartz told you from a pathologist's point of view was incorrect, they could have brought their pathologist or a pathologist to come in and say, no, x, y and z were wrong. everything dr. schwartz told you was unrefuted. dr. robicsek told you in his opinion smoking cigarettes caused raymond gil de rubio's lung cancer and his death. now, the second question that you are going to have to reach here today is whether raymond gil de rubio was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine. let us talk about the evidence you heard, because the defendants brought you dr. chacko to tell you he was not addicted. he evaluated the evidence, and after seeing that raymond gil de rubio for 15 years smoked two to three packs a day, in the car, in the house, in the business, in front of the kids, on the boat, when he gets up in the morning, before he goes to bed, he came in here to tell you in his opinion he is not addicted to cigarettes. now, i can only imagine what you were thinking. at the beginning of this case -- it started in voir dire -- they started talking about the dsm-iv. and then during the case with dr. chacko they talked about the dsm-iv, how it is the standard. and then dr. chacko took the stand and conceded, you know, it is a guideline. i really do not use it exclusively, and certainly not in court-type cases. and, most importantly, when dr. chacko took the stand, he never told you what his guidelines were from the dsm-iv. think about it. did he actually tell you what his guidelines were? now, we brought you dr. john bailey. they could not wait to talk to dr. bailey, because it started in opening statement. they hammered him for being a -- for being an addict. they could not wait to walk -- walk him through in front of you how he must have been high at times when he was performing his job as an anesthesiologist. the man came in here and readily confessed, that is what i did. and they said, no, no. slow down. i'm not there yet. i've got some more questions. could not wait to break him down. but what did he tell you, when you compare him versus dr. chacko? dr. bailey taught you the medicine about addiction. he came in here to tell you he has training in addiction. he did a fellowship in it. he ran an inpatient or a residential facility for addiction. he is currently on the staff of the university of florida college of medicine and he teaches addiction, even to psychiatrists. he told you his criteria that he helped to use with his judgment: compulsion, compulsive use, inability to control, use despite consequences, and cravings. and then he talked about how he saw that with ray. compulsive use, two to three packs a day for 15 years. you even heard that from the cross on dr. chacko. ten minutes a cigarette, that is a minimum of 200 minutes, 300 minutes, maybe as much as 400 minutes a day when you have got a cigarette in your hand, in your lips or in the ashtray or more than one ashtray. there are not many human activities you can do besides sleeping that take up that much of your day. that is compulsive use. ashtrays in the front, ashtrays in the back, a carton in his car, a carton in the office. not just a pack, a carton. lack of control. this was very important to dr. bailey, and he explained why. there is a difference between control and abstinence. the ability to control means you can measure it, you can throttle it. today i'll smoke. tomorrow maybe not. the day after i'll smoke a pack. maybe next week only three or four cigarettes. that is control. and many people have the ability to control it. control is not, today i'll smoke a pack. oh, yeah, and tomorrow i'll smoke a pack. control is not saying, i cannot touch the product or i have to go right back to it. when raymond gil de rubio gave it up on thanksgiving, that was not control. that was abstinence. a smoker who picks up just one or two cigarettes thinking they can casually use it gets drawn back in. the nicotine receptors pull you in. in his opinion, ray did not have control. he had to use abstinence to stop. consequences. the defendants want to point out to you that ray knew about his brother-in-law with throat cancer, that his wife was a public health nurse and must have told him about the dangers of smoking, that public statements in the reader's digest and every periodical and new york post were talking about smoking, and yet he is continuing to do it. they want you to know that information to say that he must have known, and yet they do not want you to consider that use despite consequences. that hits close to home. his brother-in-law had throat cancer. he saw people on oxygen. and, yet, he compulsively still abuses the product. cravings. cravings is that sense of that withdrawal. the receptors want to be fed. in the morning i need that cigarette within the first 30 minutes. at night before i go to bed maybe i'd better get that last drag before i hit it. occasionally even getting up in the night to smoke. those are cravings. that is not choice. that is not control. that is your body taking control, the nicotine receptors that have been built up by years of use. years of use. dr. chacko came in here and wanted you to know how much experience he has with addiction and how he is treated people at the va who also have smoking-related illnesses. and his ultimate opinion is this man's not addicted because in the end, unless it significantly impairs your life, it is not an addiction. that might have been credible if he gave you just one example of what that means. i mean, perhaps if he came up with one example, where, i remember treating john doe and treating him, and that man lost his job because he smoked so much, or that man stole to get his cigarettes. he did not even give you an example of what he meant by that. and that is why i asked the question, what did he really teach you? dr. bailey bared his soul and talked about the stigma of addiction. he taught you some medicine about it and how it is important to understand this is a medical problem, it is not a mental disorder, and there is no stigma in saying that this man was addicted to nicotine, the product they sold. members of the jury, dr. chacko, he just brought doubt and confusion. he brought you no criterion to judge ray gil de rubio. and when you go back to the jury room we are going to ask you to find that raymond gil de rubio was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, and that addiction fed him, compulsively smoking, which became a cause of his lung cancer and which took his life in 1992. the bottom line is for philip morris there is never going to be enough proof, never enough proof that there was lung cancer. there is always going to be a question; we needed more records. there is never going to be enough proof that the man was addicted. oh, well, he -- he must not have tried hard enough. was not that the dirty little secret of addiction that you heard here today? they admit that cigarettes and nicotine are addictive, but no one's addicted. they admit you can quit smoking even if you are addicted, but if you are the guy who did quit, then you were not addicted. if you are the one who smokes within those first 30 minutes in the morning when you come down to the table, as harold described it, well, you are not the guy who is sitting on the edge of the bed reaching for the cigarette packet. if you are the guy that is smoking right before you go to bed while you are talking with the family, well, you are not sitting on the edge of the bed smoking. and if you do have a family member who can actually remember a time when you wake up in the middle of the night and you go out on the porch just to have a cigarette, well, that is only one time. bottom line is there is never going to be enough proof for philip morris. and the reason i'm bringing that up is i expect his honor is going to give you some instructions on what the burden of proof is. he is going to tell you that we had to prove that mr. gil de rubio -- prove our case and prove that he was addicted by the greater weight of the evidence. the greater weight of the evidence. we talked about those scales in voir dire, how everybody should start out even. the greater weight of the evidence is we tip those scales in favor of addiction. more probably than not, more likely than not, he was addicted. it is more likely he was addicted when you smoke two to three packs over 15 years. it is more likely than not you are addicted when you smoke first thing in the morning. it is more likely than not when it becomes the whole focus of your day. more likely than not. and that is the standard by which our law governs this case. and that is the standard by which people live. nobody has absolute certainty. do you think our son should go to this school or that one? well, that one probably is the better school. we send him to that school. do you think we should go vacation there or there? which one's going to be better? that is probably the better one for us. which job should i take, this one or this one? what guarantees do i have? none, but that one's probably the one for us, i think. that is how people live their lives. that is how doctors treat their patients. you probably have lung cancer. it is a textbook case. you smoked for 15 years at that level. it is in your lung and now it is spreading to the areas that we normally see. it is probably a lung cancer. and that is how they treat you. but there is never going to be enough. and in 1964 when the surgeon general came out with its report, they were not buying it. there was not enough evidence for them to say that smoking causes lung cancer. same day you saw this clip. the same day the tobacco institute, the mouthpiece for this agreement, this committee, came out saying, there is not enough proof. the debate is still on. it is not settled. the same day. they have always come out with an answer when the surgeon general came out with a statement. and they want to tell you they cooperated. what did their top executives say? we have got to give our smokers a psychological crutch. we must reassure them. we cannot have our smokers even quitting one cigarette a day. the sponsorships continued. members of the jury, when you -- after you have reached the question of lung cancer and addiction, you are going, then, to have some findings that are going to be given to you by the court that says if you find that raymond gil de rubio was addicted and had the lung cancer, you will have some findings that will be binding on you and binding on these parties. and i expect you are going to hear these findings: one, that nicotine in cigarettes is addictive; two, that cigarettes cause lung cancer, specifically adenocarcinoma, large cell carcinoma, small cell carcinoma and squamous carcinoma. finding three is that philip morris usa, inc., was negligent. that will be binding on you. number 4, that philip morris usa placed cigarettes on the market that were defective and unreasonably dangerous. i expect you will hear a fifth finding, that philip morris usa agreed with other companies to conceal or omit information regarding the health effect of cigarettes or their addictive nature with the intention that smokers and the public would rely on this information to their detriment. and that will be binding on you. i expect you will be told in finding number 6 that philip morris usa, incorporated, concealed or omitted material information not otherwise known or available, knowing that the material was false or misleading, or they failed to disclose a material fact concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes, or both. i expect you will be told that philip morris usa is legally responsible for the acts of the companies that they agreed with as long as those acts were in furtherance of the agreement to conceal or omit material information regarding the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes. you are going to be asked questions whether you believe that philip morris's negligence was a legal cause of raymond gil de rubio's death. we suggest that you will find, yes, it was. his honor is going to tell you that it has to be a legal cause. but it does not have to be the only cause. their negligence, his addiction, can act with some other effect to cause his death. you will be instructed. the judge is going to give you the law on that. we expect that you would find that -- under strict liability that their defective product also caused his death. we would ask you to find that their concealment of material information regarding the dangerousness of cigarettes or the addictive nature or both caused his death, and similarly that their agreement with the other companies to conceal and omit that information caused his death. we came into the courtroom in voir dire and in opening statement and told you right from the get-go that we agree that raymond gil de rubio is in part responsible for his own injuries and death. let me say that again. from the very beginning we told you he is in part responsible for his own injuries and death. but that is not where the case ended. for two weeks you heard evidence. and today we are going to ask you to find that philip morris shares that responsibility, shares responsibility with raymond gil de rubio for his addiction, his lung cancer and his death. mrs. gil de rubio admits it. they do not. can it really be said that ray gil de rubio had as much information as all those scientists in the research and development department you heard about at philip morris? now, members of the jury, we are going leave it to your discretion as to how you share that responsibility. some people would say ray gil de rubio was an intelligent man, he was married to a public health nurse, he probably knew. and those people might say, well, he shares equal responsibility. others might say that even though he was an intelligent man, philip morris was still creating the controversy and doubt, that he did not know about the addictive nature to the extent they knew, and those would say he shares a far less responsibility. and in the end we are going to trust your judgment on that. they share responsibility. and you are going to be asked to apportion it between philip morris and mr. gil de rubio. now, mrs. gil de rubio and ray. i've got to talk to you about -- and i apologize i've kept us in the dark here a little bit. let me turn on one light. raymond gil de rubio and elsie gil de rubio met in 1963 and dated for many years. they ultimately were married in 1970. and part of what we are asking you to do, because some things cannot be fixed, some things cannot be helped, is to make up for what cannot be fixed and helped. and so part of your job will be to evaluate the loss that elsie gil de rubio has suffered. and part of that -- to do that, i'm going to give you a few ideas to at least go back and talk to your fellow jurors about. now, to know what she lost you have to know a little bit about ray. you heard from several witnesses. raymond gil de rubio, hard-working man, built two businesses after leaving one career, active in the community, with the local police. i was trying to think last night how do you describe someone's marriage who you have never met, raymond gil de rubio, and i thought probably the best way to do that would be to use the statements that were given to you by people who took the stand or who were deposed. hilda colon, his former wife. she said an intelligent man. he was good to his kids. he never yelled at them. pretty strong statement from someone who had a separation from him. you know, in opening statement they could not wait to tell you a little bit of the bad stuff about him, how he left and never had any contact. that is what they told you. you heard a little bit different story once you got here, through the evidence. although he left when his son was about seven or eight, ray gil de rubio, jr., told you through his deposition, i had an opportunity to reconnect with my dad when i was 14. i was on the outs with my mother and dad took me back in, dad and his new wife. his words were, i loved him tremendously. his father supported him, got him back on the road to finish up what he was doing and get a career. there was no bigger supporter for that son than raymond gil de rubio, sr. he encouraged him to get into the sales business. he got the gift of gab. the father trying to give a path to his son. you heard from letitia diaz, a friend of the family. what did she say? when we first met him and they were dating, he would come around. he would court her at work, bring her gifts. went out of his way to help her push her car one day when it was broken down. how did she describe their marriage? wonderful. he supported her. he confided in her. they complemented each other. she said, i've never been married, but if i were, i'd want to be ray and elsie somewhere. there is been no evidence to suggest for 20 years they did not have a wonderful marriage. you have to understand what they had to then evaluate what was lost. now, during the course of the trial we have brought you a lot of experts; medical experts, industry experts. the one expert that you did not hear from was a damages expert. did not bring someone to talk about what damages are, what loss is. and there is a simple reason for that. members of the jury, we bring citizens like yourself to collectively come together because you are experts in life. you all have your own experiences with loved ones. you all know what it is to have, and everybody knows what it is to lose. and so we trust jurors to evaluate what they have had and then value what was lost, based on the evidence that came in in the case and the law that the judge will describe to you, in light of your common sense. raymond gil de rubio built a life with elsie for over 20 years. and you heard he had two passions in life. and it was not work. he loved to fish, and he loved elsie gil de rubio. two passions. he worked so that he could enjoy both of those passions. he and she worked so that they could retire and come to florida. that is part of the american dream. not necessarily florida. but you work, you put away, and at some point you can step away and say, now it is time for us to just enjoy us. they had a house in st. augustine. he protected her. when she was sick with cancer, he took care of her. little things; sound little. until he died, she would never pumped gas in her car before, ever. he made breakfast. wonderful cook. his passion was elsie. we are going to ask you to evaluate the loss that elsie has suffered in this case. and, again, we are [sic] going to use your common sense in light of the evidence you have heard and the law that the judge is going to instruct you. so one of the things we are going to ask you to do is compensate her for the funeral bill, as the law allows. at least do not make her bear the loss of paying for the funeral bill for her husband who died almost 13 years too early. one of the things we are going to ask you to evaluate is the loss of his support and services. the loss of support and services. what did he do for her? the cooking, the car, the cleaning. he loved the yard work. you heard it. 30 hours a week, almost like it was a job, except for him it was a passion. and she is entitled to be compensated for that loss. members of the jury, we have given you some evidence. we told you what minimum wage was back when ray was living. but, again, you can use your common sense. what is the value of that loss? and you can pay someone to cook your breakfast and maybe bring it in to bed to you, but it is not the same as someone who puts that extra touch, brings it in just right. you can go to denny's and get the breakfast. it is not quite the same. you can cut the lawn yourself or have someone help you do it, but it is not quite the same as looking out the window and watching him manicure the house that you live together in. we trust you will compensate her for those loss of support and services. and then there will be other item that you will have to compensate her for, and that is the loss of his companionship and protection, the pain and the suffering that she is had for the past almost 13 years. you heard the evidence. raymond gil de rubio, at least statistically, was expected to live another 12.9 years. let us look back at his health, if he did not have the cancer. dr. krowka from the mayo clinic said complete cardiac workup, good heart. raymond gil de rubio went to the mayo clinic for his health. when they said, we have got multinodular goiter in your thyroid, he went back. when they said, you need more treatments, he went back. he did everything they asked to get rid of that benign condition. when he had a prostate issue, an enlarged prostate, he went back. the man was in good health until the cancer hit him. and you have every reason to believe he would have lived all of those almost 13 years if it was not for the cancer. so now i ask you to evaluate 13 years of loss, years on the end of the marriage they should have had together. and we are going to ask you to use your discretion there. the end of the marriage. is it the beginning of the marriage or is it the end of the marriage that is the best? that is for you to decide. did they live just to work and live together, or did they work to finally settle down and retire and enjoy the good life together? everybody, again, as experts in life, can think of an example of loss and running out of time. everybody has a: i wish i only had a few more minutes to get ready; i wish that party would have gone on forever; i wish i could have seen the grandkids maybe just one more day, you know, on the holidays, and i wish i had one more day off on a three-day weekend; i wish i had one more dance; i wish i had someone there at the house now that i'm a little older and alone. you heard the evidence. go to st. augustine with her. she wakes up in bed, probably a fan spinning over the bed. i do not know if this morning is 1993 or is it 2003, but there is no one coming in the door with breakfast that day. and she is thinking to herself, i do not know if i even want to go in that kitchen. that was his domain. and the girls and the couples are going dancing friday, and i'm not sure i really feel like i've got a place. i do not have a partner. the house is kind of quiet, the house that i really wanted to retire in. it is not so enjoyable when there is no one else to talk to. everybody understands just a little more time. members of the jury, there is been no evidence at all to suggest that their marriage was not wonderful for elsie gil de rubio. there is no evidence to suggest that was not the greatest loss that she has ever suffered in her life. none. and by the measure of the law that you are going to hear, you are to measure it and fully compensate her for it. and for that use your discretion. some -- some would recognize the value of a marriage and say losing 13 years, 12.9 years, that would be $5 million. some might say that is too much; losing a loved one is a significant loss, it is the worst loss, but yet that is two million. and that would be appropriate, too. but it was a significant loss. it was her greatest loss. and under the law you must compensate her for that. it is your job to make up for what cannot be fixed, cannot be helped. i'm wrapping up here. i'd like to say thank you again. i will have one short opportunity at the end, probably, to talk to you, but let me just say it now. two-and-a-half weeks have gone by. we started with 118 people filling out questionnaires and eight were chosen. eight people swore that they would come in here and look at these parties indifferently, not give one an advantage or a disadvantage because of who they are or what they are. not because one's a company or because another's a smoker. you all swore you would listen to the evidence, and we know you have, you would evaluate the evidence, and we know you will, and you would render a verdict under the law, and we know you will. for over 200 years in this country our constitution has called for a trial by jury to settle disputes, and for over that time, a jury system in which we believe in, judges have every day been swearing in juries like yourself to be the finders of the fact. today in this courtroom you are judicial officers. and i would submit you are the most important state officers to these two parties here today. and you will decide this case as if it was one of your most important affairs. i ask you to check, yes, raymond gil de rubio did have the primary lung cancer; to say, yes, he was addicted to their cigarettes for over 15 years -- or 15 years, rather; that their negligence and their product defect caused his death; and to fully compensate her. thank you very much. rebuttal argument mr. patacca: i know you have been real attentive. i'm going to try to wrap this up quickly, but there are some things i have to respond to before i ask that you go back to decide the case. i'm not sure where i should start. there were a lot of boards. but let me start here: this case by philip morris has been about doubt, controversy and cowboys, plain and simple. they are coming to you in this closing argument -- and i cannot grab every board. it will take me too long. here's where they stand. they remind you i have the burden of proof, and they first say, he did not have lung cancer. but if he did, they cannot prove it was from cigarettes. but if they can, they cannot prove he was addicted to our cigarettes. but if they can, they did not prove he is so addicted that it made some difference. but if they can, he did not see the ads that we saturated the market in new york with. but if they can, that man knew from reader's digest it was dangerous and they cannot prove it made a difference. but if they can, ray gil de rubio was a risk-taker and entering into a midlife crisis, and they cannot prove anything we did enabled him to be addicted to our cigarettes. but if they can, it has nothing to do with the marlboro man, it has nothing to do with our advertising. yeah, but; yeah, but; yeah, but; yeah, but; yeah, but; yeah, but; and yeah, but. that is why we only have to come into court and prove by a preponderance of the evidence, to tip the scales. we have got that much going against us. elsie gil de rubio walks into court at 85 years of age with the best memory she can do, 18 years after her husband left her and passed away, against a skilled attorney whose job it is to put on the board everything she says in march at a deposition, and they drag her in again in may and swear her in and drag that up on the board and put that on there, and then they want to poke fun at her because -- i'm sorry, but at her age she sees a commercial about kit kat bar and she goes, you know what, that jogged my memory. kit kat bars. that is how our memory works when you are 85 she said. and, yet, the same time they have no answer for inez peel, who told you -- remember the granddaughter got up here and said, i remember talking to ray when i was a young girl. and he said, i tried to quit a couple times. it is hard. they could not put up her testimony a couple times saying that changed. it did not. absolutely consistent with what her grandmother told you. he tried to quit. they could not dispute what diana jackson said, diana hearon now, her daughter, when she first met ray, when he had a real candid conversation with her, a conversation of love, a man speaking to a woman who is not even his daughter but the daughter of his new wife. was he too proud to admit a weakness? he pulled her aside and he said, do not get hooked like me. do not get hooked like me. that is why she loved that man. that is what their marriage was about, their marriage, the marriage we are talking about in this courtroom. a man who took in her daughter, arm around the shoulder, trying to give her guidance. a man who took his own son in at 14, not because he was dumped on his doorstep and had no choice. they want to say he has choice and yet in that case he did not have a choice. bottom line is they came in here to malign ray gil de rubio; he left his family, never to be seen again. they forgot ray came back, ray, jr. they want to couch it in terms of you need to know his whole life to know the whole picture. they could not wait in opening statement, from the very beginning, to tell you, oh, he was a truant as a kid, got sent off to the boarding school. what did that have to do with this case? ask yourself why you needed to know that information. ask yourself why, when they mentioned, oh, he was in the war in 1940 but he did not go overseas, why does that matter? is somehow his service to this country any less because he did not go overseas during world war ii? you have got to ask yourself why do they need you to know that. yeah, but. yeah, but. let us talk about life. you need to know about what philip morris was doing in the '50s and the '60s before ray picked up their cigarette and put it to his lips because that is what was going on in their life. and marlboro's lifespan and ray gil de rubio's lifespan were coming together. they want to show you the board and compare and contrast marriages. they are dying to show you this board and at the same time tell you, do not worry, we are not talking bad about him. they show you two different lives. life with hilda, presumably -- they did not say it directly, but indirectly -- must have been boring, because he had sons, steady-paying job. all he did was trips to the movie, family nights. i do not know. some people find that to be an exciting life. no one's ever suggested that is why ray left. they want to contrast it with the life that he took on with elsie because they want you to compare and contrast. they want you to think less of him. oh, not only was he married to her, but there was a first marriage here. i'm surprised they did not have that part of the board. why are they throwing that out at you? no small children. oh, it must have been so exciting because there was no small children. they were just living the dream. because he started the travel agency, starting a new business. oh, that is not stressful. they forgot about the other part of the children equation. ray, jr., comes to live with him at a tough time, teenaged boy, having trouble in school. what is his dad do? picks him up by the bootstraps, says, let us get on with it. let us find your path. and his son said, i loved him tremendously for it. what did he say about his dad? no one ever gave him anything. he earned it. that is not a boy who got thrown on the doorstep and was reluctantly pulled in. that is a boy who became a man and is thankful for what his dad did. not small children, but teenagers. not even his own. he took them in. that is what they are trying to do here. they are throwing this man down so you think less of him when you go back and decide what happened. a man who elsie gil de rubio says, we accept his part in the responsibility, from a company that says, we have no responsibility, none. they want a free pass. you know, this whole trial and through the closing i was waiting to hear it, and i never did, never heard once. you heard ray. you heard smoker. you never heard customer, did you? our customer. here we go, pack of cigarettes. partnership was doing great for 15 years. no complaints when he was paying for the packs and for the cartons. but now he is just that smoker. she is just that widow. and they have the gall to suggest that somehow this woman is looking for a handout she is not entitled to. if they had any shred of evidence that this woman did not lose it all, they could have paraded them through the door, put them up on the stand, taken the oath and said, nah, that is not the way that marriage was. you did not hear anything. you know, we always -- lawyers describe justice, lady justice with those scales that we talked about in voir dire. lady justice, if you have ever seen her, she is blindfolded. justice is blind. we are asking you to judge this case on the facts you heard and right here, not on that extraneous stuff. they did not bring you anything to suggest that she has not lost it all and she should not be compensated for it all. you know, they want you to be even starting off and, yet, they still want you to kind of peek under the blindfold and take a look at a few things. yeah, i suggested it. some people would say five million for that marriage, and they would be right. some people might think that is too much. yeah, i said it. some people might think two million is appropriate, and others might say it is not enough. they want you to peek under the blindfold and rip her off, just because he was a smoker, just because he was their customer. in the '50s and '60s they saturated the market with their ads. their advertising, you heard, has three goals: let us get the nonsmokers to start, the non-marlboro people or the non-philip-morris people to switch, and we keep the marlboro people in house. he was in those categories. now, i kind of wrote it down. i was trying to remember. i do not even know how to say it to you, but it -- i mean, it is crazy. they want to tell you that we spent millions of dollars on advertising to customers and potential customers and, yet, at the same time argue that no one ever sees them, no one, and certainly not ray. does that make sense, that a company would spent hundreds of millions marketing their product and become number one and, yet, no one saw the marlboro ads, the ads that they told you that ray would joke around with about the marlboro man? i mean, maybe in -- maybe in ray's mind he was a marlboro man. they did not object. he is buying, and they want to tell you about how he owns this shop in the bronx and he had to tote a gun and he kept it in the business. what is wrong with that? he was protecting his business. if they could have sold him a horse and a cowboy hat with the pack, they would have done it. but now they want to malign him and say, well, he is a risk taker. he fits our model, but that is the reason you should not compensate him. ludicrous. let me go back to the first "yeah, but," the lung cancer and the smoking. here's the rub. they come into court and say, everybody knows smoking causes lung cancer but no one can prove it in any one case. they want you to accept dr. goldstein on the board and dr. lynch for the proposition, well, we are not willing to say whether or not mr. gil de rubio got his lung cancer from smoking, and, yet, they do not want you to accept that those two doctors, the ones who actually saw ray, are the very ones who testified under oath that he has lung cancer. yeah, but. they brought you dr. keller. and no disrespect to dr. keller, but it is not like dr. keller has been publishing in this area, like he is been teaching at colleges of medicine about pulmonary medicine. it is not like he was the world-renowned doctor to come in and say, wait a minute, i've solved this. in fact, he did not solve it. he had no answer for what the cancer was. but he did have to admit to mr. yegelwel -- is it possible it is lung cancer? yeah, it is possible. is it possible to be caused by smoking? yeah, it is possible. dr. keller, whose majority of his practice -he said the majority of the lung cancer patients he sees get it from smoking, and, yet, he wants to come in and tell you how just last week there was the exception, somehow to wrap himself up into that and convince you, well, this must be the exception, too. doubt and confusion. dr. chacko. now, here's the other rub. come into court and they get to tell you, everybody can quit smoking, even those who are addicted, everybody. but if you do quit, you were not addicted. they want to say that if you do not have quit attempts, that is because that is choice and you liked it, pleasure. but if you did have quit attempts, well, that was control. you cannot win with them. no proof will ever be enough. dr. chacko came in and said, well, those two times he tried to quit, that was control. for a whole week, right before he went back to two to three packs a week -- two to three packs a day. you cannot win. it is so unfair. and that is why we only have to prove it more probably than not. she cannot possibly compete. but she brought you the evidence. and i'm not afraid to say it. we brought you some world-class experts. we really did. now, you -- you get to decide who to believe and not to believe, judge their credibility and look at their credentials. but look at the credentials. i mean, it was one parade after another. and i do not mean that in a facetious way. dr. burns on the video. i mean, harvard, worked with a surgeon general, united states public health his whole career. he is teaching medicine in san diego at this college of law -- or, excuse me, the medical college. dr. proctor, a historian who is studied this area, yale, harvard, teaching at stanford. dr. schwartz, university of miami, went to harvard for his fellowship, did a tour at mit, he is at george washington university, our nation's capital, teaching future doctors how to be pathologists. dr. robicsek, who had one career as a cardiothoracic surgeon in hungary before he even got to the united states, and god bless him, for 50 years he is still been practicing and he is not quitting yet. he could hang out and be a forensic expert like dr. chacko and just show up at court, but, yet, he does not. every day, 5:30 in the morning, he is out there teaching residents. every weekend on call. and when that is not enough, he is going down to central america and he is opening up heart clinics. his board certifications were off the chart. dr. pollay spent his entire career in marketing and business. he teaches in vancouver. some world-class people. why do i bring that up? does it really make sense that that credential type of people would put their careers, their reputations and their professional lives and licenses at risk to take this stand to collect a paycheck just to tell you that mrs. gil de rubio's husband -- well, fill in the blank. does that really make sense? use your common sense. one second. okay. let me go back to that with dr. robicsek, because they said he was an expert in everything, or he claimed to be, and i do not think that is exactly what he said. as to surgical oncology, that is his expertise. there is a difference between surgical oncologists. they say he claimed to be a pathologist. that is not what he said. he has an interest but he did not review pathology and he was not pretending to be so in this courtroom. but if you want to look at people who have expertise that go down a whole chart, look at dr. chacko, forensic psychiatrist, which he told you meant fifty percent of his time he is sitting in the courtroom talking to other juries, presumably about a statistical manual that gets waved around and does not -- does not get opened up, it just stays under. did not hear about those -- those criteria. he is an expert in malingering. do you remember what he told you that meant? determining whether someone is -- is kind of faking it for financial gain. interesting you did not hear that from the experts, that somehow she was faking her loss for financial gain. he -- his list of credentials and what he claims to be an expert is a little bit long for a man who admits, i do not do the hospital anymore. i have an office-based practice, and about half the time i'm in a courtroom. and they oversold his credentials. he was not the number-one addiction expert at the va. he said he was the chief of the psychiatrists. it was not just addiction medicine they did. and i do not know where they are going with, well, you know how many veterans must be addicted. no idea where that is going. it must be similar to ray being in the army but did not get overseas. the bottom line is dr. chacko says he is got experience in addiction, fine. did he sell you this extensive credentialing with respect to nicotine? no. did he tell you how to evaluate whether someone's truly addicted? no. what did he use on cross-examination by mr. yegelwel? he used the things that dr. bailey brought you. not because they asked him; because mr. yegelwel asked him. they used the word control, talked about the cravings. those were not the criteria he brought you on direct. that was what dr. bailey told you. what does that tell you about dr. bailey? he was dead on. he is fallen on -- he fell on hard times, you know, and now he is coming back. but no one can suggest he does not know addiction. he is not coming here to tell you that ray gil de rubio was in the gutter smoking cigarettes. it is a different type of addiction, but it is addiction nonetheless. it may not have been what his situation was, where you go inpatient, but it is addiction nonetheless. nothing dr. bailey told you was anything different than when he practices every day, what he teaches every day, and what he has experienced. and dr. chacko implicitly recognized that by buying into his criteria. will not agree with it, but bought into it. so if we want to talk about experts who sell themselves a little bit -- a longer list than they should, i think we need to start there. and the lack of records, the autopsy that never was. maybe dr. robicsek was a little flippant about it, but he told you, nowadays we do living autopsies. you have -- what he meant by that was, and he told you, cts and mris. the diagnostic techniques are getting better and better every year. you see tissue with the fluid in it, with the blood in it, as the person is living and breathing, just like the patient that dr. goldstein and dr. lynch had to deal with, the living patient. no doubt dr. schwartz, our expert, would like to have an autopsy. always would. he said that. always. no reason not to. but why would there be an autopsy in this case? dr. lynch said. you have got lung cancer. dr. goldstein said, unfortunately, you have got lung cancer. unfortunately, it is terminal. when her husband died, they signed a death certificate that said he had died due to lung cancer. and now, unfortunately, she bears the risk that no autopsy was performed and he was cremated, after hearing all that. that is what she is got going up against her, and that is why the law only requires by a preponderance of evidence, the greater weight of the evidence, more probably than not. the -- when they want to talk -- again, when they want to have it one way but not the other, they said, ray gil de rubio, what did he tell his doctors about smoking? a pack a cigarettes a day. and he said who would know better? the smoker. yeah, but. they do not want you to accept what he told diana hearon. it is hard to quit. do not get hooked like me. ray could not speak for himself, but that was about as close as he could in this courtroom. you have got to hang on to that. they said no one would know better than the smoker. let me just make a couple more points. i want to finish. we lawyers, we could talk all day, but it is time we give you this case. i want to look at the chart. what happened to the marlboro products? it is evidence we put in. as the nicotine was going down, their sales were not going up as much, but they were still going up. remember their own expert, dr. werley, came in to talk about that. he said, well, nicotine's going down, but it is the sale increase that is going down. so sales are still going up. well, there are probably a lot of reasons that the experts could tell you why smokers do what they do. and you heard some issues about compensation. lesser nicotine, people will smoke more, lesser tar. the point i want to make, nicotine was going down. look where it was heading towards thanksgiving of '78. down. less nicotine. and when the man finally said enough and he was strong-willed enough to do it, they want to make fun of him and say, well, that is just control. dr. chacko wants to say that is control. and they couch it in terms of pleasure. everybody seemed to think he had got pleasure out of it. well, even dr. chacko had to agree. what does the dopamine do? eating, sex, smoking, the dopamine levels rise. it fills the pleasure center. the receptors are having pleasure. he finally broke away. but, unfortunately, as dr. robicsek told you, the majority of these lung cancer patients, of those who have already quit, are now in the former category. i've spoken long enough. i need your help. mr. reilly: objection, your honor. the court: pardon? mr. reilly: i kind of -the court: approach the sidebar. (a sidebar conference was held outside the hearing of the jury as follows:) mr. reilly: i object, your honor. you cannot make a plea for help to the jury. mr. patacca: well, he cut me off a little early. the court: no, no. what were you going to say? mr. patacca: yeah. i was going to say i need your help -- i need you to talk about reliance, why is it that they put so much into the marketing and, yet, they want to say he was not affected; at the same time they want you to believe that he is so smart and he saw all these public service announcements. the court: now, look -mr. patacca: and -- and, i mean, i was trying to couch -- he did the same thing that -- "ask yourself," i can say it that way. the court: i'm going to sustain this objection, but i think you can ask them to look at that evidence. mr. patacca: i will. the court: and what i intend to do when you sit down is -- it is gone so far, which is fine. i do not want a, you know, problem with that, but i'm probably going to release them for lunch -mr. patacca: okay. the court: -- and then. mr. reilly: instruct them afterwards? the court: -- instruct them afterwards. mr. patacca: okay. the court: so -- because i do not -- it will take an hour for lunch. mr. patacca: oh, okay. yeah, give them -the court: so -mr. patacca: sure. the court: okay? mr. patacca: i will rephrase it, your honor. the court: okay. mr. patacca: i was not intending to make a plea. i was trying to couch it the same way he did where he says, when you go back -- or when he talks -- when he made -- i want you to ask yourself this. the court: look -mr. patacca: i will -the court: -- you-all are both doing a good job -mr. patacca: okay. the court: -- representing your clients. you are getting a lot of cooperation. mr. patacca: yes, sir. the court: so i'm going to rule -- rule on objections when they are made. i think that is too far out to say "help me," you know. but -- but if you couch it in the terms, "you go back there and look at it," you know. mr. patacca: okay. the court: okay? mr. patacca: yes, sir. (the sidebar conference was concluded, and the following proceedings were held:) the court: are you ready? mr. patacca: yes, sir. the court: all right, mr. patacca? mr. patacca: thank you. the court: uh-huh. mr. patacca: all right. we need you to go back there and ask yourself why, why they think it is important to tell you that ray must have known what was out in the public health debate, the reader's digest, the time magazine, and, yet, he would not also be cognizant of the ads and the doubt and controversy, the public debate they threw out there. why is it they want you to believe one and not the other? mr. reilly started this case in his opening and said there are some facts that are not disputed. i only suggest that here's one fact that is not in dispute, also. until thanksgiving 1990 -excuse me -- thanksgiving 1978 they never made a public statement admitting that their cigarettes were addictive. until thanksgiving 1978 they never made a public statement admitting that their cigarettes caused lung cancer. there is no dispute of that. thank you. the court: ladies and mr. dillon, we are going to break for lunch at this point. i want to give you several cautions. number one, the last phase of the trial, the instructions on the law which i'm going to read to you and which you will take back in the jury room with you, is a very important part of the case. so please try to keep an open mind even at this point and, please, do not discuss the case among yourselves or with anyone else at this point. and, as i told you before the arguments began, what the lawyers say is not evidence nor is it your instructions on the law, but they are entitled to comment on both the evidence and the -- and the law, and they know what instructions i'm going to give you. so -- but the reason we have more than one of you is because we believe collective memory is better than an individual's memory of what the evidence was. so, again, we are going to break for lunch until 1:30, but please do not discuss the case among yourselves or with anyone else. and if you see any of these people sitting in the audience or the participants, no one's going to talk to you, okay? so with that, we are in recess -- i will -- it will take me about maybe 25, 30 minutes to read you the instructions, and we will give you the case after lunch, okay? thank you.