yes, sir. ladies and gentlemen of the jury, in for 50 the court: mr. heimann: a fundamental way, this case is quite extraordinary. years or more, the defendants in this case denied that smoking cigarettes was a hazard to health. smoking caused serious diseases and led to early death. they denied that time and again, they put out the message that the claims of health hazards had not been proved, that they were the subject of scientific controversy, that more research was needed to find the answers, all the while spending hundreds of millions, in fact, literally billions of dollars advertising cigarettes to the american public, all to get people, mostly youngsters, to take up smoking and to keep smoking, to keep them buying cigarettes, to persuade them not to quit. now, when they are called in to court to account for their behavior, they blame ray gollihue for doing exactly, exactly what they wished him to do, urged him to do, spent millions and millions of dollars to get him and others like him to do, all as if the 50-year campaign of denial, doubt, and deception had never happened. when i began talking to you a week or so ago, i told you at the outset that ginnie gollihue accepts that ray was responsible for his own behavior, including the fact that he smoked cigarettes, but he has paid and he has paid v8-98 now the question is whether these dearly for that. defendants, who manufactured and sold the cigarettes to ray gollihue, should be held responsible for their behavior, and that is now up to you. let us start with the first issue in the case that was ray gollihue addicted to the you will be asked to decide: nicotine in the cigarettes that he smoked? what i'm showing you is a portion of the verdict form which you will be given in the course of your deliberations to answer a series of questions that will lead to the outcome of the case. the first question you will be asked is whether i'm going to focus on ray gollihue's death -- i'm sorry. the second question: cigarettes containing nicotine? was ray gollihue addicted to you have heard testimony from two prominent they both experts on addiction, dr. burns and dr. cummings. testified that without a shadow of a doubt, ray gollihue was addicted to the nicotine in the cigarettes that he smoked. the defendants, on the other hand, have presented no evidence, none from any expert, to contest the issue of addiction. with all the resources of these defendants -- ms. parker: objection, your honor, pretrial ruling. the court: mr. heimann: sustained. you can be assured that if there was v8-99 any qualified expert on the planet earth who could have said otherwise on the question of addiction, you would have heard from them. mr. davis: objection, your honor, improper argument. the court: mr. heimann: sustained. if you are not convinced, based on the testimony that you have heard, that ray was addicted to nicotine, there is nothing i can say that would make any difference. let me go to the second question -- third question, i'm sorry. cigarettes containing nicotine a legal cause of his death? was ray gollihue's addiction to the judge will instruct you on the issue of cause, and let me say now, during the course of my argument here, i'm going to be referring from time to time to what the instructions are to be. i try to get them right, but if i'm -- anything i say to you is different from what his honor says to you, obviously you will follow the court's instructions. my understanding is that the judge will instruct you essentially as follows, that addiction is a legal cause of death if it directly and in the natural and continuous sequence produces or contributes substantially to producing the death so that it can reasonably be said that but for the v8-100 addiction, the death would not have occurred. but in order to be regarded as a legal cause of addiction may death, addiction need not be the only cause. be a legal cause of death even though it operates in combination with the act of another, some natural cause, or some other cause, so long as the addiction itself contributes substantially to producing the death. let me see the cummings demonstrative, please. you will recall dr. cummings testified on the subject of addiction and showed you this demonstrative as an aid to explain to you the role that nicotine addiction plays in the ultimate disease and death of a smoker. with the fact that someone addicted to nicotine has constrained choices, and those constrained choices contribute substantially to smoking, why the person smokes. and it is the exposure, of course, to the toxins in we begin the cigarettes that a smoker smokes that ultimately substantially contributes, causes the smoking-related disease, in mr. gollihue's situation, his death. the natural contributing factor that the court -- the law is talking about when it talks about substantial factor in contributing to an outcome of disease. this is now, the defense undoubtedly, as they have throughout this trial, will argue to you that mr. gollihue had a choice whether to start smoking and whether to v8-101 continue smoking once he had started. they will say that he continued to smoke because he liked it, because it gave him pleasure. now, as i've argued to you and as you heard from the experts, the fact that a smoker takes pleasure, derives pleasure from smoking, is inherently the aspect of addiction. snort cocaine because it does not give you pleasure. does. and in the case of nicotine, as we know, it alters -- literally alters the brain so that the brain needs the nicotine in order to function properly. that is the essence of addiction. that is the whole point. one does not it but even if it were true that that was not a function of nicotine, the fact that the choice on the part of mr. gollihue may have played a part in the reason he continued smoking does not mean that addiction did not also after all, imagine, mr. gollihue was not really play a role. addicted to cigarettes? do you really believe he would have smoked for 40 years, day in and day out, one pack, two packs a day, just because he liked it, with no consequence, no effective addiction at all? you may recall david burns' testimony. dr. burns testified, to a reasonable degree of medical certainty, that mr. gollihue was not only addicted but that his addiction was a contributing cause towards his death. let me go back, if i might, to the verdict form. v8-102 now we get to question 1: by a non-bac form of lung cancer? was ray gollihue's death caused so let us talk a little bit about this bac thing. the defendants presented the testimony of a dr. barsky to say that ray's cancer was not caused by smoking. instead -- he claims -- it was an extremely rare cancer called bac with no known cause. of the experts you heard from on this question. let us stop and take a look at the quality let us start with dr. aplin, the treating she had absolutely you remember her, i'm sure. oncologist. no ulterior reason to testify to anything other than the unvarnished truth. she told you that she would not even accept money to appear in court, donating it to charity. she and her team of doctors in gainesville, including a pathologist who examined ray gollihue's cancer cells under a microscope, found that he had adenocarcinoma, not bac. and on a second opinion from the medical facility over in houston, cancer specialists, the pathological exam confirmed the diagnosis of adenocarcinoma, not bac. dr. aplin described in detail for you the three distinct features of bac, and ray, according to dr. aplin, had none of them. if there had been any indication, any indication at all to her and her team, of bac, it would have been noted, she testified to you, because it would have made a v8-103 and when she was difference to them, but they found none. asked by r.j. reynolds' counsel on cross-examination whether the tumor that was originally detected on examination of mr. gollihue was located in the periphery or on the edge of the lung, an absolutely key factor for dr. barsky's claim that we have a bac cancer rather than the cancer diagnosed by dr. aplin, she said, "absolutely not." may i approach, your honor? the court: mr. heimann: yes. you remember the diagram that dr. aplin drew for you of the lungs and the trachea, and she pointed out -- or drew for you exactly where that tumor was, right there, not on the edge, not on the periphery, in the upper lobe in the center of the lung, and she testified that is where it was. and then we have dr. barsky, the $2.6 million as cigarette industry expert for the past 20-plus years. his first reason for saying the cancer was bac, he testified that according to the medical records, the tumor was in the periphery of the lung, on the edge, directly contrary to dr. aplin's testimony and what she said the medical records showed. she was the doctor who reviewed the x-rays, who saw in the x-rays where the tumor was. barsky never saw that. barsky did not even read dr. aplin's testimony that she gave you here in court before appearing before you to testify. v8-104 ms. parker: objection, your honor, the rule's invoked. the court: mr. heimann: overruled. he was perfectly free to do that, to inform himself what dr. aplin had to say to address her points, but he did not do that. because he had no answers? examination by rjr's counsel to address the points that dr. aplin had made about why this was not bac. he was not even asked on ask yourself why not. is it barsky refuses to accept the world health organization's definition of bac, that it does not involve the pleura or invade -- excuse me -- the pleura -- that the cancer does not invade the pleura of the lung, meaning the lining of the lung, when we know, according to dr. aplin and the medical records, that that is exactly what ray gollihue's cancer did, exactly what the pathology showed. really think about it. ray gollihue was a heavy he gets lung cancer, and smoker of cigarettes for 40 years. instead of being caused by smoking, according to dr. barsky, he tells you that it is one of the rarest of all cancers of the lung. remember, that is how dr. aplin described it, one of the rarest forms of cancer of the lung, without any known cause. i mean, really, does that make the slightest bit of sense? once you have found on these issues in favor of v8-105 the plaintiff, you will have found that mr. gollihue was a member of what we call the engle class. you have heard about that before, i know. the engle case by the jury in that year-long trial. you must then apply the findings in as the court will instruct you, those findings include (1) smoking causes lung cancer; nicotine in cigarettes is addictive; rjr and philip morris both placed cigarettes on the market that were defective and unreasonably dangerous; r.j. reynolds and philip morris concealed and omitted material information not otherwise known or available, knowing that the material was false or misleading, or failed to disclose a material fact concerning the health effects or addicting nature of cigarettes, or both; that philip morris and r.j. reynolds agreed to conceal or omit information regarding the health effects of cigarettes or their addictive nature with the intention -- the intention -- that smokers and the public rely on that information to their detriment; that r.j. reynolds and philip morris sold or supplied cigarettes that were defective; and finally, that both of those companies were negligent. let us turn to the real issues in the case. how did the defendants' behavior impact ray gollihue when he started to smoke at the age of 13? from lois that she and ray thought smoking was cool, and we know v8-106 that is why she says they started. did they think it was cool? but ask yourself, why first of all, we know that both of these defendants targeted teenagers in their marketing efforts, singling them out to get them to start smoking and to start smoking their brands in the hopes that they would continue smoking their brands and make a lot of money for the companies. let us take a look at exhibit 31, for example. this is a confidential internal memorandum from r.j. reynolds entitled some thoughts -- need the title -- some thoughts about new brands of cigarettes for the youth market. see. rjr. well, let us this is by claude teague, by the way, scientist inside what do they mean by the youth market? "at the outset it should be said we are presently, and i believe unfairly, constrained from directly promoting cigarettes to the youth market; that is, to those in the approximately 21-year-old and under group. if this be so, there is certainly nothing immoral or unethical about our company attempting to attract those smokers to our products. realistically, if our company is to survive and prosper over the long term, we must get our share of the youth market." let me see exhibit 58, please. this is from a presentation in 1975 about v8-107 marketing and how they wanted to increase -- this is rjr again, reynolds, increase our young adult franchise. so what does that mean? of the young adult in the cigarette market in 1960. now, look what they mean by young adult. let us look at the growing importance the young adult market, the 14-to-24 age group, represented 21 percent of the population. market was to these two companies. that is what the young adult exhibit 146. this was another secret rjr document entitled younger adult smokers: what does it say? replacement smokers." strategies and opportunities. and "younger adults' importance as now, what does replacement smokers mean? they have to replace those who die or quit. replacement smokers? two-thirds of male smokers start by age 18. start after age 24." you can see right there. it means and who are the "more than only 5 percent and there is -- there is a chart by age, starting at that is who they were targeting. age 12 up through age 18. that is who their replacement -- that is the population from which their replacement smokers were going to come. now, i need you to go back in time with me. i need you to understand how things were with smoking when ray was growing up and first took it up. the defendants' v8-108 marketing and advertising of cigarettes in the first half of eighty percent the 20th century created a culture of smoking. of the men who were ray's father's age, by the time ray was in elementary school and then a teenager, eighty percent smoked cigarettes. you remember that this is from dr. burns's that is what ray grew up with. testimony, and he showed you that the cohorts -- meaning five-year intervals, so the generation of ray's father were that first -- or second line -- first line, i guess -- got up to eighty percent. would have been his role models. millions of dollars to portray smoking as manly, glamorous, and, yes, cool, the thing to do, all for the purpose of influencing people, teenagers to start smoking and as adults to keep smoking. those the defendant spent let me see 177, please. this is a report from the federal trade commission, 1967, about cigarette advertising and its effects. "cigarette advertising reaches virtually all americans who can either read or understand the spoken word. so pervasive is cigarette advertising that it is virtually impossible" -- impossible -- "for americans of almost any age to avoid." and now we pick up the comment about to what "as extent children were exposed to this advertising. v8-109 stated above, youth is also exposed to cigarette during just one week in 1967, in january, the advertising. aforementioned 60 network programs, sponsored in whole or in part by cigarette products, played before 322 million viewers who were under 21 years of age. million viewers aged 2 to 12 and 140 aged 13 to 17." this was not an accident by these companies. these included 150 they knew what they were doing. target to replace the smokers they were losing to death and to those who managed to quit. they knew where they had to now, of course, ray never said that he started smoking because of some particular advertisement that he saw or because of ads at all for that matter. but do you doubt for a second that they did not play a significant role in why he started smoking? influence teenagers, why in the world did these companies spend millions and millions, literally billions of dollars advertising to attract them? if they did not, if they did not and remember, by the way, the time period we are talking about was a long time before there were any warnings ray was born in 1942, at age on the packages of cigarettes. 13 when it was the mid '50s. cigarette warnings did not come into play until another decade later. this is a very different situation from today, when the real dangers of smoking, the real dangers, are v8-110 known, well known. in the early 1950s, science was just beginning to come out into the public on the hazards of smoking, and so too was these defendants' campaign of doubt and deception. let me see burns no. 4, please. you recall this from the testimony of dr. burns, a graph showing the increase in cigarette consumption over the 20th century. and you can see, as we have already heard many times, how it went up from the early part of the century into the 1950s and reached their peak at about 1953. and you can see that -- the red line there is showing reports linking cigarettes to cancer, and there was a sharp decline. that is when the mouse painting experiments came out, life magazine and so forth, a sharp decline for the first time, really, except for the depression, in the history of the united states. but then beginning in 1955 it started back up that corresponds almost exactly, almost exactly, again. with the campaign of doubt and deception that you heard so much about in the course of this trial. and there was ray gollihue swept up in it, right in the middle of it. so ray started to smoke in 1955, and he smoked all through high school, with that increase in smoking, and became addicted. these defendants bear responsibility for their they targeted teenagers. they targeted the behavior. v8-111 they made smoking look cool, glamorous, manly. young. created a culture of smoking in this country. they let us turn to the response of those companies to they got together in new york city. the scientific findings that were coming out in the early '50s. a public relations firm. of doubt and deception. quell the fears of smokers, to get them to keep smoking, to get them to keep buying cigarettes, to keep them from quitting. they hired they agreed to sponsor a campaign they designed that campaign to they started out that campaign with what they called the frank statement, the candid, the honest statement to american smokers, published it in over 400 newspapers, reached a circulation of something like 50 million people. they said a number of things in that statement. i want to focus on just two of them for purposes of my argument today. the first, "we accept an interest in people's health as a basic responsibility, paramount" -- paramount -- "to every other consideration in our business." the second, "we always have and always will cooperate closely with those whose task it is to safeguard the public health." well, let us take a look -- exhibit 86 -- at how this is that memorandum to they fulfilled those promises. the planning committee that was prepared right about the v8-112 let us see what the i know you saw "there is only one time that the frank statement came out. public relations people saw as their job. this earlier, but it bears repeating. problem -- confidence and how to establish it; public assurance and how to create it -- in a perhaps long interim when scientific doubts must remain. and most important, how to free millions of americans from the guilty fear that is going to arise deep in their biological depths, regardless of any pooh-poohing logic, every time they light a cigarette." now, does that sound to you as if they thought the health of their customers was paramount to any other aspect of their business? let us see exhibit 27. this is a report from a few years later, 1969. had not changed let us see what they thought at that time. any in all the years from 1953 up to the late '60s. "doubt is our product since it is the best means of competing with the 'body of fact' that exists in the mind of the general public. controversy." it is also the means of establishing a does that sound like they thought that the health of their customers was their most important, paramount interest, or does it sound like money was most important to them? v8-113 and all the time, they knew full well, full well, it was not news to them. this is that smoking caused lung cancer. this was not in doubt inside the companies. something they knew and believed. let me see exhibit 158. you saw this during the course of the trial, i this is when the folks from the bat, british believe. american tobacco company, visited the united states in 1958, so this is just a few years after that promise that is in the frank statement about how they considered the health of their consumers of paramount importance. they visited most of the cigarette companies and the public relations outfit that they would set up, the tirc, tobacco industry research committee, and this is what those who visited from england found out about what the people over here in these companies believed about lung cancer, with one exception. employee, by the way, of any of the companies. individuals whom we met believed that smoking causes lung cancer, if by causation we mean any chain of events that leads finally to lung cancer and which involves smoking as an indispensable link." that is mr. greene, who was not even an "the so much for the people's health being a matter of paramount importance to these companies. and what about cooperating with the public health v8-114 authorities? did they fulfill that promise? you just two examples of how they did that. let me give now, you this was let us look at exhibit 878. this is a letter from 1963 from a lawyer at brown -- from the folks at brown & williamson. have to understand what was going on at this time. when the surgeon general was putting together that first report, that first major report, on smoking and health. one of the things that the surgeon general and the people working with him did was to ask the cigarette companies to share with them the results of their internal research about smoking and health, to assist the surgeon general in reaching their conclusions. and and this is what this is about. this lawyer he says, "i'm of the opinion that any description says -- he is enclosing the substance of a proposed letter to the surgeon general's advisory committee on smoking and health. in the letter to the committee of the methods and steps involved in the various scientific research programs conducted by brown & williamson must necessarily be so vague and incomplete as to be irksome to the reader." sound like they are cooperating with the public health authorities to you? let us take a look at exhibit 30, from about the in fact, exactly the same time period, same time period. v8-115 because it is also having to do with this question of whether or not they are going to turn over their research to the surgeon general. this has to do with the research that brown & and you may remember the documents that williamson and bat, that british american tobacco company, had done into the effects of nicotine and whether or not it was addictive. showed that they concluded that nicotine was addictive, and they were in the business of selling nicotine. "finch" -- finch, who was the president of brown & williamson at the time -- "agrees submission battelle" -- that is that addiction nicotine research -- "developments to surgeon general undesirable, and we agree." it says, and they did not. with the surgeon general. they did not share that research let me say just a few things about these internal the people who wrote these documents documents, by the way. at the time never expected for one second that they would ever see the light of day outside of their companies. they expected they would remain secret and confidential, and it was only with the developments of history that that did not happen. these documents, for the most part, did not become -- were not discovered until mostly in the late 1990s and the early part of the 2000s, and that is why they are v8-116 available to us today. but you can be sure, given the fact that the people who wrote them never expected them to come out, that they reflect what the people who were writing them actually thought at the time and were actually doing at the time. how did the campaign of doubt and deception, the how did it influence him and others like him? phony controversy, how did it impact people like ray gollihue? how much did ray gollihue know about the hazards of smoking? what did he believe was true? due to his addiction? she is the historian, you will recall -- everyone knew. everyone was completely and fully informed, including ray, from the time he was an elementary school student. was he in a state of denial if we listen to professor hoffman -- but let us look again at the quality of the experts dr. burns. who testified in this case about this question. dr. burns has devoted literally his entire career to serving the public. he has been either a contributor or reviewer or editor of every single surgeon general report since 1975. think about that. he has been at the forefront, literally more than probably any other living person, in efforts to protect the public from the hazards of cigarette smoking. dr. cummings participated in no less than six surgeon general reports. institutes of health, the national cancer institute, the his work for the national v8-117 he too has devoted his entire american cancer society. professional career to issues relating to smoking behavior and smoking cessation. he has counseled tens of thousands of smokers on issues relating to smoking cessation, and he is compiled and organized the enormous document depository of the internal documents, some of which we have been looking at. these witnesses, these people, i should say, these men, are truly public servants whose mission is nothing more than to protect the public health, a mission that with them goes back 30 years or more. both of these men devoted the bulk of their careers to public service before they ever began testifying in court trials like this one. from their testimony it is clear that the combination of the defendants' campaign of doubt and deception, the never-ending blizzard of advertising selling the virtues of smoking, and the illusory safety of filters and low-tar cigarettes, all directed at smokers to keep them smoking, to keep them from quitting, were successful in influencing people like ray and millions of others. how about professor hoffman, on the other hand? she knew literally nothing about the awareness of americans about smoking until one day she was hired by the cigarette she was literally created as an expert witness industry. from whole cloth by the industry. she is one of the stable of experts all created by the industry solely for the v8-118 purpose of coming into court and testifying before juries like you that everybody knew, from the time of christopher columbus, that cigarettes cause disease and that cigarettes are addictive. face of the findings, on multiple occasions, by the federal agencies who are charged with the responsibility for public health and welfare. she says that in the and she says that. from the 1981 ftc report that i asked her about, you may recall, from 1981, "based upon an analysis of all the data reviewed in its entirety, staff has concluded that there appear to be such significant gaps in consumer knowledge that a substantial portion of the population does not know how dangerous smoking is or whether the dangers of smoking apply to them and therefore does not have an understanding of the health hazards of smoking. "more specifically, the data suggest that a large number of consumers do not know what diseases are related to smoking; a substantial number seriously misunderstand and underestimate the extent of the increased risk of suffering these health problems as the result of smoking; many seriously underestimate or are unaware of the severity of these health consequences and the increased risk of premature death from these illnesses; and a significant number of consumers incorrectly do not believe that these health consequences have any personal relevance to themselves." v8-119 "they are wrong. now, you may remember that professor hoffman said, i know better." let me show you what philip morris internally said they are wrong. i'm right. this is philip morris, their about that 1981 ftc report. experts, in july of 1981, writing about the ftc staff report, the one i just showed you. made of the statements in chapter 3 of the ftc report." that is the chapter that i showed you. read from here, and that is the chapter i read from when professor hoffman was on the witness stand. "careful study has been that is the chapter i here's their conclusion. "the statements made about consumer knowledge, those we have been able to trace to their source, and that is almost all of them, are accurately reported and are based on sound research techniques provided by reputable research technicians (suppliers)." that is what philip morris thought about the accuracy of the information in that report, contrasted with what a professional witness, created by the industry for the very purpose of coming in here and clouding your understanding of the truth, had to say about it. ray gollihue, like so many others, was caught between the public health message that smoking may be harmful and the industry's lies, the doubt and deceit, and v8-120 it is impossible to know today exactly how much the illusion and false promises of filter and low-tar cigarettes. ray really heard or read about the public health message, but certainly he heard some of it, although it is impossible to know how much of it that he actually believed. but it is equally certain, equally certain, that he was exposed to the campaign of the defendants, that campaign of lies and deception, and to the false promises of filter cigarettes and low-tar cigarettes. and all the while he struggled, as did so many others, between the two as a result of his addiction. again to stop smoking, more often over time as he grew older, but he was never able to succeed for good, not even after he was diagnosed with lung cancer. we do know that he tried and tried ask yourself this question: if the phony controversy, the campaign of doubt and deception, did not have profound effects on smokers like ray, if the false promises of filter cigarettes and low-tar cigarettes did not have a profound impact on smokers like ray gollihue, did not affect those would have otherwise have quit like ray, did not actually create doubt in the minds of smokers like ray, why did they do it and continue it for 50 years? spending literally hundreds of millions of dollars in the process. why? now let me ask a different question. how would v8-121 things have been different without the phony controversy, without the campaign of doubt, without the false promises of safety by filter and low-tar cigarettes? companies had admitted at the beginning what they knew full well to be true? what if they had allowed the public health authorities a free and unobstructed field to get their message across? reason for doubt; one message and one message only: start. there would have been no room for doubt, no "do not what if these quit. it kills you." well, we will never know. the defendants and their co-conspirators prevented us from ever knowing. know, you know it would have been different. that is what we will never know. but, you how different? let me talk a little bit about ray gollihue and what kind of man he was, what he was like. you have heard from his family, from his friends, from those who worked with him, from those whose job it was to evaluate his character. honorable, affable, hardworking. time of war. around. a good father, a good and loving husband. he was loved. from all accounts he was honest, responsible, he served his country in he was funny, friendly, sociable, fun to be he was a good brother, a good and faithful friend, he was respected. how does that compare to the character of the executives of these defendants and their creatures who lied v8-122 time and time and time again, who plotted together to conceal the truths that they knew, to sow doubt and to deceive people like ray gollihue? for money. and for what? for what? you heard from many of these at trial. howard cullman, chairman of the board of philip morris, industry spokesman; joseph cullman, head of brown & williamson and then at philip morris, on the executive committee of the tobacco institute; helmut wakeham, head of research at philip morris. applesauce will kill you. remember that? james bolling, vice president at philip morris; robert heimann -- trust me, no relation -- president of american tobacco, now part of r.j. reynolds; edward horrigan, once ceo of rjr, cigarettes are not addictive; james johnston, ceo of rjr, 1994, cigarettes are not addictive; william campbell, ceo of philip morris, 1994, he does not know that cigarettes cause cancer. as fine a man as ray was, he had one fatal weakness. he fell prey to these defendants' plot, to their deception, to their lies, to the doubts that they planted in his mind, just as the defendants intended. despite his many attempts, he could not break through the addiction to nicotine that held him so tightly. now, the defendants will argue that no one has testified that ray actually read or heard the statements by v8-123 would you really expect any person -- any of the defendants and their agents of doubt. surprising? the persons who testified here to be able to recall a specific advertisement, a specific news article, a specific television program which carried those statements? now, is that as the court will instruct you, circumstantial couple that with the largest advertising evidence can be just as persuasive as direct evidence. here we have a wealth of evidence about how pervasive and intense and longstanding the defendants' public campaign of doubt and deception was. campaign the world has ever known. will argue that ray was exposed to the message from the public health authorities -- and we do not deny that he was -- the circumstantial evidence is equally strong that he was undoubtedly the recipient of the messages from the defendants as well. all right. just as the defendants let me turn now to the claims, the legal claims in this case, starting with negligence. said a moment ago, when i was referring to the engle findings, the judge will instruct you that the defendants in this case have been found to be negligent, and you are to accept that finding. as i the only issue for you to decide is whether that negligence was a legal cause of ray gollihue's death, and the judge will tell you that negligence is a legal cause if v8-124 it directly and in natural and continuous sequence produces or contributes substantially to producing such death. was it a substantial contributing factor so it can reasonably be said that but for the negligence, the death would not have occurred? but importantly, as i said before, in order to be regarded as the legal cause of death, it need not be the negligence may be a legal cause of death even only cause. though it operates in combination with other causes, with the act of another person, a natural cause, some other cause. now, this is important for one particular reason, and this is that if you find, as you should, that ray gollihue's own behavior, in beginning to smoke and continuing to smoke, was, in part, a cause of his death, that does not excuse these defendants from their responsibility, for their own negligence which substantially contributed to mr. gollihue's death. the defendants' conduct is still a legal cause the question of because it contributed to that outcome. mr. gollihue's fault -- and this is going to be true for all of the claims that i'm going to talk with you about -- is to be considered by you not in connection to whether or not there was a legal cause, but in connection with comparative fault, where you will be asked to decide what percentage of v8-125 the fault for mr. gollihue's death he bears and what percentage they bear. now, let us go to the second claim, the claim for again, the court will instruct you that the defect. defendants' cigarettes that they sold were defective and the only issue for you to determine unreasonably dangerous. is whether that defect is a legal cause of gollihue's death, mr. gollihue's death. was so long as in natural and continuous sequence, the defect produced or contributed substantially in producing the death so that it can reasonably be said that but for the defect in the product, the death would not have occurred. and, again, you should find that it the next claim is for fraudulent concealment. the court will instruct you that the defendants did, in fact -- did, in fact -- conceal or omit material information not otherwise known or available, knowing the material was false or misleading, or failed to disclose a material fact concerning the health effects and addictive nature of smoking cigarettes. the issue for you is to determine whether mr. gollihue relied, to his detriment, on that concealment or omission of material information. the court will tell you that a material fact is one of such importance that mr. gollihue would not have acted as he did but for the concealment or omission. v8-126 now, we do not have ray here to tell you that he relied on the defendants' concealment, on their doubt, on their false images of safe filters and lower tar cigarettes, and this, of course, applies to all the other claims. he is just not here to tell you. but we do not need that. his actions speak louder he continued to buy and smoke he continued to buy and smoke than his words ever could. cigarettes for 40 years. filtered cigarettes and low-tar cigarettes. do you need? in response to the defendants' behavior. he acted. what more proof his conduct confirms that he acted the last claim is for conspiracy. conspiracy, the judge will tell you, is an agreement between two or more entities -- in this case companies -- to do an unlawful act such as concealing or omitting material information, and that is a conspiracy. each party to a conspiracy is responsible for the acts or omissions of every other party to the conspiracy so long as the acts or omissions were in furtherance of that conspiracy. deception that we are talking about that was hatched in 1953 at that meeting in new york city and that carried on and on and on in the last half of the 20th century. and this is the conspiracy of doubt and the court will instruct you that these defendants, in fact, agreed as part of that conspiracy to conceal v8-127 information or omit information regarding the health effects of smoking cigarettes or their addictive nature, with the intention -- with the intention -- that smokers in the public would rely on that information to their detriment. and the issue for you, again, is whether mr. gollihue relied, and i say to you the evidence of that is in his conduct. in this trial the defendants have literally accused ms. gollihue and her son of asking for an award of money, as if there was something very wrong with that. but whether rightly or wrongly, money damages are all that our system allows for justice. it is the only means we have of doing justice. i promise this to you, ginnie gollihue and shane would gladly exchange any amount of money, any sum, to have ray gollihue with them alive today. we are asking only for those damages which the law as the judge will allows in a case for wrongful death. instruct you, those damages are for ginnie gollihue's loss of ray gollihue's companionship and protection and for her mental pain and suffering as a result of ray's injuries and death. father's companionship, instruction, and guidance, and for his mental pain and suffering. shane too is seeking damages for his loss of his the law does not have any exact standard for fixing you should award the amounts, if you the amount of damages. v8-128 find for the plaintiff, that you believe are fair and just. but in doing so, you should be guided by the life expectancies of ginnie, shane, and of ray. there is every reason to believe that if ray had never started smoking or if these defendants had not been so successful with their campaign of doubt and deception in preventing him from quitting, he would be alive today. death at 53. what is the value of the loss of a husband for 20 this is for you to or more years or the loss of a father? this is your decision, yours and yours alone, but i decide. would ask that you not award more than $10 million to either of them. an award beyond that is too much and would in all likelihood be taken away anyway. follow the instructions the court gives you. base your verdict on the evidence and those instructions, and they will lead you to do justice. but whatever you do on this question, the amount should be respectful of virginia gollihue and of shane. as i said, ms. gollihue accepts that ray was so when you come to consider this issue of this means that he -- she responsible for his own behavior. acknowledges that he bears some degree of fault for his own death. comparative fault that i mentioned a moment ago, you will accept that, and you will be called upon to compare the degree of his fault to the behavior of these defendants. v8-129 how do you assess the degree to which mr. gollihue well, one way of thinking of it is that mr. gollihue you might take was responsible for his own demise and the degree to which these defendants are responsible for their own behavior and its contribution to mr. gollihue's addiction and to his death? began smoking when he was 13, 13 years old. into account that at that young and tender age, the defendants knew perfectly well what they were doing in marketing cigarettes to teenagers and targeting children as young as 13. you also might consider that for the first 11 years that ray smoked and became addicted, there were not any warnings on the cigarette packs, none at all, about the health hazards of smoking, despite the fact, despite the fact that these defendants knew perfectly well how deadly by the time the warnings were first their product was. placed on the pack in the middle '60s, ray gollihue was thoroughly addicted, just as the makers of those cigarettes had intended him to be. another consideration, in terms of weighing the degree of fault here, is the intentionality on the part of the defendants and what they did. if this were a criminal case, i'd be talking to you about premeditation and deliberation in what they did. this was no accident. this campaign, their v8-130 behavior, was intentional, was deliberate, was designed, had a purpose, came from the very tops of these companies, and they did it knowing to a certainty that what they sold was going to lead to the death of tens of thousands of people. compare that to ray's fault. now, let me talk to you a little bit about the judge will instruct you that in this punitive damages. phase of the trial, the one we are in now, if you find for the plaintiff on one or more of the claims in liability, you then must determine whether the conduct of these defendants warrants the award of punitive damages. the court will instruct you that punitive damages are warranted if you find by clear and convincing evidence that (1) the conduct causing mr. gollihue's death was so gross and flagrant as to show a reckless disregard of human life or of the safety of persons exposed to the effects of such conduct, or (2) the conduct showed such an entire lack of care that the defendants must have been consciously indifferent to the consequences, or (3) the conduct showed such an entire lack of care that the defendant must have wantonly or recklessly disregarded the safety and welfare of the public, and, finally, the conduct showed such reckless indifference to the rights of others as to be equivalent to an intentional violation of those rights. let us look at the conduct of the defendants and v8-131 it was not a mistake. and it was not just once again, the conduct how it stacks up to those criteria. that you are dealing with was intentional. accident. intentional; it was deliberate, premeditated, planned at the highest levels of these companies, approved by their boards of directors, and it directly, directly affected health. this was not just about money. it was not an mr. davis: farm/williams. the court: mr. heimann: it was not about -- objection, your honor, state overruled. this was not just about stealing this was about ray gollihue's life and could there be any clearer somebody's money. death and millions of others. case for the imposition of punitive damages? so, but that is up to you. i do not think as jurors you bear an awesome responsibility. you have taken an oath yourselves to serve faithfully and honestly as jurors in this case, to do justice to the parties before you. our legal system vests with you the power to do justice for mr. -- ms. gollihue and for shane gollihue and for ray. you and only you have that power. exercising that power, you also serve as the conscience of the community in which you live. in so the simple truth is this: if you do not bring these companies to justice, if you do not hold them v8-132 accountable for their own behavior and for the damages that they have done, no one will. thank you. mr. heimann: ladies and gentlemen, i have a few more minutes before you will be instructed by the court, and i want to focus my comments on specific matters that were addressed to you by one or another of the counsel for the defendants. i want to first take up once again this question of bac. want to focus on dr. aplin's testimony with you again. testified apex means upper. i she may i approach? the court: mr. heimann: yes, you may. just as she showed you in the nothing to diagram, upper part of the lung, nothing. indicate periphery or edge of the lung, which is key to whether or not you have a bac as opposed to an ordinary kind of carcinoma. he says that is important for bac. our expert then focuses on scarring. dr. aplin said scarring is common in all cancers. there is nothing special about scarring for bac as opposed to other cancers. it is not any more indication of bac than any it is common, is the testimony of the doctor. other cancer. blood clots, the third point from dr. barsky, saying common in all cancers, and that is what the treating 194 finally, there is doctor told you when he testified. absolutely nothing -- nothing at all in the medical records to suggest that the clot, or the tumor, was in the periphery around the edge. the treating doctor told you that was the case. what dr. barsky did say was that the gold standard for identifying the type of cancer cell that you are dealing with is pathology, looking at the cells under a microscope on a slide. he did not do that, of course; but the doctors that saw mr. gollihue and the team that diagnosed him did, not once, but twice, in gainesville and then again in texas, and both times they came back ordinary adenocarcinoma. apparently -- this is really critical here -- the doctor, oncologist told you that if there had been any indication in the pathology, for that matter any other aspect of the treatment that it was a bac type of cancer, they would have seen that. with the patient, but they did not. that would have been important to them in dealing and so unless you are prepared to conclude that we are dealing with a bunch of incompetent boobs at the university of florida who were dealing with mr. gollihue, who do you believe? $2,600,000 expert that comes in here and has been working for them for 20-some years. expert, what we call a juke box expert. the treating physicians and her team or this this is a bought-and-paid-for 195 remember what a juke box is? you put in your money his tune has been paid for and called and you call the tune. for. you should not give any credit to what he had to say. counsel for reynolds, once again in her closing, as she did in her opening, said that the best proof of the fact that mr. gollihue was not addicted, was because he quit. she says, quit for good in 1994. she told you that in opening and told you that again here, and so did the gentleman for philip morris. we know it is not true. it is not true. may i see the medical records, please. i have three sets of medical records that i would like to put up quickly. no, i want the section where it says when he quit. this is from joint exhibit 1. let me this this is december. all right. make sure we get the date of this. is a december 31, 1994. patient is a previous air traffic controller. he previously was a heavy smoker and quit in september. so two, two and a half months earlier. the point here is this is a report from december of '94, couple of months earlier. let me see the next one, please. similar -- give me the date of this, the date of the document. are we having a good time? all right. another december '94 report, the patient was a heavy smoker in the past, quitting recently. v8 - 196 this is december '94. earlier. he quit just a couple of months and that is true. that is what the medical records show, but you listened to the testimony of melissa -- remember her testimony -- that later he relapsed and she would wheel him out in the wheelchair so that he could smoke. and she hid that from ginny gollihue. not surprising. but even more apparently, has anybody forgotten he testified in a deposition. so these lawyers ray, jr.? knew before they first stood in front of you what he had said. his testimony was read by deposition. he said that he caught his father smoking after his diagnosis on several occasions, and that by april of 1995, he was definitely back to smoking. not as much as before, ray, jr. said, but he was he had relapsed, even though he was then definitely smoking. being treated for lung cancer. terrible taste. i remember it. why is it no one remembers on this in fact, if you recall, ray, jr. said his father said that smoking when he was undergoing chemo was really nasty. side that testimony? but they want to ignore it because they want to say to you, oh, the fact that he was able to quit for good shows he was able to quit. just like most smokers who want to quit, he did quit, but he relapsed. i do not want to go back to you heard dr. cummings. 197 that is so typical of an addicted smoker. he relapsed. that. so it is no proof at all, contrary to what you have heard a few moments ago, that it shows that he was not addicted. just to the contrary. it confirms the fact that he was addicted. counsel tells you about the testimony you heard from the representative from rjr, the man that makes two and a half million dollars a year working for rjr. he testified that they made efforts to develop a safe -- by which i assume he meant cancer-free, disease-free -- cigarette and spent a good bit of money, he said, to try to develop that. would not you want to be the first cigarette company that actually made a cigarette that did not cause people to die? could actually find the way to do that. just think how much your profits would zoom if you but -- but while they were supposedly looking for heart cancer. that safe cigarette, what were they selling? disease. now, counsel suggests to you what the witness's testimony was. well, they lowered over time the overall tar and nicotine content of their cigarettes, as if that is a big deal. what did that accomplish? you heard from dr. cummings; exactly nothing, because no matter how far they lowered it, although they never lowered the nicotine below the level that would sustain addiction -- they were very careful not to do that for their 198 mainstream cigarette -- people sill get the same amount of tar from a low-tar cigarette that they get from a high-tar cigarette because they compensate. let me have exhibit 81 to start with on this. here's a report from rjr. giving a cigarette that delivers less nicotine than heat -- meaning the smoker desires -- the smoker will subconsciously adjust his puff volume and frequency so as to obtain and maintain his per-hour and per-day requirement for nicotine or likely will change to a brand delivering his desired per-cigarette level of nicotine. let me have 207. the smoker data collected in this study are in september '75. agreement with the results found in other project studies. the panelists smoked the cigarettes according to the physical the dilution and lower rtd of marlboro lights properties. caused the smokers to take larger puffs on that cigarette than on marlboro 85s. the delivery of marlboro lights proportionately. the marlboro 85 smokers in this study did not achieve any reduction in smoke intake by smoking a cigarette, marlboro lights, normally considered lower in delivery. conversely the marlboro lights smokers did not increase their smoke intake when they changed to the regular delivery cigarette. no. 357, do you have that the larger puffs, in turn, increased in effect, finally, 357, i think. 199 for me? sorry. page 2, no. it comes down to the new filter brands vying. we are running on the fly here. this is about filters, says in most cases, however, the smoker of a filtered cigarette was getting as much or more nicotine and tar as he would have gotten from the regular cigarette. he abandoned the regular cigarette, however, on the ground of reduced health risks. reducing the tar and nicotine did not make the cigarette any safer, and the industry knew that. you heard dr. cummings testify, as a matter of fact -- as a matter of fact, over time, because of the ways in which they changed the curing of tobacco for the sake of less expense -- it was a cheaper way to do it -- the cigarettes got deadlier over time. remember, he said they became high in nicotine-specific nitrosamines -- hard word for me to pronounce -- that is deadly. manufactured with lower tar and nicotine actually became deadlier over time, not safer. the cigarettes that were being by the way, on the snippets, it is true, i'm not that is about a six-page please, if you have any doubt in showing you the entire document. document i put up there. your mind about whether or not i have accurately presented to you the substance of the contents of any of these internal documents, you will have the full documents available to you. v8 - 200 take whatever time you need to read them over and confirm to yourself that they, in fact, reflect in full what we have been showing you in pieces, because obviously we cannot -- in a trial where we are required to get things done in an expedited manner, we cannot go through every page of every document, but you have that opportunity, if you want. and i do not have the slightest bit of concern that you are going to find that they are any different when you read the whole thing than they were when you just saw the pieces that we showed you. we do not say it is impossible to quit. once again, in argument, counsel said just because we do not we somebody is addicted does not mean they cannot quit. argue with that. just say it is very difficult, and the evidence shows that these companies did everything they could in their power to dissuade people from quitting, both through the statements they made, through the doubt they tried to create, to the controversy they asserted existed where none would have existed otherwise, through the lower tar cigarettes and the filter cigarettes that they made. a defense, that is a lawyer's idea. but this idea of choice as let me show you exhibit 94. go to the first page of this. this is a memo from september of 1980. this happens to be a memo from one person in the tobacco 201 that was their lobbying and public relations he talks on the first page -- i institute. organization to another. will not take the time to review it now. page about concern that some organization are starting to assert that cigarettes may be addictive. he talks on the first this was during the time period when the surgeon general had not yet published the report but concluded that cigarettes are nicotine addicted. this is what he said and concludes. the lawyers remind us, i'm told, that the entire matter of addiction is the most potent weapon a prosecuting attorney can have in a lung cancer cigarette case. we cannot defend continued smoking as free choice if the person was addicted. this defense of free choice is the lawyer's idea. what did the people inside the company say? let us go to exhibit 72. this is a document from 1982 written by somebody in he writes, most of those who have their research department. many, smoked for any significant time would like to stop. but not most, of those who would like to stop smoking are able to do so. they knew internally -- not the lawyers now, but the people internally -- they knew this was the fact because most people this is what the consequences of addiction are. cannot stop or are unable to stop. v8 - 202 choice. one last document, exhibit 31, when we talk about this is a document from claude teague, i think. some thoughts about new brands of cigarettes for you have seen this document before, and i the youth market. think we showed it to you during the course of the trial; but i want to go right here. document is talking about the difference between the presmoker, the learner, and the confirmed, meaning addicted smoker, in the last column. this is where the author of the he says under psychological effects under the section c there, identification with volume persons: sophisticated, free to choose -- free to choose. presmoker, there are two pluses there. choose because they have not even smoked. there is three positives. choose because they are still starting. the learner is still free to for the learner, yes, they are free to daring, for the but look at what he says for the confirmed smoker. not free to choose. minus. that is what they thought. that is what they knew inside the company, not what the lawyers thought. now, counsel made specific reference to a document, a bat document, they said that had nothing to do with them. i want to show you that document. it is true this is a bat document, but what they did not tell you it is exhibit 106. 203 was, this is a document that reflects a conference that was held in which a number of companies that were associated, affiliated with british american tobacco attended, including people from brown and williamson, the u.s. company that is now r.j. reynolds. they want to say has nothing to do with them, and i do not blame them because -- let us go to the last page and see what we find there. this is the company -- this is the document so give them, smokers, what they want. they seem to want taste and value, and always remember that while king james i issued his famous counterblast to tobacco in 1604, it is nicer from our point of view to remember oscar wilde's words in the picture of dorian gray in 1891. is a perfect type of a perfect pleasure. it leaves one unsatisfied. us provide the exquisiteness and hope they, our consumers, continue to remain unsatisfied. larger bag to carry the money to the bank. it is exquisite and but let all we would want then is a the cigarette what more can one want? you know, this idea that ray gollihue somehow was exposed to and understood what the health message was from the public health community but somehow missed altogether the two defendant tobacco companies' campaign of deceit and doubt is really extraordinary to me. it is like saying a man's in a field and in the morning the sun is shining. that is the public health 204 but along comes the afternoon, as it does in this he is still in the that is the tobacco message. state, and a huge thunderstorm comes up. field and it pours and pours and pours. company's message. did not get wet. they would have it that somehow ray well, it is clear from the evidence -- and it is circumstantial evidence on both sides -- that somebody like ray gollihue -- ray gollihue -- would have to some extent been exposed to health risk. there just is not any doubt about that fact. his wife may not have discussed these things with him and may not have been fully informed about what he thought or what he knew, is beside the point. is true is that he was exposed to the defendants and what they had to say and what they said and said and said over and over and over again. that, too, had an impact on him. what equally by the way, there is evidence in this regard that mr. gollihue smoked filtered cigarettes and smoked low-tar cigarettes. of it, but that was the testimony. objection. i do not know if any of you took notes no evidence on the type of vantage. ms. parker: cigarette. the court: ladies and gentlemen, you rely upon your own overruled. recollection of the evidence. 205 mr. heimann: yes, this case is about ray gollihue, but it is not just about ray gollihue. it is about what these companies did to ray gollihue and to oh so many others just you cannot, as they would have it, put that aside like him. as if it did not happen. and that is really what the case is about. and it had an impact. it did. yes, ray gollihue was responsible for his own behavior, including the fact that he smoked cigarettes; but these companies have to be held responsible for their behavior, too, when they do damage to people like ray gollihue. you know, they have made a lot about the fact that mr. gollihue was an air traffic controller and had a considerable amount of responsibility for the safety of people. responsibility for the safety of people, too. they had -- or they could have had similar ray did his job. think of it this way: they did not. 435,000 people a year die from cigarette smoke. jumbo jets that ray gollihue kept flying in the air as an air traffic controller. think of a jumbo jet, the kind of ms. parker: the court: mr. heimann: objection. overruled to this point. improper. argumentative. i'll listen. how many plane crashes would have occurred on ray gollihue's watch in order to equal the number v8 - 206 of folks who died each year from cigarette smoking? the court: mr. heimann: closed earlier today. objection sustained. i'll close this afternoon the way i our system empowers you, and you alone, to do justice in these cases. the simple truth is, if you do not bring these companies to bear, if you do not bring them to justice, if you do not bring them to account for their behavior and for the damage they did to ray gollihue and to his family, no one will. no one will.