ms. parker: ladies and gentlemen, i am going to start by may it please the court -- yes. -- and mrs. gollihue and counsel. thanking you for your services as jurors and thank you for all the attention you have paid over the last two weeks now. we have all noticed you all were diligent in taking notes and paid attention and we very much appreciate your service. and we know that you all will be fair and the issue will be in your hands soon. so i want to start, and mr. davis will go after i do. during his statements to you, mr. heimann used the i want term "simple truth," and i want to follow up on that. 140 to spend my time with you this afternoon going over what i think are the simple truths of this case. now, you have all heard a lot of evidence and seen a lot of documents and a lot of different witnesses and things on the screen. i've really tried to boil all that down, and i've tried to boil it down into ten different simple truths, and that is what i'm going to go over with you. here's the first one. this case is only about one smoker. this case is only about one it is only about person. ray gollihue. verdict form about anybody else. decide in this case is about mr. gollihue. you are not going to have a question on the everything that you have to it is about his choices, his life, his smoking. it is not a crusade, the way it sounded it is not a chance to vote how you it is not a cause. like from mr. heimann. feel about smoking, because our society has already done that and said smoking is all right. it is only the issues that you are going to have in front of you on the verdict form. you may not agree with smoking, you may wish that cigarettes would just go away, and that is fine. that is not what you are going to be asked to decide here. let me give you an example of why we are asking you to keep your focus on ray gollihue. again, during mr. heimann's closing, he put up some documents and talked to you very strongly about -- he showed 141 you snippets, snippets of documents about what he called he put those up. targeting youth. do you remember that? now, those documents are going to be in evidence; and when you go back to actually deliberate, you will have those with you. those documents that have come into evidence and mr. heimann is talking about here has the snippets from are ladies and gentlemen, that is when dated 1972, 1974, 1984. mr. gollihue was between 30 and 40 years old. he was not a those documents do not have anything to do with him. youth. when he was a youth, what was going on in his in his household, his sister was beat with a belt household? do you remember when she smoked and disobeyed his father. his father did not let any of the children that testimony? remember, he said, uncontroverted in the household smoke. so from evidence, he would make them eat the cigarettes. mr. gollihue, the only person you have to decide this case about, mr. gollihue, those documents do not have anything to do with him. and in his household, his life, he knew from when he was growing up that smoking was bad for him. here's simple truth no. 2. ray gollihue had bac. now, that is going to be the first question on the verdict form. that is the first question that you will be asked on the verdict form. if we could pull that up, please. now, mr. heimann made it sound like it was an v8 - 142 every single witness and and everybody agreed remember the testimony was, there are two either/or issue, but that is not right. who testified in this case agreed that bac is a type of adenocarcinoma. main divisions; there is small cell -- everybody says he did not have that -- and then there is non-small. non-small is further divided up, and one type of non-small is adeno, and everybody agreed to that. that bac is a type of -- sub-type of adeno. does not mean that those are different things. all -- they are sub-types. a buick. car, but you also know it is a buick. not a car. of car. that does not mean it is it just means that a buick is a particular type that is what the situation is here. every one of those medical records that describe the type of cancer he had is consistent with him having a bac. it is kind of like being a car and okay? that they are let me give you that example. okay. so it is a and the burden of proof here is on the plaintiff, on mrs. gollihue, to prove to you that it was not bac. and you are going to hear with instructions from the judge at the end of the case that bac is not caused by smoking. now, you all remember dr. barsky who came in here dr. barsky has written papers about bac for over he is a cancer researcher. this is what he does he was writing papers and doing research on yesterday. 25 years. for a living. bac before he ever started being contacted by any tobacco company, and he explained the four reasons why this was a bac. v8 - 143 the first reason was the location. i want to pull this is the medical record. and the apex, up that medical record, please. it says it was in the left lung apex. he explained to you, is the periphery. also know that. what dr. aplin and dr. barsky both explained to you about the bronchoscopy. okay. and here's how we it is not just this medical record. it was remember there were a lot of questions like why did not they take tissue from the lungs? why is it that they did the biopsy from the lymph nodes? and they all said it is because they could not get the bronchoscope in there because it was so far out. that is why they did not take that tissue sample from the lung. remember dr. barsky drew that -- drew how the bronchoscope would have to go in and it would only go so far out. outside. but this location was peripheral, it was on the that is why they could not do the bronchoscope. he also talked to you about scarring. there is no disputes in all of the medical records there was scarring here in this cancer, called desmoplasia in the medical records. that is a medical term. third reason was blood clots, something called 144 migratory thrombophlebitis. to the blood clots, so there is no dispute about that. again, mrs. gollihue testified and his fourth reason was his relatively young age compared to the age when most people who get lung cancer caused by smoking are diagnosed. and all of that together, remember dr. barsky said, if one of them is present, that gives you some assurance; if the second one is present, it gives you more assurance; but with all four of these factors present at the same time in a patient, he said it was 30 times more likely that this was a bac. now, mr. heimann talked about dr. aplin, and i just she was one of the treating she said she did not remember him. want to remind you all of this: physicians for mr. gollihue. here. i do not remember. it was 17 years ago. only going by what was in the records. different than what dr. barsky did. testified based on the records. but here's what is important remember she said she said she was well, that is no both of them came and the fact is that some lung cancers -- some types of and lung cancers are caused by smoking, but others are not. so when you have a smoker who has lung cancer, you have to find out more. you cannot just say, well, the person smoked and got lung cancer and that is the end of it. some of the reasons that you heard at trial that 145 caused lung cancer -- family history, genetics, workplace exposure, radon. smoked and he got lung cancer. it is not enough for mrs. gollihue to say he the fact is mr. gollihue would have gotten lung cancer even if he had never smoked, and we know that because of the type of lung cancer that he had. now, again, this issue on the verdict form, mrs. gollihue has the burden of proof. any physical evidence because there is none. she did not bring you she did not bring you any evidence from an autopsy because there was none. she did not bring you any results of any tests that were performed on the lung tissue because there were none. she did not bring you any lung tissue because there was never any tissue from the lung. she did not bring you any information from any type of investigation by any of the doctors as to what caused his lung cancer because they did not do that. back in 1994 and 1995, when he was being treated, there was no lawsuit. criticizing his doctors. done that. they were not asked to do that. there was no reason -- we are not there is no reason for them to have let me show you, if we will pull up the record from remember he went to md anderson for a second what did they say? they only found in their md anderson. opinion. 146 all the records from assessment non-small cell lung cancer. md anderson that you are going to see back in the jury room, not a one of them mentioned smoking. and then let us pull up the death certificate that is in evidence. this was filled out by dr. aplin. what does it and here's what is non-small cell lung cancer. say? important: dr. aplin testified she filled out hundreds and hundreds of death certificates in her career and she had put smoking as the cause of death on hundreds and hundreds of death certificates in her career, but she did not do it here. so when you get to that first question on the yes. verdict form that asks you -- if you could pull that first one back up, please. okay. the verdict form. when you get to that first question on the verdict form, was manuel ray gollihue's death caused by a the answer is no because it was non-bac form of lung cancer? a bac, and you can stop right there. if you find that in our favor, that is the end of it and the directions from the court will be you can stop right there. but you have heard a lot of other argument this you heard other evidence in the case, so i'm going morning. to go on and talk to you about the other simple truths in this case. truth no. 3 is that mr. gollihue knew -- personally 147 knew about the health risk of smoking the whole time. you need to know that about mr. gollihue. you need to know about that in detail about mr. gollihue so you can make decisions about him and his life and his smoking. remember you heard -- you saw the video from -- his he was his boss there; he he was on the video and, again, the one name was gene wygal from the faa. was a supervisor. with the white hair and the suit, the navy jacket on. mr. wygal told you all about what a responsible person that mr. gollihue was, about how the buck stopped with him, that he had responsibility for the lives of thousands of passengers on the airlines. that is the true ray gollihue. he took responsibility for that. but what did you hear about in this case from remember mrs. gollihue firmly took the mrs. gollihue? position that mr. gollihue did not know that smoking caused lung cancer until he was diagnosed with lung cancer in 1994. that is what she said. and then she said she found out about it when she read a "people" magazine article about lawsuits against tobacco companies. you have heard, ask yourself, is that the real ray gollihue? well, given all the evidence let me summarize for you what the evidence was about ray gollihue and his awareness of the risk of smoking. he stole cigarettes from his father. he knew that he was not supposed to smoke. as i mentioned earlier, remember his 148 father told him he was -- they would have to eat cigarettes his school taught about and beat the sister with the belt. the health dangers of smoking every year. his high school had rules against smoking. we put up the yearbook page. years, track three years. rules against smoking. his brother frank quit smoking in 1964 because he was playing basketball and he had problems breathing. he played football all four his high school coach -- remember his high school football coach had in 1964, the surgeon general report came out and mr. gollihue was in the that is the got all that widespread coverage. air force at the time. newspaper he was getting in the air force. and let us pull this up. mr. gollihue was exposed to these warning labels on the packages. and if we could briefly put those up again. there is absolutely no reason that mr. gollihue could not read and understand those warnings on the cigarette packages. his father was age 62, and he died of a heart attack and that was back in 1975. connection with his father's death, because he saw his father die from smoking, he quit for a period of time. it shows his awareness. the evidence was that in in 1979 -- if we could pull this record up. in 1979, mr. gollihue himself went to the doctor and complained how about chest pains, and his doctor told him, no smoking. v8 - 149 much stronger warning can you get when your doctor tells you to quit smoking? he caught his son randy smoking in the 1970s, and he yelled at randy about his smoking. you heard testimony from his sister lois slone. mrs. slone said that in 1980, 1980, he told his sister, quote, i know cigarettes are bad for me and we ought to stop. then you heard testimony from his son shane that in the early 1980s, the son shane had learned about the health risk of smoking in his own school. remember shane said he was in the pickup truck sitting between his father and his mother, and he specifically remembered telling them what he had learned in school about the health risk of smoking. remember all those other friends and family members -- i went over that list when i asked questions of all those other people, friends of theirs, mrs. gollihue. family members that they knew who had health problems and who had passed away from smoking. his family testified that they were familiar with the term cancer sticks and they knew that from when mr. gollihue was alive. you heard mr. wygal say on his videotape that in the faa break room, that that is what cigarettes were called. there was a smoking ban put in place at the faa, and mr. gollihue himself, as a supervisor, enforced it. after all of that information, their testimony is that he did not know about the health risk of smoking until 1994. v8 - 150 now, mr. heimann put up on the screen during his closing a report from the ftc from 1981 and he talked a lot about it. and he is been using that document to suggest that people really did not know about the health risk of smoking. if we could pull that up. this is the ftc report, well, every expert, every witness who came to court and testified, both his witness dr. burns, as well as dr. hoffman, both of them said they did not agree. what -- here's what their witness dr. burns said and, again, this document is 1981. here's dr. burns said, more americans knew that cigarette smoking was dangerous for them than knew the name of the president of the united states. and in 1981, the exact same year of this report, remember dr. burns said he gave a speech -- i think it was to the american lung association, but i cannot remember exactly -- but he gave a speech, and i asked him about this. admitted that he said in his speech the same year, 95 percent of people were thoroughly aware -- that is what he said in the speech -- 95 percent were thoroughly aware. he and what was going on in mr. gollihue's life back in 198 -- well, at the time of this report? already tried to quit smoking and quit smoking for a period mr. gollihue had 151 he had of time because his father had died from smoking. already gone to the doctor with chest pains and his doctor told him to quit. whatever may or may not be in that report, their witness, dr. burns, admitted he had a different view. does not apply to mr. gollihue, because we know what was going on in mr. gollihue's life at that time that he -- he did have that awareness. and it those are the facts for the real true ray gollihue. truth no. 4: that is going to be important because one of the mr. gollihue was able to quit smoking. issues you are going to have on the verdict form relates to the legal cause, the legal cause of mr. gollihue's death. that is actually question 2 and 3; this relates to remember, our questions 2 and 3 on the verdict form. position is he had a bac, so you should answer question 1 in our favor and just stop right there. and talking about the other questions. what did the evidence show? but i'm going on now what do you believe about ray gollihue? did he have a nicotine addiction that left him no choice, no matter how hard he tried, but to keep on smoking? or did he have the ability to quit, but he just chose to continue smoking until 1994? mr. heimann made it sound like nobody could quit 152 but but it is hard. it is hard for some people. smoking. 60 million americans have quit. those are the official government numbers that you have heard about during the trial. and this case is not about the general issue about whether cigarettes can be addictive or whether some people are addicted, because they are. gollihue. this is only about ray some people try all sorts of different things to try to quit, and some people are very sincere in their efforts and they try over and over and are very persistent in their quit attempts. some people just hate smoking and want to quit, but they just have not been able to. that is not ray gollihue. it is one of the instructions that i believe you are going to get from the court later this afternoon. i believe you are going to have them back with you in the deliberations room. does not mean that a particular individual was addicted. that is your question. ray gollihue. it says that the fact that cigarettes are addictive not about smoking in general, but just the best evidence that you have heard on these issues relating to addiction is the fact that he quit. mrs. gollihue testified that he quit. medical records that he quit. constrained choice like you heard about at trial. he did not have any type of he was it is in all of these v8 - 153 able to quit. you know, nicotine addiction does not prevent it does not prevent smokers from smokers from quitting. understanding the health risk of smoking. both dr. cummings and dr. burns, both the plaintiff's witnesses, admitted any smoker can quit, including heavily addicted smokers. in fact, do you remember dr. cummings had this if you could, pull that up. he used to brochure that i asked him about? remember, dr. cummings just moved to charleston. work in new york; and when he was in new york he had a hotline for people to call, and he gave this brochure out that says, "people can quit." he did not tell people who called his hotline, oh, forget it. you are not going to be able to quit. do not call me, because that is not consistent with dr. cummings's testimony you know, if smokers had no choice, if smokers in this case. were so heavily addicted that nobody could quit, they just had to keep on smoking, well, that is not consistent with what you heard from dr. burns who said -- remember he put that chart up and said during the great depression, smoking rates dropped. smoking, there would not be that fluctuation. not be that fluctuation because of the great depression. and you heard from dr. burns that people quit if the smokers were all addicted and had to keep there would smoking for a lot of different reasons. i want to go over 154 some of those with you, what he said. smokers when the price of cigarettes goes up -- remember he talked about taxes and the price of cigarettes go up, they quit? that is not addiction. for some price. he talked about workplace restrictions. sometimes when their workplace restrictions are put in place, smokers quit because it is more inconvenient for them to smoke. that is not addiction. dr. burns said that for other smokers they quit that is not because it is not socially acceptable to smoke. addiction. what is important is the smoker has to be motivated they have to want to quit. they have to make their mind up. to quit. they have to want to quit for themselves, not somebody else telling them what to do. and they have to try and try more than one time, but they have to be persistent and motivated and, then, just like mr. gollihue, mr. gollihue was able to quit. they have to go do it, now, i want to briefly go over a couple of records, several records, medical records that you are going to see. they are in evidence that are actually from the faa, and i want to make sure you all are aware of those out there. we showed them to you during the trial, but the medical records from the faa that he filled out himself -- remember, mrs. gollihue said, yes, that is his signature, and it says on there that he was certifying his answers and that he understood he had to answer truthfully and completely or his job depended on it. job depended on it. v8 - 155 what did he say? not what other people say, but what did he say? what he said in those reports, he smoked between one-half and one pack per day, and in those records it said he smoked for -- one of them said 20 years. period of time -- remember we worked back with the math? when you work back with the math, he said that he started smoking in 1969. you know what, that makes sense because that is when he came back and got out of the air force. so the point in time -- that is what he said. he had a that is what he said about his smoking. say the exact same thing and they are five years apart. so there is some consistency about what he said himself about his smoking. and those records the truth no. 5 is that mr. gollihue could have now, you heard about his efforts to i'm going over those because the evidence is let us go over what the mrs. gollihue admitted he did not throw out he did quit smoking earlier. try to quit. they were really only half-hearted. evidence was. his cigarettes. not go to any doctor and ask for help quitting. she says that one time he tried the nicorette gum when he smoked at the same time, even though it says on the package you he did not throw out his ashtrays. 156 should not do that. he said he was not faithful. faithful using the patch. he tried the nicotine patch one time, and those are her words, he was not he only tried it about one week. according to their testimony he only tried to quit now, think about that. smoking about once every four years. that is half-hearted. do not you keep trying? years, and when you are trying you do not even throw away your cigarettes, you do not throw away your ashtrays, you do not go to a doctor and ask for help. if you really, really want to quit, you do not try just once every four remember the testimony of mr. and mrs. gollihue's daughter melissa lott who took the stand? direct, when she was being asked questions, she said he had tried to quit 18 times in a three-year period. remember that? remember on do you but on cross-examination, we examined her about her prior sworn deposition testimony where she had said he only tried to quit two to three times. you are going to have to be the judge of that evidence. and when he quit in 1994, he had no withdrawal symptoms of any kind. testified he could go to work, he performed well at work, she said he was, quote, extremely happy. mrs. gollihue we know he was able to quit, and he could have tried harder to quit sooner. evidence on that. there is proof positive v8 - 157 for those reasons, your answers on the verdict forms on those questions relating to addiction should be in favor of reynolds. now, i want to pull up question 3 on the form, and it talks about legal i want to spend a moment talking with you about that asks, was the addiction a legal cause of his again, you should not even get there because he had but if you were to get to which -- there it is, question 3. cause there. that. death? bac and that is the end of that. those questions, the answer is, in reynolds's favor, the answer is no, because addiction was not the legal cause of his death. he continued to smoke even though he could have quit earlier. whole-hearted effort. he could have if he had just made a simple truth no. 6 is that the plaintiff here, mrs. gollihue, cannot establish this issue of legal cause which goes throughout a number of questions on the verdict form that you are going to have. you heard from mrs. gollihue, their daughter melissa, their son shane, and his brother gary who testified by deposition, all of them, that mr. gollihue did not blame remember the evidence tobacco companies for his lung cancer. was that when he was diagnosed with lung cancer he was angry at himself. he was not planning to please do not let sue anyone. he did not blame anybody. mr. gollihue was not a victim. them turn him into a victim in this case to get money damages. v8 - 158 every one of the middle set of questions on the verdict form asks about this legal cause, and your answer should be in reynolds's favor that there was no legal cause because the plaintiffs are not -- have not proven a link with any of this they have been talking about and mr. gollihue. legal cause is more than guesswork. speculation. this is not a no-fault case. simple truth no. 7: it is proof, and they do not have that proof. there was no reliance by it is more than mr. gollihue on any of this that you have been hearing mr. heimann talk about, these documents, all of that. where is the link to mr. gollihue? why are they doing this? well, there is why are they putting on there is no evidence that he ever saw, heard. because they are trying to make you no link. this evidence? why are they doing that? mad, trying to make you mad -- trying to make you so mad you will be mad about reynolds, you will be mad about the tobacco companies and you will forget mr. gollihue. they are trying to divert your attention from mr. gollihue because this case is about him, and he did not rely on any of this. he did not want to sue a tobacco company. his actions; he did not blame anybody. he took responsibility for here's what the evidence was. mr. gollihue -- and 159 mr. gollihue never saw he never read the "new york times." mrs. gollihue admitted all of this. and he never heard any kind of statement from any tobacco company. put up things from the "new york times." "wall street journal." street journal." they put up things from the "wall remember they he never read the he never said that a tobacco company did something he never said he never said a tobacco company fooled he never said he had been duped by a tobacco company. or said something that made him start smoking. that a tobacco company said or did something that made him continue smoking. he never said a tobacco company withheld information from him. him. he never said he would even heard of the tirc. he would even heard of ctr or the tobacco institute. had any communications with reynolds; he never had any communications with philip morris or any other tobacco company. he never said he never and she agreed that mr. gollihue was his own he was not a follower. he was not person. and that is why mr. heimann in his closing a gullible person. he gave this morning admitted that he has no direct evidence of any reliance. he was a leader. now, the witnesses that you heard from the plaintiffs did not tell you the whole story about the documents that they showed you. they just showed you little 160 let me remind you about some of that. remember snippets. they showed you some documents and then i pulled them up on cross and they were drafts? and then i do not know what mr. heimann -- he goes after us, after mr. davis and i. he has some more time to talk to you. i do not know what he is going to say to you and i'm not going to have a chance to respond. but when you hear him, when he puts up any documents, you ask yourself, wait a minute, does this have anything to do with mr. gollihue? and here's an example. there is one document he keeps talking about, talks about bags of money, remember? okay, where did that come from? it came from the british american tobacco company. england. company over in england. the british merican tobacco company is a separate mr. gollihue never went to why did he show that to you? because it talks about bags of money. just to rile you up then remember he showed you another document during his case that talked about the evidence of cigarette smoke as a health hazard was overwhelming, and it did say that. now, on cross i said, okay, well, put up the rest of that; put up it the rest of that paragraph. said evidence of other causes of lung cancer were also out there and some, like air pollution, were even greater. and then what did it say? remember he showed you a document from reynolds 161 from 1959 from a scientist named alan rodgman that talked about different carcinogens in smoke? i had to bring out that same year, the same month, in 1959, reader's digest said the same thing. (indicating)? remember that then remember on cross ask yourselves why is it they did not tell you the they are only pulling out these little snippets remember how mr. heimann showed you whole story. to try to make you mad. a document that listed the speaking engagements for a lady who worked for tobacco companies? cross-examination of dr. cummings said, wait a minute, you described that as being one month's worth of engagements; it is six years' worth. then mr. davis on let us talk about dr. cummings for a moment. this is what he does. dr. cummings, you heard from his testimony, he goes around and testifies. it as a second job. testified three times just this year. time according to his testimony. he goes from place to place. remember he described he is well, now the fourth he goes around and testifies and puts on the slide show and he tells his story. they are just pulling out little snippets. there is another part to it. and then i want to talk about advertising for a advertising cigarettes is legal and during that moment. entire period of time that mr. gollihue smoked and there was 162 there is there is no evidence that he started smoking advertisements on tv that you saw, that was legal. been no allegation that any of our advertisement was anything but that. because of an ad. his father smoked and his older siblings smoked. that advertising did not shield him from this avalanche of information that he was getting in his own life about the health risk of smoking. the evidence is he started smoking because now, mr. heimann showed you the frank statement okay, frank statement remember that? can we pull that up. it was again this morning. was published one time. published one time, january 4th, 1954. eleven years old then. ever heard about it. mr. gollihue was there is no evidence he ever saw it, and remember the jim johnston video? that is the video that the people -- the man raised his hand and testified. remember i had to come back and show the rest of that video where mr. johnston explained, you know, it depends on the definition you use of addiction. addiction changed by the surgeon general. included intoxication and everybody -- reynolds and the surgeon general, everybody agreed smoking does not cause -- it does not make you drunk. it does not cause intoxication. they only showed you a little clip. rest of that. the definition of prior to 1988 it they did not show you the 163 there is zero evidence here that mr. gollihue ever saw or heard any statement by reynolds or philip morris; there is zero evidence that any statement, any information put out by reynolds or philip morris had any impact on his smoking decisions. now, mr. heimann talked this morning about circumstantial evidence. does not have any direct evidence. oh, we have circumstantial evidence. remember that? that is because he so now he is trying to say, remember, even when he was diagnosed with lung cancer, mr. gollihue did not blame a cigarette company. did not talk about suing anybody. just found this out. is that circumstantial evidence of a man who had been lied to or duped? he he did not say oh, gosh, i he took responsibility for his own choices. i cannot believe it. this is awful. no. simple truth no. 8 is: the government knows that all of that that you all have seen cigarettes are dangerous. in this case, everything you have heard about death rates and how many people smoke, all of that, all of these documents, all of that is all of that is known by our government. publicly available information that is on the internet. heard all of that. our government knows all of that. like mr. gollihue knew what was important, which is that our government knows smoking cigarettes have health risks. all of that, but our society here in the united states has you just decided that adults have the right to make that choice. like mr. gollihue did. v8 - 164 just which leads us to truth no. 9, which is that throughout the whole entire time cigarettes are legal. mr. gollihue smoked, cigarettes were a legal product. other than just going out of business, there is nothing that reynolds could have done that would have made any difference to mr. gollihue and his smoking. and reynolds and philip morris cannot be held liable here merely for selling cigarettes, because that is legal. and you heard reynolds has complied with all of the federal and state laws, regulations, and rules. in the united states, we adults have the right to drinking alcohol, riding a motorcycle, make risky decisions. buying a convertible instead of a big heavy car. those are our rights here in the united states, and they include the right to choose to smoke. and then truth no. 10 that you heard from dr. gentry yesterday, reynolds has worked hard to try to reduce the health risk of smoking. if we could pull up this. remember all these we have brought you we brought you the person who was head efforts that reynolds has gone through? the top scientists. we have of -- he is over the person who is head of r and d. brought you the top man from reynolds to come here and to 165 look at you and to testify and to tell you what all reynolds had done over the years. and reynolds always operated its research and development department under this bedrock premise that cigarettes cause cancer, so they tried to do everything that he described in his testimony to try to reduce those harmful effects. and reynolds has done -- besides all that you heard that reynolds did from dr. gentry, internally, reynolds and philip morris funded research. research that was done at fsu, university of florida, university of miami, usf, and remember it was done by scientists, including seven nobel prize winners. remember they funded all that reynolds worked with the national cancer institute with what is called the ncitwg, national cancer institute tobacco working group, for ten years until the government stopped that program. that was an effort, a joint effort that we cooperated in to try to have a safer cigarette. and then if we could pull up the product dr. gentry talked to you about the product stewardship. stewardship program at reynolds, how they test the cigarettes to try everything possible to try to reduce those inherent health risks of cigarettes. dr. gentry was candid; he was forthright. he did not come in here and tell you everything reynolds had ever v8 - 166 nobody is no company is perfect. dr. gentry explained to you done in the history of the company was perfect. perfect. the difference between epidemiology and statistics, on the one hand, versus the classic definition of cause where you need to know the mechanism. the reynolds employees had to make real decisions in realtime. they should be judged based on what they knew back then, not based on what we know today looking back. i want to stop for a moment and talk to you about well, first of all, those findings do otherwise, i these findings that mr. heimann talked to you about. remember those are the findings that were made by another jury some years ago. not answer the question on your verdict form. mean, why would you be here? those questions on the verdict form. to hear about mr. gollihue's cancer, to hear about mr. gollihue's life. liability here. those findings do not establish you are the only jury you are the only jury to answer in fact, they do not even apply at all unless they first prove to you the legal requirements to even use them. they have to prove to you that his cancer was not they have to prove to you that mr. gollihue was bac. addicted; and they have to prove to you also that even if he was addicted, that was the legal cause of his cancer. so you do not even get to the findings unless you make those 167 determinations. when you get to the verdict form. as i've said, you should stop right there i've gone over with you what are the ten simple truths about the evidence in this case. a few minutes now and go over with you the law and the verdict form and how those simple truths apply. i just want to spend at the end of the case, after you go back and review all the evidence, you review those simple truths, your verdict should be in favor of reynolds and philip morris. a couple of things for you to look out for on the first of all, is the plaintiff has the burden of proof instructions that you get from the court: the burden of proof. on all those substantive issues we have just been talking about. they have the burden of proof. and then you are also going to be instructed that you should not reach your verdict based on sympathy or prejudice; prejudice against a party, sympathy for a party. you are going to hear about that from judge dalton. i'm going to go back and talk to you a little bit more about this issue of legal cause. just plain old cause like we use, you know, as laymen. cause has a specific definition that you are going to hear about from judge dalton. legal cause is not legal mrs. gollihue is going to have to prove that he would not have developed his illness but for the different 168 allegations that they make that are on your verdict form, and she is just not going to be able to do that because the general attacks against smoking and against tobacco companies are not enough. now, that gets us to another question on the verdict form as you go down further about comparative fault. again, we do not want you to even get there. should be no to begin with, so you are not even dealing with this; but as part of my job, i have to go over that with you as well. your answer by all accounts, mr. gollihue grew up from humble beginnings to become very successful at faa as a supervisor, responsible position. when he retired, he went to work in law enforcement. again, you heard the video deposition of mr. wygal, and you heard what his brother gary said. his brother gary testified that he is the kind of person who, whenever he set his mind to it, quote, it got done. we have already gone over all this evidence to show that when he smoked, when mr. gollihue smoked, he did it with his eyes wide open about the health risk of smoking. made these decisions whether he smoked? where he smoked? stop? mr. gollihue is the one who made every one of those decisions for himself. who when he smoked? whether to try to he was entitled to do that. how much he smoked? when to try to stop? what brand to smoke? 169 the bottom line is no one forced him to smoke. he remember, even after he quit, did not hate tobacco companies. even after he quit, he kept -- he and mrs. gollihue kept ashtrays out at their house for other people to use, for other people who smoked. then his son shane, who is also seeking money in this lawsuit, he continued smoking even after his father died. after mr. gollihue quit. and mrs. gollihue kept smoking even mr. gollihue understood he made the choice to smoke and he decided to smoke despite knowing about these health risks. every time he smoked, there was a warning on the package; he made that choice. when he began smoking again after he had quit in 1975, and he quit that time when his father had the heart attack and died -- when he started smoking again after that, he made that choice. when he decided to disregard his doctor's warning that we showed you on the screen, when he decided to disregard his doctor's warning to quit, that was his choice. when his son shane sat in that pickup truck and all those other times and said, here's what i learned in school and you ought to quit smoking and he disregarded that, that was his choice. mr. gollihue took that responsibility, did not blame anyone. v8 - 170 ladies and gentlemen, reynolds has zero fault in this case for all those decisions and choices that mr. gollihue made. who made those choices for him? he did. we are not blaming him. we are not criticizing him. he had the right to smoke. but that does not mean that mrs. gollihue can come to court and get money damages from reynolds because of the choices that mr. gollihue made in his life. whether you agree with his choices is not an issue for you to decide. you may have decided differently. may not like smoking, you may not want to smoke; but mr. gollihue made that decision for himself in his own life. and we should not second-guess his decisions that he took responsibility for. you now, that brings me on down the verdict form to the next question which i have to talk to you about, which is the amount of damages. now, you heard what mr. heimann said. any damages that you award go to mrs. gollihue and to shane, shane gollihue, their son. there is no claim here for medical expenses; there is no claim here for funeral expense; there is no claim here for lost wages. loss of companionship. the claim is for their pain and suffering and ladies and gentlemen, this is just not a case where we think you should stop and you damages should be awarded. v8 - 171 should not even get to that point; but if somehow you do, the amount of damages in this case should be zero because mr. gollihue would not -- did not want this lawsuit, never indicated that he wanted a lawsuit. he did not blame us. he made all those choices about his took responsibility. smoking. he he was a successful man; he was intelligent. there is no reason to believe at all -- there is no reason to believe that he did not understand all those warnings that came to him from all those different sources over all those periods of time. the answer on punitive damages i need to talk to you also about punitive damages, mr. heimann which is another question on the verdict form. talked to you about it. should be no. it was not reprehensible conduct that should be punished for reynolds to do all the research they did to identify the constituents of cigarette smoke, to go in and all that research that they did to try to eliminate that part of the smoke -- and remember the chart that dr. gentry showed with you a 48 percent reduction. with that is this reduction in tar and nicotine over the years? remember not reprehensible conduct that should be punished. all the work that dr. gentry described that they did to lower these tar and nicotine levels? that should not be punished. do we have that one? they followed the suggestions from the public 172 that should not be punished. health community regarding what to do to reduce the risk of cigarettes. they did research that was cited in the surgeon general's report and they published -- remember this book (indicating), that should not be punished. institute. a billion dollars to develop that new cigarette called premier that heats instead of burns tobacco. be punished. they cooperated with the national cancer that should not be punished. they invested over that should not ladies and gentlemen, you are going to hear it is not the same burden that you have in the rest instead, it is a high burden, something called instructions from the court that punitive damages have a high burden. of the case. clear and convincing evidence. evidence, and the evidence in this case just does not support a finding of punitive damages. clear and convincing you need to remember when you are evaluating reynolds, do so based on what they knew back at that time. bacs are so you should answer question 1 on so in summary, mr. gollihue had a bac. not caused by smoking. the verdict form no. mr. gollihue was aware from all those different sources in his life that smoking was bad for him, but he chose to smoke despite knowing about the risk. not keep him from quitting. he quit successfully, and he addiction did v8 - 173 could have quit at any time before then. responsible for those decisions about smoking that mr. gollihue made for himself. reynolds is not and under all those circumstances, under all those facts, you are going to have to decide whether mrs. gollihue and their son shane gollihue deserve money damages. we say they do not, and we hope you will, too, when you review the evidence. you know, some of you may not like some of the snippets that the plaintiff pulled out and put on the screen. you may think, well, you know, reynolds should have acted sooner. but you are not being asked to decide that in this case. is whether the conduct of reynolds was a legal cause of mr. gollihue's death, and the plaintiff just has not put on the facts to meet their burden of proof on that. what you are going to be asked to decide in this case i would like to respectfully submit to you that in this case, it would be wrong to award money damages where the smoker had bac that is not caused by smoking where he knew the health risk. showed that technical volume up on his deposition. the boss at faa. said, oh, that is something he kept up with. was independent, and he was well read. to believe that he did not know about the health risk of he was he showed you the technical book, and he there was no reason he was smart. remember, mr. wygal said he he was smart, he smoking. v8 - 174 he never blamed reynolds. he never blamed any tobacco company. he never blamed philip so, please, morris. when you go back and you are all going to work together as a group, but you also have your own individual convictions, and i would like to respectfully ask that you not just give in and award money here. this is a case that does not deserve money damages. this is a case where the smoker did not have lung cancer caused by smoking, and he knew the risk. now, i want to leave you with one final thought before i turn the time over to mr. davis. if mrs. gollihue can get money damages here, then anybody whose used a risky product and took those risks could. if you drink alcohol, ride motorcycles -- your honor, i object. it is improper. mr. heimann: the court: ms. parker: sustained. what the plaintiffs have done here is to go through some old documents, ancient documents, pulled out little snippets to show you to try to rile you up about what is in there. as you hear whatever it is mr. heimann says when he finishes, when he has his time that we cannot respond to, ask yourself, does that have anything to do with mr. gollihue? did that affect his life in any way? what did the rest of that document say? 175 based on all of the facts of his life, the right, fair, and just verdict here is in favor of reynolds and philip morris, based on everything that we know about the real ray gollihue. thank you so much for your attention and for listening to me talk with you this afternoon. cases like this, i always, always feel like this. could have a conversation. down and talk and you could tell me if you had any questions and i can answer your questions, but we cannot do that. it is just me giving you my summary. you know, i wish we could sit when i try i wish we so i hope that i have answered any questions you might have. i hope that i've summarized the evidence for you in a way that would be helpful for you when you go back into the jury room. when you hear whatever mr. heimann says when he finishes, just ask yourself, what would reynolds say? what would reynolds say in response to that, because i will not have a chance to tell you that directly. thank you again very much. your honor, that concludes my closing argument. mr. davis: i guess you figured out by now from watching sure. good afternoon everybody. mr. heimann, miss parker, and me how i feel up here, but these are pretty special times for us who have the privilege to try the cases because we do not get a lot of opportunity to talk to you in the course of a trial. we have a little bit at the first, and then we have it is a great to ask questions, and that is the way it should be, but we do not have a chance to just stand up and talk. relief, actually, to be able to stand up and address you directly, look you in the eye without sneaking to see how you are reacting to things, but just to sit and talk with you. i think about it, and it may be similar to the relief you feel when you get to go back to the jury room and actually start discussing and engaging all this evidence that you have heard. so it is a pleasure to be here, and thank you for all the lawyers say that, but we mean it, your service. because we do know how disruptive and difficult it is to come here for almost two weeks and sit and concentrate and listen, and we appreciate it. it is important to all our clients and to the system, and it means a lot to the way we go about resolving disputes. so thank you very much for your service. i'm sort of the last one here, and i will not take as long as miss parker did, and she covered very important 177 issues that apply not only to her client, r.j. reynolds, but also to mine, philip morris, and i agree with everything she said. everything she said. she talked about some topics that i'll talk about. so thank she talked about it many ways better than i could. you for that, and it will shorten my time. i do want to start with one other point, though, it is an additional reason beyond all that and it is a reason that applies only to my client philip morris. miss parker so capably presented to you as to why my client, philip morris, should not be held liable in this case. i had about five minutes to talk to you folks on opening statement, and what i tried to do was say, can we agree on two questions that would be fair to ask in the case. the first is, what is the basis upon which miss gollihue is seeking money damages from my client philip morris. part of that, what is the evidence about mr. gollihue's actually smoking marlboro cigarettes, because marlboro is the only brand -- among all the brands that he smoked, marlboro is the only brand that was made by philip morris. as a i asked you to -- i hoped we could agree in the context of this trial those would at least be fair questions. well, the answer, now that we have had the evidence, as to what is the evidence about mr. gollihue's smoking marlboro, i suggest to you, is not much. there is simply no clear evidence in the record of v8 - 178 when mr. gollihue smoked marlboro. evidence. and there is no evidence whatsoever of any role that his smoking of marlboro played in his lung cancer and death. no clear evidence of how much he smoked marlboro, i mean clear, specific now, judge dalton will instruct you that the not guesses. evidence. not maybe that. plaintiff has the burden of proof in the case. proof. not hunches. this. evidence that comes from the witness stand and documents and the exhibits that have been admitted and then the other instructions that you will get. not words of lawyers, but the burden of not maybe now, we heard seven witnesses during this trial who had personal relationships with mr. gollihue at various times in his life. we heard from ray gollihue, jr., his oldest son; melissa lott, his daughter; lois slone, his sister; shane gollihue, his son; eugene wygal, his supervisor, the one we saw in the video from the faa center; kenneth gholson, we heard his testimony by deposition. friend, and miss gollihue. he was his life-long now, these were the people that knew him best, and five of those they came in, one way or another, to testify. folks, five of them: gollihue; gene wygal; and kent gholson either had no knowledge of mr. gollihue's brands or they specifically ray gollihue, jr.; lois slone; shane remember him smoking brands other than marlboro. now, just stop for a moment and think about that. his oldest son, ray, jr., who went to all those v8 - 179 his sister lois, they grew up together, just a she moved to florida, fourth of july weekends, did not testify that he smoked marlboro. year apart, kept in touch, visits. went down to see him when he was in fort lauderdale, did not testify that he smoked marlboro. his son shane did not testify that he smoked marlboro. his long-time supervisor, gene wygal, you could tell how closely they worked together in that faa center, guiding those airplanes around. testified that he smoked marlboro. buddy, kenneth gholson, did not testify that he smoked marlboro, and these are people -- if you put them together, these are people who knew ray in all aspects of his life. home, work, family, and recreation. he never his long-time friend, his there is no evidence from them whatsoever that he none. now, there are only ever had a marlboro in his mouth. two witnesses -- virginia gollihue, miss gollihue, and melissa lott -- who testified he even smoked a single marlboro cigarette. now, miss lott, melissa lott, was born in 1967, and she told us three things. first, when she was little, when she was a young child, marlboro was one of the brands she remembers her dad smoking. but she could not tell us with any specificity so what did they tell us? all right. 180 and when he smoked marlboro. she could not tell us how much he was smoking marlboro among the other brands that he was smoking at the same time. how much he smoked marlboro. the third thing she told us -- and i do think this is significant -- is she said her dad preferred unfiltered cigarettes, and there is no dispute, no debate that marlboros always had a filter. so, in other words, from miss lott, no specific evidence. now, what about miss gollihue in her testimony? she testified that her husband smoked marlboro cigarettes. she told us a lot about that one time that she remembers. she thinks it was 1973, 1974 when she went to the store, she was supposed to get marlboro, she same home, looked, were not went back to the in there. store and came back, and lo and behold they were there. she remembers that. my goodness, they are not there. that was it on direct examination. then on cross, i tried to get down to the specifics, and i asked her questions, saying, just let us get down to the specifics of what you really know about him and what she said was that her smoking by client's product. husband smoked marlboro cigarettes for a total of somewhere between 6 months and 12 months, for sometime between the time she met him in 1972 and 1980. she does not know anything about marlboro in the and, of course, she does not eighties, nineties, nothing. 181 know anything about whatever he was smoking before 1972, as so that is it. she told us, because that is when she met him. six months to a year, sometime between '72 and '80. but she also told us that during that time he was smoking other brands. smoking how many cigarettes were marlboro as opposed to those other brands. there is no evidence in the case that marlboro was ever his primary brand. the evidence seems to be that he would just borrow them or bum them. she could not tell us among the other brands he was remember that she acknowledged that marlboro are they are not discounted, and yet premium cigarettes. mr. gollihue was a frugal guy and he would go to georgia. she told us sometimes he would drive all the way to georgia to buy cigarettes or go to the seminole store to get cigarettes at a discount. so the most plaintiff can prove about marlboros is that mr. gollihue smoked and unspecified number of marlboros between 6 and 12 months over that 8-year period. that is it. that is it. but one thing we know for sure is that every pack of marlboros he had in his hand, however many that was, had one of those warnings on them because those warnings went on in 1966. so whatever it was, however little it was in that 6- to 12-month period, it is probably the same period, if you look at melissa lott's age, that she remembers her dad v8 - 182 smoking marlboros and that would be the seventies. born in '67. she was every pack he had in his hand had a warning. now, what about the connection between smoking marlboro and his lung cancer and death. can you say that but for smoking marlboro he would not have gotten lung cancer and would not have died? but for the marlboro? well, they had some doctors here that could have helped us with that. treated mr. gollihue. connection between his smoking marlboros and his death. they had dr. aplin, the oncologist who no testimony at all about any medical they had dr. burns, a pulmonologist, testifies all over the country in these kind of cases. this case about any connection between marlboro and his death. no testimony in they brought dr. cummings. now, dr. cummings is as a he is a public health official. he said that before a person reaches ten not a medical doctor. public health official he told us something that is very important. pack-years, their risk of getting lung cancer is indistinguishable from a nonsmoker. a day for a year is a pack-year. years, pack a day, that is ten pack-years. he explained that. ten indistinguishable. pack dr. cummings, their witness, tells us that you have to get to that threshold before your risk of contracting lung cancer from smoking is distinguishable from a nonsmoker. 183 well, if you look at the marlboro history, they not even one pack-year. cannot even prove one pack-year. now, other than his history with marlboro, is there anything else that philip morris did or did not do or said or did not say that had any impact on mr. gollihue? well, let us talk about reliance. you will hear the judge instruct you about reliance the judge will instruct about did in the sense of the conspiracy claim and in the fraudulent concealment claim. mr. gollihue rely on something philip morris did or said or did not do or did not say about the health risks of smoking that had it not happened, he would not have gotten lung cancer and his death. that is the but-for standard. well, there was a question that was asked by he asked during his mr. heimann. presentation, he said, would you expect someone to testify he heard something or saw something? it is fair question. yeah, i would. you know, i'm not saying that he has to come in no. i'm not saying that. i'm not saying he has to come in and with evidence of some specific thing that he heard or said -- or the tobacco said or did. that is not common sense. remember a specific article from 1963 or something specific from 1974; but what i expect is there to be some evidence in the case that if there was any connection between all of this stuff that we have seen and mr. gollihue, that we would hear 184 something about it. would i have expected that maybe he and kenneth gholson would have talked about -- there would have been something about him growing up, saying, hey, kenneth, i just saw the surgeon general's report. looks like smoking is bad for you. unless i heard something from the tobacco company, then it is not. or when shane talked to him about the risk of smoking, instead of fluffing it off or whatever the son said he did, that there would be something like, you know, i cannot remember what it was, but tobacco companies said this was not going to hurt me. i would expect evidence. and you know why? because this is a court. that is what this is about. coming in and saying it is circumstantial evidence. it is not just about, you know, they have the burden of proof, and sure, circumstantial evidence can be really good evidence, but it has to be from something. mr. heimann: your honor, i object. this is i think you understand what i mean. you are a little late, but, yes, i improper argument. the court: sustain your objection with respect to the previous comment. mr. davis: all right. now, you heard no evidence -- no evidence that mr. gollihue ever heard or read anything that philip morris ever said. mr. heimann: that is the same basis for that 185 objection. the court: mr. davis: overruled. much less relied on it. much less i would further submit, as miss parker said, that relied on. he did not rely on anything philip morris did not say about the health risk of smoking. he was aware from an early age -- there is no question that he was aware from an early age, from the evidence, about the health risk of smoking, from the school and all of the stuff that she explained. now, what i did hear say, again, in mr. heimann's opening, or presentation -- i think i got it right -- we do not deny that mr. gollihue heard the health risk from the public health authorities. we do not deny that he heard it. i think -- well, that is not evidence, because the evidence in the case -- and it is undisputed in the record of this case -- is that miss gollihue has taken the position and swore to you under oath that he did not know anything about whether smoking could be bad for him until 1994. she testified to that. so i'm hearing the statement that we do not deny that he heard, and i do not know what to do with it in argument. did he hear and when did he hear it? case is that miss gollihue was not accurate in her testimony, her consistent sworn testimony that mr. gollihue did not see i mean, it makes we want to go back and say, what if the premise of the v8 - 186 did he hear about the well, what did he hear and when or hear or know anything about the health risk of smoking until 1994, if that is inaccurate and that is the basis of their case, i honestly do not know what to do with it. i almost want to start over. did he hear it and let us go back. surgeon general's warning? is that what they admit that he heard now? does that mean that we should go back and figure out if there is a witness that he discussed that with to see if there is any connection between all of this stuff they say the tobacco companies did and to present it to you. and this how can you build man, mr. gollihue, were there discussions? a case on the premise that you have to reject the testimony of the plaintiff? we have talked about legal cause. you know, we were talking about we ask so much of you folks. miss parker did a great job of that. it. judges of the facts, and we ask you to come in and listen to all the facts and assimilate it and put it altogether and say, on top of all that, you have to listen to lawyer legal language and apply it. we really do. you are but i do want to spend -- i do want to focus on two words that you will see over and over and over again in this legal cause instruction. important because that is the legal link that is under the law that is why the lawyers focus between conduct and liability. the legal cause instruction is 187 what you will hear is, that among other things, for a on it. conduct to be a legal cause in this case, it has to be reasonable that, but for -- but for that conduct, mr. gollihue would not have gotten lung cancer and died. for. but i just encourage you, as you pour over those instructions and listen to judge dalton, look for -- because you are going to see it, whether it is in the addiction part of the verdict form, whether it is in the negligence, product defect, conspiracy, fraud, anything of it, defect, whatever, all of those instructions, every time you get to a claim, you are going to see the same language over and over and over again that it is not a substantial contribution -- it is not a substantial contribution to his harm unless you can say, but for his injury, but for the conduct, he would not have gotten lung cancer and died. that is the instruction. so, you know, you can look over the verdict form you are not and you can see the questions that are asked. going to see questions like, do you approve everything -- are cigarettes legal. do you approve everything that the tobacco companies did and did not do over the course of 50 years? that is not the question in front of that is not in the form. you. the questions that you will see require that you look at the evidence in the case and connect them to the harm by that legal cause standard. you know, there are three things that i took away v8 - 188 i think the evidence showed that he that is the image that seems to emerge curious. he was a life-long learner, lots of pokers in the fire. from the evidence about mr. gollihue that i would like to share with you. mr. gollihue was intelligent, successful, independent. was a curious man. from the evidence. someone described. in the faa, goes to the police academy, learns how to farm, 350 goats. learning about his environment. an informed person who reached out and kept learning. constantly reading, constantly expanding, he was an informed person, he is working why would we think he would not understand or have heard anything about how smoking could be bad for him until 1994, which has been the consistent testimony in this case, until apparently it was different just on the opening and closing argument. we know he had the ability to quit. he is a strong he had the ability to i mean, he is an independent man. he did quit. guy. quit. as miss parker told you, he quit four months before -- the evidence is he quit four months before his diagnosis, when he was motivated to do so. i do want to talk with you briefly about punitive damages and to talk to you about damages in general. $10 million is a lot of money. that is a lot of money. i suggest to you that that is not an appropriate 189 this is not a millions of dollars case. amount in this case. if you look at what is really the evidence here of the relationships -- and i know you will do that, the real evidence of the relationships. couple of points. it is okay to ask for money. if i suggested something in any of my questions of these witnesses that i am somehow denigrating the right of miss gollihue or anybody to come into this courtroom and ask for money, then i have badly misspoken. we should all be proud of a system where a citizen can come in and bring a case against two companies like this and be represented by lawyers and have that claim resolved by people drawn from different walks of life, like you, in front of a judge that makes and enforces the rules. so proud of that. nothing wrong with that at all. we should be there is i spent my life in it. i am. we do not criticize -- if i have said something, some mention about blaming ray gollihue, if i have said something or if i have asked a question in the course of this proceeding that led you to believe that i have anything but respect for mr. gollihue and his family, i have misspoken. of course he has the right to smoke. of course he of course she has the right to come has the right to choose. in and seek money damages under the rule of law. but with those freedoms and with those 190 we are just responsibilities, come responsibilities. asking -- we are not saying she should not be here. saying that if you look at the evidence and apply the law as the court will instruct you, you will come to a result that she is not entitled to money damages; but that is very different, very different than her right to be here. we are punitive damages, i think miss parker covered it couple of things. clear and convincing beautifully. evidence, very high standard. the other thing i do not want to get lost here is the instruction that you will get that whether or not miss gollihue and shane are entitled to money over and above what would fairly compensate them is to be judged by you based on conduct that was directed to mr. gollihue. it is not about all of the things that you might find fault with across the board, you know, filters, low-tar, which i'm not sure why they are in the case anyway. did not like unfiltered cigarettes. he ever, ever chose a low-tar cigarette for health reasons. i'm not sure what that is about. there is no evidence that he my point is that whatever the conduct is, whatever the evidence is that you are considering, if you ever get to that punitive damage question, and i submit, like miss parker, i want to be clear, i do not think you should. one, no; two, no; three, no. those first three questions: v8 - 191 you say no to one of those three questions, you can go. if you do say yes to the punitive damage, if you get that far, we will come back and have another proceeding, which you will see. but my point is that the evidence that you apply in making that decision as to whether or not these folks get money over and above what you have already given them, because you would not be here if you had not already decided to give them some compensation, is only conduct that is directed to mr. gollihue. this is mr. gollihue's case. it is not about the world. you heard from these witnesses that have testified enough to know in courtrooms across american we have cases like this. mr. heimann: your honor, objection to that. that is improper. the court: mr. davis: overruled. but this is mr. gollihue's case. this is your case, in about 20 minutes; and the decisions that are going to be made here have only to do with the people that are in front of you. i appreciate so much the opportunity to talk with i appreciate i appreciate your attention. you about this. your time. actually get a chance to address you directly. i wish i had more, but it is a pleasure to i thank you very much, and i ask that you return a 192 verdict for philip morris and r.j. reynolds. thank you.