mr. foote: good morning. judge, mr. mccarter, mr. geise, all of us here, thank you again for what will turn out to be about three weeks of service. and as i said when we started this, we stand up out of respect to you just as we do with the court. and shortly, because now you have heard the law, what is going to be turned over to you is to decide the facts in this case. the battle -- the battle against lung cancer really occurs on two fronts. okay? you have heard how on one front the surgeon general, federal trade commission, even president kennedy has tried to do things in a global perspective to make the fight against lung cancer work. it is sort of -- in economics there is a term -- the term "macroeconomics" and "microeconomics." and they do the macro stuff. but what is important for you today is that you are going to do the microeconomics. you are going to decide for one person how the conduct of the defendants affected the gore family. and so, today, you are just as important as the surgeon general; you are just as important as the ftc; you are just as important as president kennedy when he made -- they all made their decisions about what to do. today is about gloria gore. you will, as the judge said, get a full set of the instructions. and as -- and you should read the instructions and treat them as a group, as -- as the court will tell you. the -- each of the instructions is important. and the first thing you should do when you get back to the jury room, hopefully later today, is pick a foreman so that someone can run the way that the jury operates and how you make your decisions. and, basically, you have seven questions to answer, because after you read the instructions, you are going to get this verdict form and on it are seven questions. and my job this morning and this afternoon is to argue to you how you should answer those questions and why. the answer to each of the questions should be "yes." each of the questions that you have a "yes" or "no" answer to, the answer to each of the questions should be "yes." and when you get to the question about compensation for mr. gore, later on when i talk to you i'm going to give you a number as to what i think is fair. also, you are going to be asked to divide the responsibility between mrs. gore, philip morris, and rjr. and -- and as the court will tell you, that responsibility has to add to one hundred percent. a lot of the proof in this case has been about why we believe that they are at fault and not just mrs. gore. but one thing is for sure: mr. gore is not at fault. he is sort of a character -- you are going to see nothing in here about mr. gore and his fault, because it is not part of the case. what relates to mr. gore is the compensation for what he lost, and only that. so i'm going to go through these questions now -- and i'll just rely on the court to stop me or, if one of you needs a break, i'm sure that the court will allow that -- as i go through the questions that you are going to be asked to answer today and why you should answer "yes" to these questions. so, baron, can you put up the first slide. first is the burden of proof. as the court told you -- and there will be one exception to this -- and as mr. mccarter told you at the beginning, we have the burden of proof. and what that means is that we have the greater weight of the evidence on these questions that you have to decide. and there is lots of ways to describe what the greater weight of the evidence means. if you think of the scales of justice, when this trial started out, the scales of justice were even. and our burden is to move the scales of justice a little bit in our favor. that is all it has to be. you may think that we moved it a lot. but if you put a quarter or a nickel or a penny on the scales of justice and that moves the scales of justice to our side -- or a feather -- that means we have met our burden of proof in terms of the greater weight of the evidence. so in a -- and there is a lot of basketball on. now, in a basketball game, if you win 98 to 97, you still win. in legal terms, that is the greater weight of the evidence. if you win a football game 7 to 6, you still win. that is the legal definition of the greater weight of the evidence. that is our burden. put a feather on one side, which i think we have done way more than that, and we win. but i wanted you to understand what those scales of justice mean. so the first question: was gloria gore addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine? and, again, all these will be on your verdict form. and if so, was her addiction a legal cause of her caro- -- carotid artery stenosis? next slide. what is important about the definition of a legal cause -- it is all important, but what i want to point out to you is three things: one, it talks about a cause. now, there is a difference -- it is common sense, and you are going to bring your common sense to this. there is a difference between "the" cause and "a" cause. "a" cause, as the judge described, means there may be other things that affected it; so it is, was it one of the causes? was it a cause in terms of your determination? as it says, it need not be the only cause. it need only be a cause that con- -- contributes substantially. that is our burden. next slide. contributes substantially. did the addiction play an important role on this first question? was it a cause? next slide. but for the addiction, would the carotid stenosis have occurred? if she was not addicted to nicotine, would she have smoked one and a half to two packs of cigarettes per day for 46 years and develop this disease? next slide. you have heard this from a lot of different folks: addiction causes continued smoking, causes carotid artery dise -- artery disease. addiction was a cause of the continued smoking. continued smoking was a cause of the carotid artery stenosis. next slide. surgeon general agrees that cigarettes and other forms of tobacco are addicting and that nicotine is the drug that causes addiction. i'm going to talk a lot about nicotine because i think another thing that i hope happened this week -- these last few weeks, for all of you, is that you learned something. part of being in these trials, being in an interesting trial, is that you learn something. whether we win or lose, i hope that you-all learn something about what is going in this battle for lung cancer in the united states. next slide. addiction is a -- is defined by the national institute on drug abuse -- you heard dr. burns talk about that. it is characterized by compulsive drug-seeking and use despite harmful consequences. now, gloria gore, i'll talk more about her later, but there was not a bad word said about her. she was an intelligent, wonderful person, with one problem: she started smoking too young, and she was in the group that, by 25, was addicted, and that is a cycle that she could not get out of. even though there were harmful consequences and she knew that there were harmful consequences, the addiction is what took over. and you have heard that from a lot of people. and the addiction took over to the point where, during a hurricane, as you heard one of her daughters, i think, tell you, they went out to get cigarettes because she -- mr. mccarter: objection, your honor. mr. foote: -- not smoking. the court: sustained. mr. mccarter: daughters did not testify to that. mr. foote: you heard the testimony from somebody. i apologize. next slide. the evidence of her smoking is related to what the medical professionals then get to look at to determine whether or not she is addicted. so the evidence of her smoking was -- why did we put that in? because the evidence of her smoking is important for a medical opinion about the medical diagnosis of addiction. so you can see that she smoked for 46 years. you -- you see how much she smoked. she smoked everywhere. she smoked in bed. you also heard -- and this is part of the addiction -- that she tried to quit in many different ways. she smoked before going to bed. she -- no one said she was not addicted. never heard that during this trial. next slide. this is how much time she spent smoking. again, who does this if they are not addicted? this was the damage to her body. next slide. you got to hear dr. burns, and you got to hear his qualifications, and you got to hear that he is one of the best in the world on these issues to the extent where the surgeon general, in the macro world, needed his assistance to work on the surgeon general's reports, and asked for his assistance with respect to the surgeon general's reports. and he came here in the micro world to talk to you about gloria gore. next slide. and what did he tell you? he is a doctor. and he told you that she was powerfully addicted and that she tried to quit but nicotine had a hold on her. and that is absolutely what happened to mrs. gore. next slide. he talked about each of the four brands of cigarettes that you heard were -- were smoked. he talked about the fact that each of them contributed, both the rjr cigarettes and the philip morris cigarettes, because this is continuous. this is a continuous event. every cigarette that she was addicted to, every cigarette that she smoked, was part of the chain that led to her sickness and her death. next slide. do you see there it says "to a reasonable degree of medical certainty"? that is how doctors legally give opinions: do you have an opinion to a reasonable degree of medical certainty as to whether mrs. gore's addiction to nicotine was a substantial contributing factor -- and this -- that word comes out of the instructions, you will see -- in the development of the carotid stenosis? yes, i do. what is the opinion? that it was a substantial contributing factor to the development of her carotid stenosis. that is the guy that the surgeon general asked to help him. next slide. then you heard from dr. beckett. he is here. he is part of the vero community. he took his time to come here and talk to you. i think he was here for a few hours. he was a treating physician of gloria gore. he actually was the person that can talk about this; who saw her, talked to her, touched her, had -- had the verbal and nonverbal communication with her. and what did -- what did dr. beckett tell you? that she was addicted to nicotine in cigarettes. and you saw the question -- you know, about, do you have an opinion to a reasonable degree of medical certainty. he is sure. there is no question that in dr. beckett's mind, the treating physician, she was addicted. next slide. again, did she suffer from the cerebrovascular disease in 1992? no question. here's -- here's an important question. but for -- but for her cigarette smoking, she would not have developed the disease in 1992. he said, i would say that. but for smoking, mrs. gore would not have developed the disease. next. here's the medical records -- records. carotid stenosis with plaquing. next slide. you also heard from michaela scott, who did not want to come in and testify. she was convinced that mrs. gore was addicted. she was sure that mrs. gore was addicted. next slide. so what do we have on this first question about whether she was addicted to nicotine contained in defendant's cigarettes? we have three medical opinions and no opinion otherwise. this is not the greater weight of the evidence. this is one hundred percent of these people believe, these doctors believe and told you that she was addicted to nicotine contained in defendants' cigarettes. so i think you noticed that these were the only people allowed to actually talk about addiction. and why is that? because they are m.d.s, they are trained to be the people to talk about addiction. you might remember that mr. gore talked about his wife being hooked. okay? but these were the only people, the only people, that you heard talk about addiction and give the opinion of addiction. and that is the only proof you have. so there is absolutely no question, based on the evidence you heard, that she was addicted. so when you get to question 1, "was gloria gore addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine; and if so, was the addiction a legal cause of her carotid artery stenosis," there is no question that your answer should be "yes." and you heard from dr. beckett that there would not be that -- in her, there would not be that carotid artery stenosis without -- without all of the exposure that she had to cigarettes because of her addiction. so that is why the answer to question no. 1 is "yes." now, what does that mean when you answer that question "yes"? that means that now gloria is part of the engle class. and the rulings that the judge will have in your instructions with respect to the engle plaintiffs apply to her as soon as you answer that question "yes." i'm not going to go through those rulings right now, you just heard from the judge, but basically they are determinations of things about addiction, they are determinations about things about cigarettes, and they are determinations about things that the defendant did which you now must take as true once you answer that first question about which there is no doubt, yes. second question: "was smoking cigarettes manufactured by each defendant a legal cause of lung cancer in gloria gore?" well, first off, remember what the judge said about continuous. she started smoking r.j.r. cigarettes and then she switched to philip morris cigarettes. so the damage started, as you heard from the witnesses, with r.j.r. and philip morris finished the job, and that is why they are both responsible for her lung cancer. one thing that you will not see in the instructions is the word "choice," because, as you saw from the surgeon general, the addicted have no choice. that is the idea of a medical addiction. so you are not going to hear anything in the instructions about choice. what was the legal cause? her smoking was the legal cause of her lung cancer. there is no question she had lung cancer. i do not think there is any question in your mind about where the lung cancer started and what the reason for the lung cancer was, but let us go through a few things. this is an easy question. next slide. you saw in the proof -- i'm now trying to publish this to you -- from the defendants' documents that -- and this is pt 1525. if i forget to identify a particular document to me -- if i forget to identify a particular document, let me know. this is in 1987. so what is the plan in 1987? "lest some lawyer be looking over our shoulder, i do not concede that even one person dies of a chronic disease that is caused by smoking cigarettes. sauce for the goose is sauce for the gander. that is all i am saying." next slide. dr. burns: "there was not any question in my mind, in reviewing the record, and certainly there was not any question in the record by the physicians that once they had all the information, that this was a primary lung cancer." all you see in all the records, what you hear from all the doctors, is primary lung cancer. and dr. burns has seen thousands and thousands of patients. and, yes, he is paid a lot, because he is the best. you heard about 200 billion dollars spent by the defendants. dr. burns has been paid millions of dollars because these people need it. he is the best. no question in dr. burns's mind that the smoking caused the lung cancer. next slide. this is dr. michaela scott. i want to get back to the medical way that a medical opinion is made. "and at that time you believed within a reasonable degree of medical probability that she had carcinoma, left lung, nonsmall cell; is that right? to a reasonable degree of medical certainty? "yes, i thought she had lung cancer with all her presentation." next slide. again, the records show lung cancer. next slide. more records showing lung cancer. death certificate. lung cancer. so there is really not, again, much doubt about the fact, when you get to the next question. or, again, it is a cause. the question is, "did it contribute substantially to her lung cancer?" if smoking did that, then with the next questions you answer "yes." and, again, on those questions, we use the same standard, the greater weight of the evidence. so was smoking cigarettes manufactured by each defendant a legal cause of the lung cancer in gloria gore? yes. all right. now, i want to turn -- i'm going to get back to the questions, but i want to turn the talk a little bit to the conduct of the parties. next slide. next slide. conduct of the parties. as i said, the conduct of mr. gore is not at issue. what was the conduct of gloria gore? well, she was not a liar. she certainly did not defraud anybody. she did not decide to not make safer cigarettes. what did she do? what was her conduct? she smoked. that was her conduct. she started smoking at a young age. she got addicted, as dr. burns said, by at least 23, when the defendants call at that age a young, adult smoker. from whatever age, age 25, she got addicted to cigarettes in that time period, and she tried to quit, but she could not. that is her conduct. that is it. she was an addicted person who, in her particular situation, she could not get off of this drug. now, let us look at the defendants' conduct. it is hard to believe... you saw the chart from r.j.r. that started at page 9, and you will have it, page 9 to 25. it is hard to believe that understanding that the replacement smoker, who are people between 9 and 25 -- it is hard to believe that the replacement smoker who they know they may kill, is a target. it is really hard to believe that 20 or 25 years down the road the person that starts out before their brain is even fully formed, the person that starts out doing this for glamour or doing it because it is cool, the person who starts out with the first cigarette not even liking it, but after a few more cigarettes and a few more cigarettes, as mr. teague said, the real satisfaction starts to kick in, the real satisfaction being the beginnings of addiction to nicotine. so it is really hard to believe that replacement smokers are what they need because of greed. the money -- where does the money come from? where does the 200 billion dollars come from? the addicted people. they are paid for their own addiction. you think the chainsaw was free? how much was spent in a chainsaw. mr. gore thinks it was free. so you start with the replacement smoker. you get the replacement smoker addicted. you know the replacement smoker will probably die prematurely. in this case about 23 years prematurely, or -- if you look at the life tables for gloria gore. it is hard to believe that knowing they are going to kill people, they still target the replacement smoker. because if they do not, then they will not have any more addicted people and they will not have any more cigarettes and they will not sell any more cigarettes and they will not have billions of dollars to spend on the next generation. so the next generation can become a replacement smoker, an addicted smoker, and the cycle continues. it is really, really hard to believe. next slide. "young, adult smokers have been the critical factor in the growth and decline of every major brand over the last 50 years." this was 1984. 1934 to 1984, 50 years, young, adult smokers, both the replacement smokers, without them using the 200 billion to get those replacement smokers, there would not be another generation over those 50 years. next slide. "young, adult smokers are the only source of replacement smokers." once you are really an adult, you know, people mature at different ages, but some people are mature at 18, some people are not mature until they are 30, some people never mature; but use your common sense about when people really grow up, and they know that 25 is a really important age. because if you make it to 25, you are probably never going to be a smoker, and they have lost you. so they need you before you are 25. if younger adults turn away from smoking, the industry must decline. next slide. median age, 16.7 years, as young as 9. median age. a 16-year-old who starts smoking does not have the advantage of someone who is 26, where it appears, by their own study, almost nobody starts smoking. and that is why the young, adult smoker is so important to their billions of dollars. next slide. here is one of their replacement smokers. here is one who died early. here is one who, in 1953 or '54 is about when this picture was taken. what were the defendants doing in 1953 or 1954? well, about this time this beautiful young girl was about to have her first cigarette to be cool, to fit in. they were having a meeting in the plaza in new york. all of them. and they made an agreement. now, when you make an agreement to do things -- it can be a contract, it can be lots of different things. when you make an agreement to do bad, which is what this agreement was, that is called a conspiracy. a conspiracy to do bad because they knew in 1953 that they had a problem. and they had to make a decision: do we fix this in a healthy way, or do we make an agreement to keep stuff secret, keep things secret from the public, to keep things secret from the surgeon general, to keep things secret so that we can continue to sell as many cigarettes as possible? even though we know -- because of mr. teague at that time -- even though we know it is going to kill people. next slide. i... people are crops? that is how little respect for human life these rich -- mr. mccarter: objection. the court: sustained. mr. foote: that is how little respect for human life the people that ran these companies had. people are crops. and we need more crops because we need more money. next. kool. you heard that kool was one of the brands that gloria smoked. high filtration products skew more female, and so do high filtration menthol brands. she was the perfect target at the perfect age for kool cigarettes because of what they at one time said were the health effects of the menthol, which, in fact, the menthol just makes it easier for someone to become a smoker. growth is from 16- to 25-year-olds. at the present rate, a smoker in the 16- to 25-year-old age group will soon be three times as important to kool as any other prospect. it is just undeniable that they knew once you get to 25 you are safe. you are probably safe. and one of the decisions is that is since we know they are probably safe, we are going to go ahead and we are going to get the 9, 10, 11, 12. we are going to do sampling. we are going to go out into neighborhoods and give free cigarettes. we are going to make it look cool. we are going to spend 200 billion dollars so that the culture is such that people do not think -- at certain times; now we do -- smoking is bad. next slide. if you remember, the -- dr. proctor was on the stand talking about griffin and battelle: what is important here is certain unattractive side effects. certain unattractive side effects. that is what lung cancer is to them: a certain unattractive side effect. next slide. the cigarette, the modern cigarette, is one of the most highly designed, specialized products ever created by man. and what the modern cigarette does is applies the optimum amount of nicotine. now, the reason that there is an optimum amount of nicotine is because nicotine is a poison, and every person has their own ability to -- when they become addicted, their own usage requirement with respect to nicotine. and so in order to keep people addicted, it cannot be too much and it cannot be too little. and they spent a lot of time studying exactly what the optimum amount of nicotine was to be. and as you can see there, they can be extracted from the tobacco, also can be added to the tobacco. but what is important is the ph. and what is important about the ph is, if you take ordinary nonflue-cured tobacco, it is very difficult to inhale. once you get the ph up, not only is it easier to inhale because it is more like the ph of our lungs, it allows you to inhale it. but that is what frees up the nicotine. you heard about freebasing and free nicotine. this is what freebasing... and that is what gives you the kick in seven or eight seconds. now, the faster you get the kick, the more likely you are to either become addicted or stay addicted. the... you heard dr. proctor -- again, someone who is, in -- in my view, the best in the world -- mr. mccarter: objection to counsel's personal view. the court: sustained. mr. foote: -- in many people's view is the best in the world -- he talked about the fact that they had a choice. they had a choice to make a different cigarette that was safe or safer. the problem with that cigarette was the agreement. because they stuck to their conspiratorial agreement. and part of the agreement between these companies was you could not talk about safety because, once you started down that path, a big problem would start for all of them because they all had to deny, as they did until they were caught -- they all had to deny that there were safety problems or that there was a problem with nicotine. so what their conspiracy did was not even allow them to make their product safer. again, like the replacement smoker, that is unbelievable. they kept to that conspiracy to the point where, when they had safer cigarettes, they could not call them "safer." and what they could have done -- if they can make an agreement to lie, a conspiracy to lie, a conspiracy to hide things, a conspiracy to trick the surgeon general even -- which we will talk about in a little bit -- why could not they make an agreement that they were going to do it the right way? let us make it a good agreement? let us make an agreement where we all -- we control the market? let us make an agreement we all make a cigarette that is safer? that is a good agreement. that was a choice they made, to not make that safer cigarette. and as a result of that, we have the largest epidemic that the u.s. has ever seen. 20 million people died prematurely because of the decisions that came out of the conspiracy. next slide. so what did they conceal? well, as we know, it started in 1953 and it lasted until 2000. i think you heard the story about somebody actually being concerned about these documents and puts them in their pants so that they can become public at one point. and, eventually, they had to admit certain things because they were caught. you heard dr. proctor talk about the fact that there was this deal with the states, and they had to turn all their documents over. so it was not until then that they started admitting things, the sorts of things that you are going to hear they admit today. but in any case, during that time when gloria was first their replacement smoker and then their confirmed smoker, what did they conceal? they concealed false -- the fact that they were doing false science. again, america was built on science. you know, we would not have the lights. we would not have the air conditioning. we would not have the cars. we are built on good science. we would not have gone to the moon. we were built on good science. good science is important. bad science is medieval. and what -- what they did was use bad science to create doubt and concealment. and you heard that from dr. proctor. they misled the surgeon general. they were the ones -- when you look at all these documents when you have a chance -- they were the ones who knew about the fact that the light cigarette, which people believe was making them safer -- they were the ones that knew it was a lie. but they did not tell anybody that it was a lie because they could not break the conspiracy. they did not even tell the surgeon general. and the one mistake the surgeon general made -- not on purpose -- was to believe that there might be some health effect from the filters, which turned out to be totally false, and nobody knew it until after gloria died. nobody knew that filters did nothing. and, in fact, in certain cases, they are more harmful than a cigarette without filters. they knew that they were killing 400,000 americans a year. and they -- they had studied nicotine like crazy because they know that what they were really selling -- you will see in their documents -- they knew they were selling a drug. they knew they were selling a drug as -- as addictive as cocaine and heroin and that, what their product really was, was a nicotine delivery device. why was that important? because it was addictive. and that is what created the replacement smokers, and that is what created the $200 billion. without the nicotine, there is nothing. so they knew for a long, long time, from the time gloria started smoking, that nicotine was a problem. and all the way up to when they stood before congress and raised their right hands, the heads of these companies, in '94, and told congress nicotine is not addictive. they knew they were lying. that was part of the conspiracy. they had to lie. the conspiracy was not broken until all the documents came out. they had to lie. they had to conceal, because that is what they had agreed to do. next slide. so they -- as we have discussed a little bit, they manipulate the levels of nicotine so that people keep buying cigarettes. if it is too low, addiction goes away and people will not buy cigarettes. they concealed the fact that they knew there were cancer-causing agents in every puff of smoke. how many puffs did gloria take? how many times was she exposed to these carcinogens? they knew that filtered cigarettes were no safer than nonfiltered; but, again, they did not tell anybody, even the surgeon general. so as there were scares -- think about -- think about the way that they kept people -- they kept their addicted consistent smokers going. as there were scares, they came up with a response. so smoking causes cancer; so we will add a filter. okay. now we are safe. well, there is still tar and nicotine; we will have a low-tar, low-nicotine filter. okay. we are safe. this is what gloria was thinking as she -- as she progressed towards the benson & hedges ultralights. they still had a light cigarette. okay. we are safe. this big company would not lie to me; so i'll smoke light cigarettes. i'm going to be safe. and even i'll smoke ultralights because then i know i will be safe. because these big companies would not lie to me. they are big american companies. they are not going to lie to me, a devoted customer. next slide. so what did they know? that carcinogens are found in practically every class of compounds in smoke, and present technology does not permit selective filtration of particulate smoke. what does that mean? it means filters meant nothing. and they knew this in 1961. filters meant nothing. they were deceiving the whole country. next. all right. one of the jurors asked a question, i think, about what -- can we go back to the prior slide? does that show the -- go back to the prior slide. i think one of the jurors asked a question about the list of carcinogens that they knew about and then what they told -- was there ever anything told to the surgeon general. next -- next slide. so when they wrote to the surgeon general after they knew about all these carcinogens, they knew all the -- the whole list you saw. they knew they were all carcinogenic. none of the chemical substances listed therein, to our knowledge, has been found by scientific research to be harmful to the health of the smoker in amounts reported in smoke, and it is possible to modify the chemical composition of cigarette smoke by the use of filters. 1963, two lies. two lies to the surgeon general when they knew that the surgeon general was putting a report out. next slide. this is in evidence. it is not very long. we will play it for you again. (on video.) * * * * male speaker: this is cbs news extra on smoking and health. the findings of the surgeon general's committee. in our studio this afternoon, following the surgeon general's news conference, cbs news correspondent richard c. hottelet put some questions to one of the leading spokesmen of the industry, howard cullman, president of the tobacco merchant's association and a longtime director of the philip morris company. mr. cullman, prominent in the new york theater and civic affairs, is a third-generation member of a tobacco family. mr. hottelet: mr. cullman, the conclusions are pretty stark and pretty solid. they say -- quite flatly they express the judgment that cigarette smoking contributes substantially to mortality from certain specific diseases and to the overall death rate. then they have the rate of ten times as high for smokers in the case of lung cancer and rather higher in other cases. mr. cullman: well, it is awful hard to define the word "substantial." i do not believe that most people who smoke get lung cancer. we are now in an era, as you know, of moderation. we eat more carefully. we have cholesterol habits. we have drinking habits and lighter whiskey. we have smoking habits which, incidentally, are today changing the type of cigarettes from regular cigarettes to filters. now, i was surprised, at the beginning of the conference, when dr. terry was supposed to have said they had very little evidence, if any, on the effect, if any, of filtered cigarettes. so when we have today sixty percent of the business and the filter field compared to 3 percent ten years ago, i think we need a little more research. i'm convinced that, eventually, they will find some element through a filter or through leaf-growing or a special type of seed-growing that will eliminate the mysterious thing they are looking for. we want to be the detective just as much as the surgeon general as the a.m.a. and we will cooperate in every way. mr. hottelet: well, are you saying, then, sir, that there is something toxic about tobacco which are removable by filter? mr. cullman: well, obviously, the filter takes out tar and nicotine. i do not think the industry admits there are any bad elements. if there are bad elements, through our laboratories, through the surgeon general, through the a.m.a., through acts of god and the like, we hope we may find them. and if they are found, they will be removed. but at this point we do not know. mr. hottelet: does any of the research that the tobacco industry has been engaged in refute any part of the findings here or the conclusions as a whole? mr. cullman: well, without reading the report, i could not answer that to begin with. i do not think the tobacco industry as a whole agrees with the conclusions. (video concluded.) * * * * mr. foote: so you can decide what he meant when he made those statements to the public. next slide. psychological crutch. they actually did psychological research because, again, they knew the importance of nicotine to their business of selling a product that was killing people. so how do you give people the psychological crutch and self-rationale to continue smoking? even if they know it may be harmful to them, what do you tell them? well, first they started telling people not -- no harm. it does not matter what cigarette; this is all baloney. this is caused by radon. this is caused by there is too much sunshine. this is caused by something else going on. this is caused by genetics. then when the health scare comes, they slide a little bit more filters, as i said before, filters, lights. so this is how you keep the self-rationale. and you remember the cycle of addiction dr. burns talked about. if you are in the cycle of addiction, it is very easy to self-rationalize that it is going to be okay; especially when a new cigarette comes out that is even lighter than the one before. a new cigarette that comes out that is safer than the one before so that you do not have to worry about what is going to happen to you. next slide. so 1969. when people are in a conspiracy, and when people know they are lying, what do they do behind the scenes? they have what-if meetings. what if we get found out? what if a whole bunch of people start filing tobacco suits because our product is killing people? and so the top legal firms got together way back in '69 for the what-ifs. no one knew at that time, even the president of the united states, even the surgeon general, no knew what they had in their secret files, but they did. so they held what-ifs, they had to have meetings, they had to have plans. and what was going to happen if litigation started involving cancer suits. why would they ask that question if they did not know that cancer was from their product? if they really believed cancer was not in their product, they would not be concerned about this. but they knew it was. and so behind the scenes, secretly, they started having meetings and formulating plans about what to do about it. and one of the things to do about it was doubt. and this goes back to self-rationale. "doubt is our product." because doubt for an addicted person can overcome a body of fact. doubt for an addicted person can establish a controversy. there was no controversy. but they knew that behind the scenes they had to figure out a way to establish a controversy so that they could keep the people smoking; they could keep the self-rationale going; they could keep the people -- have a reason to continue to use their product. next slide. so in 1978, same thing. when you are in a conspiracy, and when you know you are lying, when you are afraid that someday you are going to get caught, what do you do? well, you try, as best you can, to keep these things secret. and you do not want any admissions made by anybody in your conspiracy, because that would open the door to problems that were not opened until the vault of secret documents was opened. so no admissions. you cannot say nicotine is habituating. you cannot say nicotine is a drug. you cannot say that cigarettes caused cancer. 1978. they knew all this. why have these meetings? because they do not want any admission of guilt with regard to the lung cancer problem because that might cost them money. it might cost them money because it would open the door to legal suits in which the industry would have no defense. so they had to keep it secret as long as they could. and they were successful for 22 more years after this little meeting about keeping all these things secret. they were successful for 22 more years to avoid the admission that nicotine was addictive and cigarettes caused cancer. next slide. again -- the court: hold on. is everybody okay over there on the jury? you do not need a break? mr. foote: time for a break? the court: you need a break. all right. let us take about a seven- to ten-minute break. remember, you are not to discuss this case among yourselves or with anyone else. please leave your notepads on your chair. (the jury left the courtroom at 12:37 p.m.) the court: take a recess. (break taken from 12:37 p.m. to 12:51 p.m.) the court: all right bring the jury in. we are back on the record. (the jury entered the courtroom at 12:52 p.m.) the court: all right. you may be seated. mr. foote, you made proceed. mr. foote: sure. and thank you for your patience in getting to lunch, because i do have a lot of -- the court: well, you know what? actually, let me see if they want to break for lunch now and finish, or if you want to just go ahead and let him finish. can i see a hand of votes? do you want to go to lunch now? it is 5 of 1:00. yes? who wants to go to lunch? show your hands. no one. mr. mccarter: are we allowed to vote? (laughter.) the court: okay. who wants to stay? show your hands. well, nobody is voting. okay. so they want to stay. all right. the majority does. mr. foote: thank you for your patience. the court deputy: judge, one second. one of the jurors wants me to get her a ginger ale; so i'm going to collect money. mr. foote: thanks, leslie. may i proceed, judge? the court: you may. mr. foote: so -- if you put the picture up. so what -- it is a free country, and they can sell cigarettes. they do not have to sell cigarettes. nobody makes them sell cigarettes, and nobody makes them sell defective cigarettes. but it is a free country. and what you need to do in our free country -- on the one hand you have this gal -- this is when she graduated from -- here in vero. and on the other hand you have all these folks. you have seen the names. you have heard the names. who they are: rjr and philip morris. that is what you have to compare. you have to compare the responsibility of this person to these people. now, i told you, when i did opening statement that i was going to try to figure out a way to help you come up with how you should divide that responsibility. and we admit some fault, but i'll tell you what: we admit no fault until she is 25. she is a replacement smoker. when she is 14, 15, 16, whatever you decide -- 17, 18, 19, 20, 21 -- before she is really an adult, when she was a young adult smoker, before she is fully matured, we accept no fault. they targeted her and they got her. now, after she is 25, that is when we accept some fault. and i think it is equal after she is 25: a third, third, and a third. and if you do the math on that, the arithmetic -- it is not really math. if you do the arithmetic, it is going to come pretty close to my suggestion for what percentages of fault be. remember, until she was 25, i think it is only fair she get no fault. and after that, we were not there. we know what they did. we know she tried, but that is why we took some responsibility. and this is a fair portion given what happened to her in terms of how the responsibility should be laid out. and so that is your question 5. i suggest you answer ten percent for gloria gore and divide the rest equally between them. and remember the total has to add up to one hundred percent because you are dividing up all the fault between those three parties. and, again, you notice who is not on there: bob gore. no responsibility. next. this -- these next two questions, again, i suggest all four of them be answered "yes." this relates to gloria's reasonable reliance, reasonable reliance, on things that the defendants did or did not do. how do you know what somebody does not do until the vaults are opened? you cannot. the surgeon general did not know until the vaults were opened. so concealed or omitted material. her reliance was on their truthfulness. her reliance was her trust. you know, it is okay to trust a liar. that is human nature. people are trusting. it is not okay to be the liar with the intention that people trust you. that is not right. so what was it -- and the date is may 5th, 1982. what was it that happened? what was it that she was relying on from that date forward? well, some of it already happened and continued. it was continuous. what was the lie? nicotine, not addictive. we are not doing studies on animals in germany. we are not examining the psychological effects behind the scenes so we can get exactly the right amount of nicotine. we are not telling you that cigarettes are safe because we are lying. but they were. and she was their perfect subject for their conspiracy. the perfect subject, because she did everything they wanted her to do. if -- if we were sitting in a board meeting in 1953 and they could say, "who is our perfect subject? who is the perfect person that we are going to be able to turn into a smoker and keep as a smoker? well, let us see. who is our perfect person?" well, first of all, a female. because, as you see in the psychological studies, especially a strong female -- and i think that you heard it from mr. gore she was a strong female -- they are more likely to make their husband quit than them, themselves quit. so who do we want? we want a female. we want them young. we want them addicted. we want them to be a replacement smoker. and then we are going to lie to them because we know the truth. we are going to lie to them as long as we get away with it. and we got away with it way after may 5th, 1982. we got away with it for 18 more years. for 18 more years, we got away with our conspiracy, our lies, our ability to keep more people smoking. the sad thing is the conspiracy worked. the conspiracy really, really worked. so here we have the perfect subject. she is young, so they get her addicted before her brain comes together. she listens to them and believes that the filters are safer. she believes the filters are safer after may 5th, 1982. she believes light cigarettes are safer. she believes ultralight cigarettes are safer. she believes menthol are safer. she believes, "this is not going to happen to me. it is not going to happen to me because i trust these people and what they are telling me." so she relied on them and she relied on their concealment and their omission. and how could you do that to somebody? seriously. they spent her money, get their 200 billion dollars, so that they could keep her relying after may 5th, 1982. that is the incredibly unbelievable thing about this scam: they are using the people's own money. that is the source of revenue. it is the people buying the cigarettes. that is where the 200 billion comes from. they use their own money to trick the people. if you want an example of is it -- was it reasonable for her to rely? was it reasonable for her to rely on them? well, the surgeon general did. surgeon general did until almost 2000. so if it was reasonable for the surgeon general to rely after may 5th, 1982, how could -- he is got everything. how could it not be reasonable for her to rely after 1982? that is part of the reason that you should answer "yes" to these four questions. but let us go through some specific stuff that you saw and heard. (on video.) * * * * male speaker: would it be correct, then, from 1954 until 1980, it was also american tobacco's position that cigarettes are not injurious to your health. male speaker: that is so. male speaker: could you expect a consumer to rely upon your advertisements? male speaker: yes. our advertising is truthful, and we would anticipate that they would rely on it, if they chose. male speaker: that is your promise as to what the consumer can expect from your product, is not it? male speaker: yes, it is. male speaker: okay. (video concluded.) * * * * mr. foote: 1986. that is after 1982. on national tv. mr. mccarter: objection. mr. geise: objection. the court: sustained. mr. foote: i withdraw that. 1986, this was their position. next. now, this started before '82, but it continued after '82 because the filter fraud, the filter scam continued until 2000. so for 18 years after 1982 they knew, but they did not tell anybody else, that switching to these lighter cigarettes created the same amount of smoke and disease and danger as did any other cigarette, and she had a right to reasonably rely on that after 1982. next. same for the illusion of filtration. who knew it was an illusion? in 1983, who knew it was an illusion? the surgeon general did not. only the tobacco companies knew it was an illusion in 1983. for them, it was magic. it was magic for them because the illusion of filtration caused all these dollars, these magical dollars to float in. so they created an illusion, and the illusion worked, and the result was money. next. the new filter brands make extraordinary claims, but the customer is getting the same. the customer, gloria gore's customer number, 10856341 or whatever it was, that customer, the one they kept track of, she is getting the same nicotine and tar from '76 all the way until 2000. why did she do it? as they say: on the ground of reduced risk to health. next slide. you saw this study that philip morris did. did they tell anybody about this study? did they -- in 1980, '82, '83, did they tell anybody, "look, we actually did a study, and it turns out that light cigarettes make no difference to your health"? why would not they? why would not they tell people? they could not. we are back to the conspiracy. they could not tell. otherwise, the conspiracy falls apart and then what happens? all the stuff that they have got in their vaults comes out. and instead of it coming out in 2000, it comes out in 1975. so was it fair? was it reasonable for gloria, in 1983, to rely on lights and filters? it was. was it reasonable for them to keep it secret? it was not. it is another thing that is really unbelievable, that they kept americans believing this for so many years. next. boy, they are doing a lot of studies. doing a lot of studies because they still want to make sure they get that perfect balance for the perfect profit. so behind the scenes, without telling anybody -- they are not telling the surgeon general; they are not telling the ftc -- behind the scenes, they are doing these studies, and they, again, find out: no difference. but we cannot tell anybody. next slide. so you know there is no controversy about it, that the -- towards the end of her smoking days, gloria went to the benson & hedges lights and then the benson & hedges ultralights, the philip morris product. women attribute elegance and class image to benson & hedges. they feel glamorous, and it sets them apart. and they are menthol. so they are light; they are menthol; they are glamorous. this is what -- this is what the company is saying. this is not what mr. gore said. they -- gloria -- perceive they are cutting down, and as an alternative to quitting, they are trying to be safer. this is what they are saying: "our customers are trying to be safer. we know they are not safer. we know one hundred percent they are not safer. we have done the studies. but this is an alternative." this is, again, part of dr. burns's cycle of addiction. and what do they also know? all the way through 2000, past 1982, what do they also know? most cannot accomplish. the people that they got at age 14, 15, 16, 20, what cannot they accomplish? they are bringing this change. you have heard the doctors talking about change in the brain, change in the receptors. this is not, you know, i need a snickers bar. this is your brain has changed, and my receptors need this drug. that is why, if they get them good enough and they spend enough of their own money so that they smoke lots and lots of cigarettes, money, again, going into these folks' pockets, they know full well there is not one thing they are going to accomplish: stop smoking. and that is good for them. that is what they want. they want people to keep smoking. and it was fair for gloria to rely on the benson & hedges after 1982 as a safer alternative. why was it reasonable? why was it reasonable? because they say it is reasonable. even though they know they are killing her. next slide. lights. they are doing a study about the reaction to their new part of the conspiracy. and gloria was one of the victims. and that her reliance on this stuff behind the scenes, her reliance on what they showed publicly, was reasonable. next slide. you heard this from dr. burns. this was part of the history that he was using to come up, again, with his medical expert opinions. ultralights, in 1994, six years before her death, she thinks she is safer. is it reasonable for her to think she is safer when they have hidden the fact -- it looks like it is safer? what does your common sense tell you about what somebody would think if that was safer or not? take your common sense back to the jury room. and what is your common sense going to tell you? she was trying. she had a -- why would somebody switch to ultralights? because it is safer. only they knew it was not. next slide. so we get to, again, the burden on this issue of these four questions, which is the greater weight of the evidence. so on questions 3 and 4, because of the concealment after '82, the omissions after '82, you should answer all four of those questions "yes." it was a conspiracy. they did it together. they could not get out of it without breaking a conspiracy. that is what a conspiracy is. they all do it together. whether it was philip morris or r.j.r., they all did it together. it was very telling when dr. proctor talked about the fact that they could not even make a safer cigarette because that would break the agreement. they all did it together. they are all responsible. all right. next. there is a different burden of proof for another question that you are going to answer; and that is, punitive damages. and that burden of proof is clear and convincing evidence. use your common sense. it has to be precise, explicit, beckoning confusion. so what do we have? next slide. first of all, this is question 7; and, again, you should answer, "yes"; that punitive damages are warranted to both of these defendants. let me tell you a little bit about that process. first of all, we are still going to finish by friday. okay? if you answer "yes," mr. mccarter and i have already talked about this, there will be three witnesses on thursday. on -- and your -- if you answer "yes," you get to hear those three witnesses and then you decide if there should be or not, you can say after hearing that, zero punitive damages. i will, again, have a suggestion for you if we get that far. but it will be -- one thing that'll be interesting for you, if we get that far, there is going to be somebody here from philip morris -- mr. mccarter: objection, your honor, we are not in that phase yet. the court: sustained. mr. foote: we will be done by friday. why punitive damages? you have seen the instruction, but let me tell you why. my term is "reprehensible." what is reprehensible? to me -- mr. mccarter: objection. the court: sustained. it will be stricken "to me," stricken. mr. foote: there is a term," reprehensible." and if something is reprehensible, there should be punitive damages. what is reprehensible? a conspiracy to kill 20 million people? mr. mccarter: objection. harm to others. based on the instruction on harm to others. the court: sustained. mr. foote: a conspiracy to kill gloria gore. a conspiracy that they knew when she was 14, they might kill her. a conspiracy to keep from her a safe alternative. a conspiracy to get her addicted. it is reprehensible that they targeted a 14-year-old. of all things in this country, what are we supposed to protect? what is the point of all this? we protect our children. what good is it all except for that? we protect our children. we protect the children. they did not. that is reprehensible. that is enough for you to think about gloria gore and whether or not punitive damages should be awarded. they state the filter. that is reprehensible. i cannot imagine doing that to someone -- mr. mccarter: objection. mr. foote: telling her, here, smoke these. you will not be like your dad. you will be okay. and the next health scare, well, smoke these. okay, now smoke these. and she did it all along the way. she did everything they asked of her. she even stayed on the coupons. the unfilter, the illusion of a filter to make money, to make enough money that they could spend $200 billion. can you get the elmo going for a second? i just need a blank piece of paper. they use the money, in part, against gloria gore. can you put up a piece on there and -- i'm so bad at this. do i write this way? this way? mr. philipson: yeah. mr. foote: so i just want you to see the number. i'll start over. it is a hard number to write. 200 billion. that is the number. when they went before congress in order to keep their conspiracy going in '94, i'm in america. i'm here in our nation's capital. i swear to you, nicotine is not addictive. that is what they said. that is reprehensible. using -- go back to the... using -- i talked about this a little bit before. false science to keep people addicted, including mrs. gore, fake science, wrong science, that is reprehensible. keeping it all secret, that is reprehensible. they were very careful because they could not violate their conspiracy. next. if they did not like it, if it was really bad, if it did not lead them to something to help them, they threw it away. that is reprehensible. next slide. setting up fake organizations -- i'm sorry. mr. corr: do you know how to do this? i know how to do it. mr. foote: oh, i apologize. thanks, steve. fake organizations to act as shields and fronts. who paid for those fake organizations? gloria. every pack of cigarettes she bought went to create a shield so they can make things happen at the congressional hearings and as a front. i get you to pay -- i get you to pay me to hurt you. that is reprehensible. next. why? greed. could not lose their jobs, did not want to go out of business. they knew they were killing people. that is reprehensible. next. you saw this before. (on video.) * * * * male speaker: from cbs washington, in color, face the nation, a spontaneous and unrehearsed interview with joseph cullman, iii, chairman and chief executive officer of philip morris, incorporated, and chairman of the executive committee of the tobacco institute. mr. cullman: we have no problem that i know of to try to help people to stop smoking. we do talk to the question of whether or not cigarettes are hazardous. we do not believe cigarettes are hazardous. we will not accept that. because when as and if any ingredient in cigarette smoke is identified as being injurious to human health, we are confident that we can eliminate that ingredient. male speaker: do you believe that cigarettes are safe? have they be proven to be safe, mr. cullman? mr. cullman: i believe they have not been proven to be unsafe. i conclude as a matter of course that it is true that babies born from women who smoke are smaller, but they are just as healthy as the babies born from women who do not smoke. male speaker: what about higher -- mr. cullman: and some women would prefer having smaller babies. (video concluded.) * * * * mr. foote: i do not know what to say about that. so was their conduct reprehensible in this microburst here with respect to gloria? was their conduct reprehensible such that in this place, you need to take a look at whether you should punish them or not? and that is why you should answer "yes" to both those questions. now, the other thing that you need to decide -- and it is hard -- is compensation. there is no easy rule for compensation. on the issue of compensation for mr. gore, we go back to the burden of proof. it is only in punitives that there is a higher burden of proof, which i think is easily overcome. but this, again, is more probably true than not true with respect to his compensation. so let us go to the next slide. as the court told you, you figure out what he lost. it is money. who made this about money? who made all of this about money? it was not mr. gore. he has no fault. you have to decide what he lost. and that starts with gloria, obviously. you have heard -- you saw the family. they are here. some of the friends. vero beach community. was she a special person? was she a special person? she was. why was she special? well, you have not heard a bad word about her. she had lots of friends. she knew everybody in the community. she loved life. she loved to dance. she loved her family. she loved her grandkids. she was special. she was gregarious. she was attractive. no -- there is nobody saying anything else but this. she was intelligent. she was glue. she was glue for a whole clan because she was special. to put together a family of the type that you saw testify, you need to be special. those girls are great. and that shows that she was a special person. and so what you are measuring is the loss of a special person for 23 years. you can do the arithmetic about what would have happened had she not died prematurely. he is got a life expectancy still. it is about 12 years. and had she not died, because of these folks, in 2000, she would have lived a lot longer and he would have had 23 more years with her. so we know she was a special person, and we know she is gone. and we know that he will not have her for 23 years that he should have had her. and you have to figure out: how do you put that into money? that is how our system works. it is not easy. how do we know -- how do we know how truly special she was? well, you heard about her life, but you also heard what happened when she was gone. i suppose there may be people that, when they go, the -- the -- the hole is not that big. well, the hole that she left behind -- this has got nothing to do with her smoking; it is got nothing to do with anything but what the loss is. that is what you have to focus on. it does not matter at this point, when you get to this -- it does not matter how she went. it is just measuring the loss: how big was the hole that was left when she was gone? and i think that you need to think about three or four things in terms of what hole was left. one, because the glue was gone -- every family is different -- because the glue was gone, the family was not the same. there were no more christmas dinners; there was no more halloween; there were no more pictures like we saw of her opening the stuff with grandkids with bob there. it changed the family. which affected bob. he was so much in love with her -- and is today -- that it is hard for him to be here. it is hard for him to go outside on the break and look at the church where they got married right over there (indicating). it is hard for him to go to the elk's club. it is hard for him to go the church they went to. it is hard for him to go to the gas station because, again, he is reminded -- and i think you saw he is a character. i think that is a good way to describe it. but i think you saw, really inside of him, this is real. he puts it inside of him and holds it inside. and he lost those 23 years of one of the lucky ones -- i do not think there is that many of us that are that lucky -- the lucky ones who found the one. who found the one that he wanted to be with every single minute that he was not working. every single minute, he wanted to be with the one and would have been with the one for 23 years. so the family's different. that is part of the hole. but what happens to him is pretty incredible. he has never gotten over it. he is still on depressive medication after all these years. he just wanted to die. that is the hole. and if it was not for his daughter sitting there, he would have died. he would have died drinking a gallon of wine a day and back to smoking cartons of cigarettes. she saved him. that is what a family's for. she saved him. and although it was hard, he was brought back, but he is not the same bob gore -- is this -- is this guy -- is this the guy you see sitting back there? no. it is a different guy. happy man. think of him, at the end of his mail route, looking so forward to going home to see the one. every day. so it is not just what he said. okay? we have got records. because you know what happened. it got worse and worse and worse. and, finally, indian river medical center records department. you will have all these. now, in our final arguments, i cannot read you the whole thing. i cannot read you the surgeon general reports that are in evidence. i cannot read you this stock of -- stack of documents. we would be here just -- we would be here longer to read everything. but it is all going to be available to you. we are not just trying to pick and choose here. please take what you think is important and read it carefully when you go back there. everything's in evidence. we want you to. but i want to go through a couple of things that are shown in these records. it is going to be a little bit. we have got to use the elmo. and i'm going to need these records from the clerk, if that is okay. mr. -- (conferring with the clerk). great. thanks. yes. and my great helper here, baron, is going to help me show these to you. baron, just start with that first page, if you would not mind. i know this is going to be a little bit awkward. maybe it will not be that awkward. okay. so you will see that there is going to be 193 pages. why am i showing this to you? this shows you the hole that was in mr. gore after she died. one of these you have seen before. if you go to 425... what he had gone through -- and you will have this page in a -- and you are free to write these down or not, but you will have this page, 425, to examine as closely as you want. what had he gone through to get to this point? that is part of his loss. not being able to do his job because he needed to take off because she needed him. he would do for her; she would do for him. and so when she lost her hair -- and you have heard this before -- he shaved his head. what does that say about the connection between those two people? and when she -- when she could not go to the bathroom by herself, there were nurses there. who was it that she needed to have do that for her? it was him. the one. and who was it that -- that eventually just carried her when she was 60 pounds? the one. and that is all part of his loss. next, 426. diagnosis: major depressive disorder. initial episode, severe. major depressive disorder. never happened before. he was a happy man. 427. they were worried about him in there to the point where there were suicide checks. this was a man who loved life. who has gone from loving life to suicide checks. 432. you will see -- some of the notes, as you know, get typed up and some are handwritten. depressed. wife died end of june. dependent on her. that is why it is hard to put numbers on these cases, because everybody's different. everybody's relationship is different. but she was really everything to him. and for him, there could be no greater loss. that is -- you will see if you -- if you want to look through the records, you will see there was more notes there like this. that is enough, baron. thanks. so... what is a number for those -- starting when she got sick, through today, and into the future, what is a number that is fair for his life? this man who lost the one? and i'm suggesting that, again, this is -- you do not worry about the comparative here. you just put down what his loss. i'm suggesting it is $7 1/2 million. that is for you to decide. so i just have a couple of more things to say to you and you can have your late lunch. it is almost 2:00. it is really one of the worst stories of greed you could tell. worst stories of lies. some of the stuff you could not make up. we are going to -- we are going to make children our next crop? you could not make that up. it is unbelievable. so i do have -- you are going to have a lot of documents, and i do have what i would call my "suggested reading list," and you do not have to pay any attention to it if you do not want. you will see that it is divided in categories. all those documents are in there. this is a demonstrative exhibit; so this is not going to go back in the jury room with you. but as you go through these documents, you are going to remember seeing them and what was said. and please read them carefully. and please be the micro-surgeon general. be the micro-ftc. be the mic -- micro-president kennedy and do what is fair here, and that is answer those questions "yes" and award mr. gore a fair amount for what he is gone through and will go through, which is $7 1/2 million. and thank you, and after lunch, please give mr. mccarter the same attention you have given me. thank you. mr. foote: thank you, judge. the court: or mr. corr. mr. foote: well, i was not expecting to talk very long, but it may be a little bit. let us set the stage for why we are here. if you go to 89, i think you called it. in 1987 they never changed their position. it is exactly what they are doing with mrs. gore -- 3609 mr. mccarter: objection, your honor. there is an order in limine on that. the court: sustained. mr. foote: you can read it. you will have it in the jury room. i'm going to go through some of the things that counsel missed. it may not be as organized as usual, because i'm responding. first of all, there is a stipulation which you are going to see as part of the group of documents, and the stipulation with respect to reynolds -- i just happen to have this on the top -- says: "at all times during which mrs. gore's alleged to have smoked belair brand cigarettes, they were manufactured by brown & williamson tobacco corporation. reynolds is successor in interest to brown & williamson tobacco corporation's u.s. tobacco business. at all times when mrs. gore is alleged to have smoked kool brand cigarettes, they were manufactured by brown & williamson." dr. burns took all the information he could get from everybody and the only person that talked about this '63 to '70 period -- now, 3610 remember these gals were young. he went around and got all the information he could together and he said -- and i hope that you wrote this down, "from your review of all the depositions, did you find evidence that mrs. gore smoked kool and belair cigarettes from about 1963 to 1970?" and his answer was "yes." oh, we do have it. also, in terms of when she started smoking, there is no doubt she started smoking in high school. her high school friends were here. they smoked with her. there is no doubt she started smoking in high school. there is no doubt she smoked before she turned 18. the evidence of the earliest time she would have started smoking is 14. you can decide it was 15, you can decide it was 16. it does not matter. they targeted youth in order to get their replacement smokers. 90. this is in 1978. "attitudes towards benson & hedges. those who are currently smoking lights do so because they are better for you than full flavor cigarettes." that is what they knew people believed and what mrs. gore believed. not only from that 3611 time, but forward past '82, and all the concealment -- can you go to the verdict form for three and four? let us start with three. i was just trying to make it shorter for you. i was not trying to short-circuit this question. take it back and read it. misinformation -- i'm not going to repeat it all. you know about all the misinformation before may 5, 1982 and you know -- and i'm going to go through the engle findings with you a little bit later -- and you know that the finding which you are going to be bound to is because of course she was addicted. of course the carotid was because of her addiction. there is no doubt about that. the finding is going to be that there was an agreement that they do these things together and that finding is something that you have to take as one hundred percent true. it took another group of people a long time to come to these findings -- and these are the findings and we will go through them -- these are the findings that you must accept if you simply believe she was addicted; and second, that the carotid was caused by her smoking. 3612 mr. mccarter, in my view, was playing doctor. doctors get to testify about their opinions and yes, doctors can be cross examined, but the implication that dr. beckett is a liar was not the implication. it is just not true. dr. beckett said that but for the smoking -- but for the smoking she would not have the carotid disease, but for. he is from here, he is not a liar. he is a doctor. who are the liars? who are the liars? when they start talking about liars, it is hard for me to believe. who are the liars is the question. now, to me -- if you go back to the verdict form -- because the engle finding that we will go through in a minute says: "each defendant concealed -- each defendant concealed or omitted material information not otherwise known or available, knowing that the material was false and misleading and failed to disclose a material fact concerning the health effects or addictive nature of cigarettes or both." that is the answer to the question. but we have a lot more than that. also, each defendant entered into an 3613 agreement to conceal or omit information. the agreement is the conspiracy, the conspiracy means they all did it together. they are all responsible for each other's conduct in the conspiracy. so it does not matter whether pm did this or r.j. reynolds did that. they are all responsible for each other's conduct because they entered into this illegal conspiracy agreement. but even further, with respect to both these defendants, because they are coconspirators, what did mrs. gore see -- they forgot the most important piece of evidence. what did she see hundreds and hundreds of times after may of 1982? the pack. the pack is their best advertising, the pack that says "light." and as dr. proctor told you, it is illegal today to call it light. the pack is the best evidence of all the advertising for all those years. then it turns out when -- because they had tricked the surgeon general, remember. once the surgeon general figured out they had been tricked about light, they made it illegal to call cigarettes light. so the pack. besides the engle findings, 3614 besides all the other things i've told you, the pack itself is the statement and misinformation that they conspired together to make sure that the true health effects of these cigarettes that had become their big sellers was not going to be known to the public. 92. i'm sorry, i'm skipping around. here's sandra, teenage smoking. 93. michaela scott, she did not want to testify and you heard she did not want to testify. but here's her testimony as it related -- and think about this. many, many years later she is trying to reconstruct what she did at the time. now, is your memory better about something that happened in 2000? is your memory better in 2000 or is it better today? what she did in 2000 is what is important, because in 2000, as of that time -- if we can go to the next one -- "when you wrote that statement in 2000, is that something you wrote within a reasonable degree of medical probability?" you did not see that phrase in the questions that they asked, because the proper phrase for a question to a doctor has to go to a reasonable degree of medical probability -- 3615 mr. mccarter: objection, your honor. that is not the law. the court: sustained. mr. foote: so that was her opinion at the time. and she did not want to testify, but in fact she does tell you that she had lung cancer. next. there it is. next. 97, i'm sorry. that is what she says. now, again, this idea about -- let us talk about bob gore for a little bit. i'm sure that the first thing on people's minds when he was carrying her to the washroom and he had shaved his head was trying to figure out who they were going to sue. i'm sure that was really tops on their mind at that time. and this whole idea that this is something made up by mr. gore is so wrong, because all these documents were secret until she died. people did not know all this stuff. she thought that the lights were still safe. why would she sue somebody if she thought she was doing the right thing? she did not know they were lying to her. it was a long time after that. engle was the one who made these findings you are going to 3616 need to abide by and the people found out they were lying. that is the basis of the lawsuit. so when we talk about liars -- you got to observe bob gore. as i said, he is a character, he is a lovable character. they deposed him for 900 pages. i think your common sense would tell you if any person in their 80s is deposed for 900 pages who is got certain medical issues, you might get a few different answers here and there. his memory might be a little bit different. but none of the things that mr. mccarter talked about have anything to do with this case. we are just trying to tell a story and he is picking on little things. he is not picking on the medical records that showed that he went in and what the medical records say, which i think you should look at. he is not picking on the fact that mr. gore certainly drank a lot after his wife died. he is not picking on the fact that the important story was -- i did not hear hardly anything about how great mrs. gore was. a couple people said, yes, she was great. that is not a lie. i do not have time to go through each of those. i'll go through a couple of them when i 3617 get to it. but he did not lie about things. yeah, maybe he got confused about a couple of things. his daughters confirmed everything he said. his daughters confirmed, no, he was not drinking. they were there. his daughter confirmed his exact story. yeah, he smoked maybe for about a week when my mom yelled at him. the patch, he was dipping, as he calls it. you need the patch for dipping just like you need the patch for smoking -- mr. mccarter: objection, no evidence. the court: sustained. mr. foote: so let us talk about what the testimony was regarding mr. and mrs. gore. i want to make sure i get the right ones here. 98, 99, 100. the most telling thing relating to her attempts to quit is this. "i let you down. my partner, i let you down because i could not quit." and she could not quit because she was a replacement smoker. she was one of the ones that that got addicted at such a young age. dr. burns says by at least age 23, that she was one of the ones that their own documents say some people cannot quit. she was one of the ones 3618 that could not quit. this thing, they lied to her. of course she enjoyed smoking. that is an addiction. she loved to smoke. of course she enjoyed smoking. of course it relaxed her. that is an addiction. of course she was going to say she did not want to quit smoking. i'm going to go through all the testimony about all the times she tried to quit. believed that she should have the right to smoke cigarettes. of course she said that, she was addicted. she never blamed philip morris. how could she? this is ridiculous. how could she blame them, when they hid everything until after she died? so let us go through -- and i may have to use the -- here's the testimony. now, this talks about hypnosis. can you go to the next page, baron? again, this is a man who is doing the best he can in his 80s. so he is remembering the best he can. go down to the top. show the top. you see there, '60s, '70s, that is what he 3619 thought. that is what he remembered, '60s and '70s, and he talked about all the other ways that she tried to quit. but one thing we know for sure is -- that is good, baron -- one thing we know for sure is a doctor in vero beach prescribed a controlled substance to her, specifically for addicted smokers. now, why would dr. beckett do that if she was not an addicted smoker? i get back to this issue of the doctors. we have three doctors all saying she is addicted. there is no one who says -- there is no doctor who says the carotid artery was not caused by smoking. so where is their doctor? mr. mccarter: objection, burden of proof. the court: sustained. you have ten minutes. mr. foote: pardon me? the court: you have ten minutes. mr. foote: oh, thank you, judge. on the issue of punitives, one thing i did not talk about was broken promises. that is another place where what they did -- and you 3620 heard it from dr. proctor -- that is another place where what they did was reprehensible. they said, "if we cannot fix it, we will stop selling cigarettes." they could not fix it. they broke their promise. on this issue of these supposed family history things, the sister had kidney disease and was diabetic. they are not related. they are not in the same situation as mrs. gore. the two uncles were obese, the mother was 84 or 89. everyone had -- you heard that everyone has some of this disease by the time they get to that point in their life. that does not mean she had it when she was 60. this whole family history thing is a complete red herring, because what you heard from the doctors who talked about it was that there is no question that what caused the disease, carotid artery disease, was the smoking, the four or five million hits that she took over her life. there is no evidence that she had high blood pressure. there is no evidence that her cholesterol was really completely out of control. dr. beckett never treated her for high 3621 cholesterol. he did not know whether that reading was before or after fasting. there is no evidence about anything like that. the evidence was that she was in good shape, that she was vital, that she got a lot of exercise in the sense that she was very energetic. she had no signs. and this dsm thing never came in. there is no need to go to this dsm, 11 things. it is doctors who treat people every day who decide whether someone is addicted and what happened to them because of the addiction, and that is what we brought you. the filtered cigarettes had an opportunity to be safer. dr. proctor said they ended up being as dangerous or more dangerous. check your notes. and part of that was because of the fact that people believed in it. now, they do not have to sell cigarettes, i said this before, and they can make cigarettes without nicotine. they can take it out and they can put it back in. so unless you are trying to get people addicted, why do not you make a cigarette without nicotine? no one would smoke it. greed. 3622 why do not you come up with a nicotine delivery device and tell everybody what you are really doing? conspiracy. they could have done that in the '80s easily, '70s. here is a nicotine delivery device. any one of you people out there that wants to become addicted to nicotine, we are going to sell you this nicotine delivery device and you may use it and become addicted to nicotine. you will not get lung cancer, but you will be addicted to nicotine. that was their choice not to do that, because they had to keep their conspiracy together. because my time is short, i'm going to -- there is a couple of things. i agree, dr. teague did a good job. he found everything there was to find out there, and that is why it was important. he found all the stuff from all over the world. that is why it was important, because he delivered that to the people in the plaza in new york and they knew it was coming -- mr. mccarter: objection, no evidence. the court: sustained. mr. foote: he delivered it to r.j. 3623 reynolds, who attended the meeting in new york, and that is why they knew they had a problem and that is why they had to start the conspiracy. waxman, do not forget waxman. talk about liars. please do not forget waxman, because the study that mr. geise showed from i think it was '62 in the magazine that he put in evidence that talked about heavy smokers are addicted, well, that was their study. so how could it be 20, 30 years later? "we swear nicotine's not addictive." how could that happen? conspiracy. so let us go through -- can you put the engle findings up, please. so on the first question for which there is no issue, there is no evidence opposite the fact that she was addicted and that the addiction caused her carotid problem, once you answer that question "yes", all the rest of this is true, one hundred percent true. it is true for gloria -- mr. mccarter: objection, the findings do not address mrs. gore. the court: sustained. mr. foote: it is true in this case that smoking cigarettes causes lung cancer and 3624 cerebrovascular disease, including carotid artery stenosis. nicotine in cigarettes is addictive. each defendant placed cigarettes on the market that were defective and unreasonably dangerous. each defendant was negligent. each defendant concealed or omitted material information not otherwise known or available, knowing that the material was false and misleading, or failed to disclose a material fact concerning the health effects or addictive nature of cigarettes or both. each defendant entered into an agreement -- i've called it a conspiracy, this calls it an agreement -- to conceal or omit information regarding the health effects of cigarette smoking or the addictive nature of smoking cigarettes, with the intention that their smokers and the public would rely on this information to their detriment. for all these reasons you should answer every question "yes". you should award a fair distribution of the fault. who was the liar? was it mr. gore or was it 3625 all these gentlemen who hid things for 50 years? who is the liar? based on that, mrs. gore should only get ten percent of the fault, and the two conspirators that entered into an agreement to do these things together should each bear 45 percent of the fault. in terms of what mr. gore lost, that is for you to decide the compensation. but this is not about earnings. you cannot replace a person with earnings. what is the value of losing the one? that is a hard choice for you. it is an important choice. like i said before, be the surgeon general, be the ftc, be president kennedy. do what is right here and award a substantial damage to mr. gore of seven and a half million dollars and then let us go see what happens in the punitive phase. thank you.