mr. mccarter: thank you, your honor. all right. thank you. first, thanks for being here the last two and a half weeks. we really appreciate it. that is how i want to start off, because you have been made a great effort paying attention and listening to both sides and being patient. so i hope you have a couple more hours of patience in you. we are not going to take as much time as mr. foote did, but we are going to take some of your time out. let me also thank mr. geise for giving me most of the time to talk on the defense side and jenn buso back there, who helped put together 3486 some of the slides i'm using today in my closing argument. so the last time i talked directly to you i said i'm going to start with what i would submit to you are the five most important facts in my case when i do my closing argument. this is where i ended my opening, and i told you that the evidence would prove each of these facts even though we do not have the burden of proof. but what you saw is that the evidence did prove this. you saw that mrs. gore knew the entire time she smoked that smoking was bad for her health, and i'll go through in detail as we go through this. mrs. gore enjoyed smoking. she did not want to quit smoking. she believed that she should have the right to smoke cigarettes. remember, she said that on the form she sent to philip morris, and mrs. gore never blamed philip morris or r.j. reynolds for her smoking. i want to pause there for a second, because there is no evidence that mrs. gore was anything other than a wonderful person. there is no dispute about that. she did not file this lawsuit. she never told anybody she blamed 3487 philip morris or r.j. reynolds for her smoking. when she got carotid artery disease in 1992 she never told anybody, "i blame the tobacco companies for it." she never told anybody to go out and sue the tobacco companies. when she got cancer in 2000 she never told anybody, "i blame the tobacco companies for my smoking and my cancer." she never told anybody, "go out and sue the tobacco companies after i pass away." mr. gore is the one who filed this lawsuit. this is mr. gore's lawsuit. i'm going to talk more about mr. gore later, because you saw his testimony, but keep in mind, please, he filed this lawsuit, not mrs. gore. now, i want to start -- i mentioned this early in opening and there is only one person in this courtroom who keeps saying mrs. gore started smoking at age 14. mr. gore blurted it out in an answer when he was testifying and the judge struck it, because mr. gore did not know mrs. gore when she was 14 or when she was in high school. the only person who keeps repeating that mrs. gore started smoking at age 14 is mr. foote. he said it in opening. there is no evidence that 3488 she started when she was 14. this is the evidence from the medical records that we went through when dr. burns was here, and they give different dates. maybe that is because when mrs. gore says she started at age 17, maybe that is when she had her first cigarette and maybe she did not become a regular smoker until she was in her 20s, early 20s. but whatever it is, whatever it is, mrs. gore did not start smoking at age 14. the reason why that is so important is because they want you to believe she started at age 14 and knew nothing about the dangers of smoking when she started. if she started smoking at one of these later ages, you know that she learned by then that smoking could cause cancer and be bad for her health. i'll go through some of this in more detail, but you know from the testimony that when mrs. gore was growing up she learned from her parents, she learned from her teachers, she learned from her boyfriend, she learned from all sorts of sources that smoking was bad for her health. and again, i'll go through this in more detail. 3489 you know from the evidence in this case that mrs. gore continued to get those messages from all of her doctors, from her husband, her parents, her children, the warnings on the pack, the media, and her father's death from lung cancer in 1994. mrs. gore knew her entire life that she smoked. she knew it was bad for her health. that is what the evidence is from their own witnesses. they admitted it on cross-examination. mrs. gore also enjoyed smoking. remember i asked mr. gore this, i asked dr. burns. but mrs. gore told everybody who talked to her about her smoking that she understands it is bad for her health, but she is willing to take the risk because she enjoys it and it relaxes her. mr. gore said that. he said she said that to the kids, and you heard that from dr. burns, who reviewed all the testimony in the case. there is absolutely no dispute the evidence points in the same direction, mrs. gore enjoyed smoking. mrs. gore also did not want to quit smoking. those are not my words. those are the words of mr. gore when he was here and he testified. you 3490 heard he had said that under oath in august. he testified that mrs. gore did not want to quit smoking, and yesterday we played a portion of his deposition where he said the same thing and i want to play that again if we can, jenn. "q: "did you ever suggest to mrs. gore that the two of you had some sort of bet to see who could quit smoking? "a: no, we never had that. i knew she would lose. she would not last five minutes. she really did not want to. i mean, that is just the feeling i had. i do not think she really -- she never told me that. her mindset or however you say it, 'my way or the highway.'" mrs. gore's doctors who talked to her about her smoking said the same thing. you heard dr. beckett when he was here. remember, he is the doctor who is also the family friend. he testified he remembers very clearly that mrs. gore had no motivation to stop smoking. you heard when we read dr. scott's testimony, she talked to mrs. gore about her smoking and dr. scott testified mrs. gore did not make any effort to quit. she did not want to quit. 3491 that is the evidence from mr. gore, dr. beckett, and dr. scott. nobody told you otherwise. in fact, the kids told you. the daughter said, "we never saw her try to quit smoking." they said they heard maybe she tried hypnosis, but they never observed her their entire lives growing up in the house, they never saw their mother try to quit smoking once. fourth, i mentioned this, mrs. gore believed that she should have the right to smoke cigarettes. you have seen this before, but this is the document that mrs. gore filled out. remember, mr. gore said this is mrs. gore's signature and handwriting, and here on the bottom she is asked, "would you be interested in joining a smokers group to help protect your right to smoke?" her answer was "yes". now, not everybody feels that way, of course. people who do not smoke often do not enjoy being around others who do. people who do not smoke do not want to be in a restaurant or bar where they are smoking. but mrs. gore was not a person who held that belief. she believed she 3492 should have the right to make the choice to smoke wherever she wanted to smoke, and it was her right to have that mindset and to have that opinion. but it tells you a lot about who she was. she was not somebody who was ashamed of her smoking. she was not somebody who viewed herself as a victim to the tobacco companies. she viewed herself as in charge of her own decisions in life and as the person who is responsible for those decisions. finally, i mentioned this before, but again, mrs. gore never blamed the tobacco companies. she never said to her husband, "sue them. sue them if i get sick. sue them if i pass away." she never said anything like that. so that is sort of the overview of the case. i wanted to start there, because i ended there on my opening, and i'm going to put this down now and what i'm going to do is i'm going to work through the verdict form, which really is going to be your job, right? you are going to get those questions, you are going to bring the list of questions to the jury deliberation room, you are going to deliberate on 3493 them and answer them. so i want to go through the evidence on every one of the questions you are going to be asked to answer at the end of the case and i'm going to start, of course, with the first one: "was gloria gore addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine and if so, was her addiction a legal cause of her carotid artery stenosis?" you may remember in opening i mentioned this is what we call a compound question. it really has two questions in one. they have the burden of proof. they have to prove both parts of the question to your satisfaction. i'd ask you to look at -- be sure to look at both parts of the question, because they have to prove not only that mrs. gore was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, but they also have to prove that her addiction was a legal cause of her carotid artery disease. what i will do is i'm gong to break this first question into the two parts. i'm going to walk through the first part first and then we will get to the second part and the evidence on carotid artery disease. so what is the evidence relating to nicotine 3494 addiction? well, you heard from dr. burns that 55 million americans have quit smoking. you heard there are more former smokers in the u.s. today in 2015 than there are current smokers, which means if you took anybody who ever smoked in this country, the majority of people who have ever smoked have quit; and you learned from everybody who testified that even addicted smokers can quit. dr. burns testified that anybody can quit smoking if they are motivated and dr. beckett told you the same thing. finally, you heard that mrs. gore at most made one quit attempt in her 40 years of smoking. remember when dr. burns was here, he testified that to qualify as a quit attempt you actually have to stop smoking for 24 hours, so one day, with the intention of quitting for good. in all the materials he looked through relating to the 40 years of mrs. gore smoking, he could say at most there was only one quit attempt where she stopped for 24 hours, and even then he said, "i'm not sure. i think i recall," but at most it is one in 40 years. 3495 you remember mrs. gore was told by her physicians in 1963, when she was pregnant, the doctors and mr. gore told her, "you should quit smoking. it is bad for your health. it is bad for the baby's health." she did not even try to quit smoking then. that is what mr. gore said, she did not even try to quit. set aside whether she would have been successful if she tried. she did not even try. in 1967 she was pregnant with her daughter faith. same thing, the doctors and mr. gore said, "you should quit smoking. it is bad for your health and the baby's health." mrs. gore did not even try to quit. mr. gore does not remember mrs. gore ever trying to quit in the entire decade of the 1960s. he knew her from 1962 to 1970. she never tried to quit that entire decade. her first husband, who testified yesterday by deposition, also did not recall mrs. gore ever trying to quit. you go to 1972, when their son robby is born, same thing, except there is more urgency placed on mrs. gore to quit this time because their daughter faith was born with some problems 3496 caused by smoking. so mr. gore and the doctors told mrs. gore in 1972, "you got to quit. we do not want the same thing to happen to robby that happened to faith." and again, mrs. gore did not even try to quit smoking. mr. gore testified that if you look at the entire decade of the 1970s, mrs. gore did not try to quit smoking. same thing for the 1980s. so i'd submit to you without evidence that mrs. gore ever made a sincere attempt to quit smoking, how could anybody say that she was addicted? but now i want to talk about the evidence they brought you as to whether mrs. gore was addicted to nicotine and whether they satisfied their burden of proof on this issue. what you are going to see in the evidence when we go through it is what plaintiff proved was physical dependence on the part of mrs. gore, that she had cravings and jitters and withdrawal symptoms. but they never actually used -- none of their witnesses used and they never showed you the criteria that somebody is actually supposed to use to diagnose addiction, and none of their 3497 witnesses applied that criteria. this is a slide that dr. burns showed -- they showed when dr. burns was here, and this is the only definition of addiction that is in evidence. and there is no dispute here as to whether this is proper or not, but note where the definition comes from. it comes from the national institute of drug abuse, "drugs, brains and behavior." you heard evidence that the national institute of drug abuse is the official federal government agency in charge of substance abuse and addictions. so dr. burns brought you this definition of addiction, which everybody is using in this case, but he never told you whether he applied the criteria this organization points to in actually diagnosing mrs. gore as addicted, and you remember on cross examination we showed him the media guide that the national institute of drug abuse -- nida -- that nida put out. we showed it to dr. burns. and the nida guide -- we read this to dr. burns, and the nida guide draws a distinction between addiction and physical dependence. 3498 remember, dr. burns at first would not admit that there was a difference between physical dependence and addiction, so i read this to him and then he agreed there was. this is from the organization that their own expert relies on and it says, "physical dependence is not equivalent to dependence or addiction and may occur with a regular daily or almost daily use of any substance," and when the substance is taken away, you with have withdrawal symptoms that can include cravings and jitters, the types of things they said mrs. gore had. mr. foote: objection, judge. the court: can you approach? (whereupon counsel for the respective parties approached the bench and the following proceedings were had outside the presence of the jury:) mr. foote: that is not in evidence. mr. mccarter: it is not, but i read it to dr. burns and he answered that that is what it says. the court: well, you cannot show it. mr. mccarter: no, it is not -- it is just a demonstrative. it is not the actual guide. 3499 the court: okay. hold on, do not go away. that juror that you guys keep saying is sleeping, she is not. her eyes look closed. you need to look at her. mr. mccarter: but i'm not showing anything that is not in evidence. i'm summarizing what dr. burns said. the court: okay, overruled. (whereupon the following proceedings were had within the presence of the jury:) mr. mccarter: so you heard dr. burns say that this organization, nida, does in fact differentiate between physical dependence and addiction. the only evidence that the plaintiff offered as to what they call addiction is that mrs. gore had physical dependence, that she had cravings, withdrawal effects, and mr. gore used the term she got jittery or had the jitters. but then dr. burns admitted after we showed him the guide from nida, he admitted physical dependence is one component of addiction, but it is not synonymous with addiction. it is not the same thing. proving that she had cravings or physical dependence does not prove she had 3500 addiction. in fact, you heard dr. burns say this, that the national institute on drug abuse said drug dependence and addiction refers to substance abuse disorders which may include physical dependence, but must also meet additional criteria. now, you may remember this part of the cross examination, because this is where dr. burns started to get very nonresponsive and not answering questions. simple questions were asked as to whether he applied the criteria that is in that book he was shown, and he would not answer the question. i had to ask it four or five times, but finally he admitted that he did not apply those criteria. what you heard was that the nida, the organization whose definition of addiction he showed you, that nida points to the diagnostic and statistical manual on mental disorders, the dsm, as a basis for diagnosing addiction and substance abuse. dr. burns admitted that, that they point to the dsm, and that the dsm actually has 11 different criteria that have to be used to 3501 diagnose addiction. those are the additional criteria to get from physical dependence to addiction. you also heard, because we asked this of dr. burns and dr. beckett and we asked it of our own witness, dr. scott, in the deposition, no witness in this case and certainly none of their witnesses ever applied those criteria to mrs. gore. so on this question of addiction we all have to set aside whatever preconceived notions we have about what addiction is and who might be addicted and who is not and decide it based on the evidence. the evidence in this case is that their own witnesses did not follow the criteria that they are supposed to use to diagnose addiction. they did not meet their burden of proof. their burden of proof required them to go through those criteria, explain them to you, and tell you how and why mrs. gore met them. they did not even tell you what the criteria were, much less have anybody go through them and diagnose mrs. gore as addicted based on those criteria. what criteria did plaintiffs' witnesses use? 3502 well, dr. burns actually never explained what methodology he used to diagnose somebody as addicted. he did not identify any criteria. in fact, the only thing you learned about dr. burns is if somebody writes him a check for $4,800 a day, he always comes into court and says the person's addicted. that is the only criteria, is dr. burns always says somebody is addicted as long as he is being paid to testify. dr. beckett did describe his criteria. he said, "if i counsel somebody repeatedly to quit smoking and i see them over and over again and say the same thing and they do not quit, i write down smoking addiction." that is not -- there is no evidence that that is the criteria that is supposed to be used under the dsm or under the diagnostic criteria listed by nida, those 11 criteria. in fact, dr. beckett testified that he would call somebody addicted to smoking even if they do not want to quit, even if they never tried to quit. finally there is dr. scott and she testified in testimony we brought you that she believes mrs. gore was addicted, but that she did not actually diagnose mrs. gore as addicted. 3503 you are going to see -- i'm going to show a lot of excerpts from dr. scott's testimony today and part of the reason is that when it is read in like that, it is not necessarily as memorable or as noticeable as if you have a live witness on the stand. so i apologize in advance for maybe showing you too much from her testimony. but this is the first thing i want to show you, is that she admitted she made no effort to try to evaluate mrs. gore to make a determination under the diagnostic standards for nicotine addiction to even diagnose her. "so it is fair to conclude that you never did diagnose mrs. gore with nicotine addiction, correct? and she said, "that is correct, yeah, i do not get into that." so that is the sum and substance of the evidence as to whether mrs. gore was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine; testimony from their own witnesses admitting that they did not apply the criteria that you have to apply under the dsm, the 11 criteria, to diagnose somebody as addicted. all they proved was that mrs. gore had physical dependence, but their own expert, dr. burns, and the organization he relied upon 3504 made clear that physical dependence is not addiction. so on the first part of that question, was gloria gore addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, they did not meet their burden of proof. they did not do what they needed to do to prove that she was addicted. so let me now transition to the second half of that first question. "if she was addicted, was her addiction a legal cause of her carotid artery stenosis?" so now we are going to talk about the medical history, the family history, the high cholesterol and all the other risk factors she had for carotid artery disease besides smoking. this is one of the jury instructions, and mr. foote showed it, but this is the instruction that essentially says addiction need not be the only cause. so addiction need not be the only cause of her carotid artery stenosis. there can be other causes as well. that is sort of a summary, quick summary of what this says, but i want to show you the important instruction which is there; that they have to prove that but for the addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine, 3505 the carotid artery stenosis would not have occurred. that is what they have to prove. so even if there are other causes, they have to prove that if she had not been addicted, she would not have had carotid artery disease; that no addiction, no carotid artery disease. and now i want to talk about what the evidence is on that. the first thing -- this came from dr. burns, and i would submit to you that this is the most important piece of evidence on this issue, because addiction could not have caused mrs. gore's carotid artery disease unless her smoking caused it, right? because their theory is that she was addicted and she smoked and the smoking caused it. so first they have to prove to you that her carotid artery disease was caused by smoking, not caused by other things. remember dr.~burns towards the end of my cross examination of him, he admitted that only ten percent of all carotid artery disease is caused by smoking and ninety percent is not. what did they do to convince you, to prove that mrs. gore was part of the ten percent and not part of the ninety percent that is not caused by smoking? 3506 that is a pretty big burden to meet to shift somebody. only one out of ten carotid artery diseases is caused by smoking. only one out of ten. nine out of ten is not. they have to prove more likely than not that hers was caused by smoking. that means they have to prove more likely than not that she was part of the ten percent and not part of the ninety percent. what kind of evidence did they offer that could shift her from the majority of people, the ninety percent, into this ten percent category? they never even came close to doing that. they never explained how mrs. gore is so unique that she falls in the ten percent where it is caused by smoking and not the ninety percent that is not. in fact, what you saw in the evidence is that mrs. gore had a host of other risk factors for carotid artery disease, not just cigarette smoking, and because of that even dr. burns admitted -- even dr. burns, who got paid $3.5 million testifying in all these cases, even he admitted he could not say that if mrs. gore had not smoked, she would not have gotten the disease. here's his testimony. i asked him -- this 3507 is his testimony on the ten percent. so this comes from dr. burns. he is the source of this, and even dr. burns with all the money he is been paid agrees ninety percent of carotid artery disease is not caused by smoking. again i ask you, what evidence did they offer that puts mrs. gore in the extreme minority, the ten percent and not in the ninety percent? this is what i was talking about. i asked dr. burns -- remember, they have to prove that but for the addiction, if she had not been addicted she would not have gotten carotid artery disease. i asked him about smoking. i said, "given that mrs. gore had multiple risk factors" -- which we are going to talk about in a minute -- "given that she had multiple risk factors for carotid artery disease, you cannot tell this jury that but for mrs. gore's smoking she would not have developed carotid artery disease, correct?" and he said, "i can tell the jury that her smoking doubled her risk of vascular disease, but i cannot tell the jury that she would not have developed it at some point in her life had she 3508 not smoked." that is their expert that they paid nearly $5,000 a day and he says they cannot prove what they need to prove on this issue; and the reason he said that is because mrs. gore had all these other risk factors. cigarette smoking was one, but it was not her only one. she had high cholesterol. remember the 258 milligrams per deciliter? dr. burns said she had hypertension. he reviewed all the medical records. dr. beckett said she did not, but he only reviewed his own records. dr. burns testified she had lack of exercise and of course, you know very well that she had a family history of atherosclerosis and coronary artery disease. when you were not here, one of the times we were taking up time and you were forced to sit around we admitted into evidence those death certificates from her relatives. i appreciate you have not seen a copy of them yet, so i want to show them to you now, because it goes to this last factor, the family history of atherosclerosis and coronary artery disease. first, remember this medical record. you have seen this. remember dr. burns said, "no, i 3509 did not see any evidence in the medical records of a family history of heart disease." and then we showed him this and it says the mother is diabetic and has coronary artery disease. family history is positive for hypertension, diabetes and heart disease. so mrs. gore's own medical records say she has a family history of heart disease. and this is her mother's death certificate, helen christina howard. these are in evidence. acute myocardial infarction was her cause of death, that is a heart attack, and it was caused by ischemic heart disease, end stage cardiac disease. this is confirming what you have seen already in medical records, that her mother had heart disease. her mother, by the way, was a nonsmoker. cigarette smoking obviously did not cause her mother's artery disease, but they want you to believe that cigarette smoking was responsible for mrs. gore's artery disease. and you remember coronary artery disease and carotid artery disease are both the same disease process. it is both atherosclerosis clogging the 3510 arteries, just happens to happen in different locations. it is the same disease process with the same risk factors. mrs. gore's mother was not a smoker and she had coronary artery disease. this is mrs. gore's sister, helen joyce ogren. coronary artery disease, cerebrovascular vascular accident, diabetes, and hypertension. she was a nonsmoker. and you heard the evidence that mrs. gore cared for joyce, helped her out when joyce had her heart attack or heart surgery in the 1990s. so mrs. gore's sister, a nonsmoker, got -- had artery problems with her coronary arteries around the same age that mrs. gore had problems with her carotid arteries. smoking was not the cause of joyce's clogged artery because she was not a cigarette smoker. then there are the two uncles. this is the uncle, roy crocker. it is hard to read. he had a heart attack and it was caused by coronary disease, and it says he had had coronary artery disease for years. this is the uncle. we do not know whether he was a smoker or not. there just is not evidence one way or another. 3511 uncle albert, cardiac arrest, coronary artery disease. we do not know whether he was a smoker or not. there is just no evidence one way or the other. so to sum up mrs. gore's family history of atherosclerosis, what you see is that her mother, a nonsmoker, had it. her sister, a nonsmoker, had it. she had two uncles, we do not know their smoking status, they both had it, and mrs. gore had carotid artery disease. the point here is that cigarette smoking has nothing to do with it, because it runs in her family whether you are a smoker or not. her nonsmoking sister had the artery disease the same time mrs. gore did and the sister's was not caused by smoking. there is no reason to think that mrs. gore's was either; that she was somehow part of the ten percent and not part of the ninety percent. now i want to talk about dr. beckett. dr. beckett was here on friday afternoon and cross examination of him got spirited at times, and you learned toward the end that it turns out he is a family friend. dr. scott was not -- is not a family friend. there is no evidence that she socialized or employed any of the gore family 3512 members. but dr. beckett, mr. gore's daughter faith used to work for him and mr. gore's granddaughter either currently works for him or also used to work for him, and dr. beckett acknowledged he is gone to social events at the gore house for mr. gore's grandchildren. so dr. beckett is somebody who is a family friend, but even he admitted mrs. gore's family history of heart disease was significant and important. i want to pause here because i want to go over how things played out when we crossed him. because remember i showed dr. beckett -- or maybe you do not remember, but i showed him the medical record relating to mrs. gore's mother, who had diabetes and coronary artery disease, and he said -- he acknowledged that is important and it is significant, because it shows a family history of heart disease. then what he said was, "but it is only one relative. it is only one relative, so it really does not tell us that much." and i asked him, i said, "well, have you seen the death certificates?" 3513 remember, they did not give dr. burns the death certificates. they did not give dr. beckett the death certificates either. you are entitled to ask yourself why did not they give that information to their witnesses? why did not they give them information showing a family history of heart disease? in any event, when i showed dr. beckett the death certificates of the sister -- remember he said the mother, she is got diabetes and coronary artery disease, and that is significant, but it is only one. i showed him the sister's death certificate to show it is not one, it is at least two, and he said, "well, you know, she had coronary disease, but she had diabetes, so it is not significant." so when we showed the mother -- the medical record on the mother, the mother had diabetes and coronary artery disease, the same as joyce, he acknowledged it was significant, but it was only one relative. as soon as we showed him a second, he said it does not count any more because she had diabetes. then we showed him the other two, the two uncles had coronary artery disease and 3514 dr. beckett continued to fight and say oh, it was not important at all. then we showed dr. beckett that article from the magazine published by the american heart association and the american stroke association. we showed him the article and then he said, "well, you know, it is not really fair. you are showing me an article i have not read before i came here to testify. i have not reviewed this study. i need to review it more before i could answer questions," and he constantly said things like that. but ask yourselves whose job is it to keep up on the literature? if he is coming here as an expert to testify on the cause of mrs. gore's coronary artery disease, is not it his job actually to review the studies and to review the literature? this was one of the -- this is a recent study from 2014 and dr. beckett, what you learned, had not done the research to learn how important a family history of heart disease is, and when i showed him and directed him to what the study found, he did admit -- he admitted that mrs. gore's family history more than doubled her 3515 risk of carotid artery disease. he talked about the odds ratio of 2.65, which means it more than doubled the risk, and he also acknowledged that study found that what is important in terms of if you have a parent with coronary artery disease, the parent whose risk -- or who is having it is more important is the mother. if you have a mother who has coronary artery disease, it makes you more likely to have carotid artery disease than if your father had it, and even more important than a parent is a sibling. a sibling with coronary artery disease makes it even more likely that you are going to develop carotid artery disease. and what is even more important than that is if you have a mother and sister together, which mrs. gore did, not to mention her two uncles. so that was dr. beckett. and dr. beckett, they showed you earlier, testified that he thought smoking was the cause of her carotid artery disease, but he never told you what is important; which is that he never said that addiction was the cause of her carotid artery disease, and that is ultimately what they have to 3516 prove. in fact, i asked him some questions on this and he admitted that if mrs. gore had quit smoking in the 1990s or even 1990, if she had quit smoking then, she still would have developed carotid artery disease. she still would have developed it. i want to focus on that for a minute, because that, i would submit to you, is at the core of this question whether mrs. gore's addiction, not her smoking, whether her addiction caused her carotid artery disease. because that is the question you are being asked to answer. their theory is that mrs. gore was addicted and because she was addicted, she could not quit smoking when she wanted to quit smoking, and that because she could not quit smoking when she wanted to, she went on to develop carotid artery disease. this is why we spent so much time with the witnesses, trying to figure out when it was that mrs. gore actually tried to quit smoking, because the question is did she want to quit smoking. did she try to quit smoking at a point in time where she could have avoided getting the carotid 3517 artery disease, and that is why i asked dr. burns and mr. gore about when it was that we have evidence of mrs. gore trying to quit smoking. you remember the only two quit attempts anybody could put a date on was the use of the patch sometime in the 1990s and zyban in 1999. nobody could say, not dr. burns, not mr. gore, that mrs. gore ever tried to quit smoking before the 1990s. the point here is that even if mrs. gore was addicted, addiction did not cause her to get carotid artery disease, because she never tried to quit smoking until she already had carotid artery disease. so even if she had been successful in quitting when she wanted to, when she used the patch or when she used the zyban, she already had carotid artery disease. the addiction, if she was addicted, never prevented her from quitting at a time when she would have avoided the disease, because she never tried to quit until after she got the disease. so let us assume mrs. gore was not addicted at all. let us assume she was not addicted at all and she would have quit successfully the first time she tried. 3518 if she had done that, would she have avoided carotid artery disease? that is the question, the second half of that first question. if she had quit when she first tried to quit, would she have avoided getting the disease? the answer is no, because she already had the disease by the time she first tried to quit. by the time she used the patch, that was the mid 1990s, she already had carotid artery disease. so her inability to quit when she was on the patch did not cause the disease, because she already had it. when she used zyban in 1999, she would already had carotid artery disease for seven years. if she had been successful with zyban she still would have gotten carotid artery disease, because she already had it. so if you look at the evidence in this case, there is no evidence of mrs. gore trying to quit before she got carotid artery disease. therefore, her addiction or failure to quit is not a cause of the carotid artery disease. she would have gotten it either way. now, let me sum up on this, because i'm coming back to what i'd submit is the single most 3519 important piece of evidence on this. that is the ninety percent/ten percent, and i want to emphasize this because if you are trying to figure out what is more likely than not, the ninety percent is much more likely than the ten percent. they have to offer you some evidence that could convince you that mrs. gore was part of the ten percent, not part of the ninety percent, and given all of her other risk factors -- the hypertension, high cholesterol, lack of exercise, and that overwhelming family history which more than doubled her risk -- they have not proven in any way that mrs. gore's carotid artery disease was caused by her smoking or her addiction. for that reason, on this question one i'd submit the correct answer based on the evidence is "no". plaintiff has the burden of proving that she was addicted and that her addiction caused her disease, and they proved neither of them. they proved neither of what they had to prove. if you answer this question "no", the case is over. it is all done. the case is over. i'd submit "no" is the correct answer. 3520 if you answer it "yes", your work is only getting started, because there is a lot more that plaintiff has to prove to get that seven and a half million dollars or whatever it is they are asking for. the second thing they have to prove is that -- the question going to be posed to you is was smoking cigarettes manufactured by each defendant a legal cause of lung cancer in gloria gore. that is the question you are going to be asked to answer, separately for philip morris and separately for r.j. reynolds. mr. geise is going to have an additional argument for you on this for his client, r.j. reynolds. the one i'm going to make here applies to both of us. now, you know from opening statements and seeing the evidence that the dispute here is whether mrs. gore had lung cancer, whether mrs. gore's cancer started in her lungs. that is the dispute in this. if she did not have lung cancer, then of course our cigarettes did not cause her to have lung cancer. so the dispute, the fact that is going to be at issue for you on this question is did 3521 mrs. gore's cancer start in her lungs. did they prove that her cancer started in her lungs, did they prove that she had lung cancer. so let me talk about the evidence on that. you probably remember this from opening or dr. burns, but really it comes down to these two abnormalities seen in the cat scan; whether either of those was the beginning of the cancer and whether they are located in spots that were seen are located in mrs. gore's lung. but let me first talk about the other ones, because it is common sense and you heard from dr. burns, the brain, right arm, sternum, the right adrenal, the vertebrae, the ilium, left rib, left adrenal, and the hilar lymph nodes, everybody testified and said those are not in the lung. so what they have to show is they have to show -- for the cancer to have started in the lung they have to show that there was cancer in the lung, right? because if cancer started in the lung, it is still there, according to dr. burns, even if it spreads elsewhere. so they have to show you that there was cancer in the lung and second, that that is where the cancer 3522 started. these are the two important ones, because those are the only sites. this one was in the lung, this small one, the 12-millimeter by 12-millimeter. that one was seen in the lung, so i'm going to talk about that. i'm going to talk about that one second. then you have the larger tumor that was observed in the pleura. remember, the pleura is outside the lung and the chest wall, which is outside the lung. but that is the one dr. burns says, he says it was in the lung and he says that is where the cancer started. so i'm going to start with what dr. burns says is where the cancer started and then i'll talk about the other one, the smaller one that was actually in the lung. before i do, though, i do want to say a word about the witnesses you got on this. so mrs. gore's oncologist was dr. scott, right, and you heard yesterday when we read dr. scott's deposition that mr. gore's lawyers actually contacted dr. scott twice; once in november 2012 and once, i think, in december of 2014. so just a few months ago. 3523 they sent her medical records in november 2012 and had a 12-minute phone call with her and they sent her -- and they contacted her again in december just a few months ago. they contacted and talked to mrs. gore's doctor who treated her for her cancer. they talked to her about it twice and did not call her as a witness either live or by deposition. they talked to the woman who saw mrs. gore's cancer, saw mrs. gore, saw these scans, treated her for cancer, and they did not call her as a witness. ask yourselves why? why did they not bring you the testimony from dr. scott, the doctor who treated mrs. gore? she is not a family friend like dr. beckett, and you heard she said she did not want to come to trial to testify because she sees patients. but she was happy to have her deposition read in, which we did. why did not they bring that evidence to you? they did not bring the evidence to you because it totally blows up their claim that mrs. gore had lung cancer. i'm going to show you dr. scott's testimony. instead of bringing in dr. scott, who they talked to twice and sent medical records, they bring you 3524 a guy from california who was never mrs. gore's doctor, who never treated her, he is never practiced medicine in florida, and who flies around getting paid $3.5 million to testify in these cases. they brought a guy from california here and paid him $5,000 a day instead of reading in the deposition of the woman who treated dr. -- treated mrs. gore for cancer. they did that because they knew dr. scott was not going to say what they needed her to say and dr. burns would say anything they were paying him to say or that they wanted him to say. that is why they brought in dr. burns and not dr. scott. mr. foote: objection, judge. the court: sustained. mr. mccarter: we brought dr. scott's testimony to you and we read it yesterday, and what you heard -- and i'll show you the testimony -- you heard dr. scott say, "we cannot tell whether it was lung cancer or not. we never actually made a final diagnosis. it did not matter to us when we were treating mrs. gore, because her cancer spread everywhere. so we never investigated where it started and no, i 3525 cannot say it was lung cancer. i cannot say it started in the lung." so i got a little sidetracked, but let me go back to the two potential sites where the cancer may have started or maybe not. so this is the medical record that you have seen a lot and what i've done is i've excerpted the writing. this is the ct scan report relating to -- up here is the big one where dr. burns says the cancer started, and then below here is the 12-by-12 millimeter. when you read this notice, that the doctor only describes one of them as actually being in the lung. the only one in the lung is the small one, the 12-by-12 millimeter, which he describes it in the left lower lobe. that is the one described in the lung. the other one is described as a chest wall mass located not in the lung, located at the left lung base. so it is describing geographically where it is, but it is not in the lung. it is at the left lung base, and it says it appears to be a pleural-based mass and then it talks about going into the rib. so you have only one of these abnormalities 3526 that is reported in the lung and that is the one i'm going to talk about next, the smaller one. so let us talk about the bigger one where they say the cancer started and dr. burns tried to say it was in the lung. again, to be lung cancer there has to be cancer in the lung, not outside the lung, and it must have started there. remember when we cross examined dr. burns and he admitted -- well, you heard his testimony read, because he would not admit it here. we had to read his testimony under oath in a different case. but dr. burns testified in that testimony that the pleura -- remember this is a pleural-based mass. the pleura and a pleural lesion are outside the lung, not inside the lung. what that means is that the cancer that dr. burns says was the beginning of the cancer was not observed in the lung. it was observed outside the lung. if it is outside the lung, it is not lung cancer. it means it is spread from somewhere else. so the cancer they are pointing to, that they say was the cause of the cancer, was not in the lung. not in the lung, not lung cancer. dr. scott confirmed that the pleura is 3527 outside the lung. she described the tumor as being in the chest wall, which is outside the lung, not inside the lung, and she said she cannot say that the cancer started there. this is dr. scott's testimony which we read yesterday: "q: it is not capable of being said that you know that the cancer started in the lung and grew out to the chest wall; is that fair? "a: not on this chest wall mass, you know. you know, we just -- this was not biopsied, because she had a rib lesion that was easy to biopsy. so, you know, we do not really know did it start in the lung, grow through the lung, through the pleura into the chest area, you know. "q: you do not know if that happened? "a: right." she is saying that you cannot tell, you cannot say the cancer started where dr. burns says it start, and you cannot even say it is in the lung. here's there is another question: "if it was truly an exclusive chest wall mass, that would be outside of the lung? "right." she is agreeing. they went through the pathology report with 3528 her and asked the question: "and by the description in the pathology report, it is still not telling you that that mass was actually in the lung?" she answers, "that is correct." so dr. scott, the doctor who treated mrs. gore for her cancer, says no, no, you cannot say this is in the lung, like dr. burns was trying to say. there is no evidence it was in the lung. it is in the chest wall, it is in the pleura, which are outside of the lung. so at this point in the testimony they had gone through that section i just showed of the medical record and said: "so up to the point where we talk about the destruction of the rib and the oblong chest wall mass, there is no description up to that point of anything in the lung, correct?" she said, "correct." that chest wall mass, there is no evidence it was in the lung. so let me now turn to the other one, okay. so dr. burns admitted -- just to summarize, dr. burns admitted that this one, he says, was the source of the cancer. it is in the pleura. he admitted the pleura is outside the lung. 3529 dr. scott said the pleura is outside the lung and dr. scott said there was no way to say that that was in the lung or even the start of the cancer. that is mrs. gore's own treating oncologist. so let us talk about the only thing that was seen inside mrs. gore's lung, in the lung. this is the only thing that could be the start of lung cancer, this one, because it is the only thing in the lung. now, you may remember dr. burns said, "i do not even know that this is cancer. it is so small it may not be cancer and in fact, it is so small it is not the source of the cancer. it is not where the cancer started." so i want to go through that. so this is the only thing that is seen in the lung, the only thing in the lung; very small, 12-millimeter by 12-millimeter. dr. burns admitted it may or may not be cancerous. he did not know. of course it has to be cancerous if it is lung cancer, but he cannot say that it is, and he said it is so small it cannot be where the cancer started. so their own witness is admitting that the 3530 one thing seen inside the lung is not where the cancer started. dr. scott said she agreed it may or may not be cancerous, but she says, "i cannot say that it is cancerous because it was never biopsied," and she also could not say the cancer started there. let me show you some more of her testimony. here it is describing the small -- the 12-by-12 millimeter. it says, "in the left lower lobe that is a description, that is an example of a description of a nodule in the lung?" she says, "in the lung, right." she is agreeing this is the only thing -- this is the one that is in the lung. "and that was never sampled, meaning it was never biopsied?" and she says, "no." "it was never sampled by pathology, so we do not know what it was, correct?" "a: right." meaning nobody could even say that that was even cancer, much less that it was the source of the cancer that spread across mrs. gore's body. then you heard a lot about this yesterday, this reference to primary site. primary site 3531 means where the cancer started. and she was asked: "would you agree with me that even though you know it is a possibility" -- in other words, it is a possibility that the small thing in the lung started the cancer -- "you believe it is unlikely to be the primary site in this case? it is unlikely to be where the cancer started?" she said, "we do not know, you know." "we do not know" is a defense verdict, because they have the burden of proof. they have to prove it started in the lung. "we do not know" is a defense verdict. "q: there is no way to know? "a: there is no way to know. it was not biopsied." they have the burden of proof. this is what mrs. gore's treating doctor for her cancer said, not somebody paid three and a half million dollars. "q: it was not biopsied and you say it is unlikely that that would be a primary site, meaning the source for mrs. gore's cancer, correct? "a: yeah, we do not have a primary site. we 3532 do not have a primary site. we only have metastatic disease and this could be a metastasis too." meaning even if this is cancer, it could have come from somewhere else where the cancer started. "q: so in looking at all the information, you would say this is a case where we really do not know what the primary site of the cancer was" -- in other words, where the cancer started -- "is that fair? "a: yes." mrs. gore's treating doctor for her cancer. i said i had a lot of these. i'm sorry if it is getting redundant, but i want to make the point. "q: now, if you are looking at the different explanations for that 1.2-centimeter nodule, if it is cancer, could it be cancer that spread to the lung from some other site in the body? "a: of course. "q: and would you agree with me that the lungs are the most common site for cancers to metastasize to from other portions of the body?" in other words, say if it is cancer, which 3533 nobody can say because it was not biopsied, is it the source or could it have gotten there from somewhere else as part of the cancer spreading, and she said, yes, of course it could have, because it is by bloodstream to the lung, and you heard her testimony that cancer that starts elsewhere often spreads to the lung because blood comes to and from the lung to get oxygenated. so the lung is one of the most likely sources for a cancer that started somewhere else to spread. now, i want to talk about mrs. gore's doctors and what they said in the medical records, because they have shown you these medical records that talk about lung cancer or bronchogenic carcinoma, which is the same thing as lung cancer. you may be wondering, well, why are they writing down lung cancer if they do not know where it started? and dr. scott helped us on that as well. but first look at the terms that are used in the medical records, because dr. scott said they never made a final diagnosis of what the cancer -- where it started, what kind of cancer. 3534 it was a working diagnosis, just to put something down so they could treat mrs. gore and it did not matter to her treatment where it started. they said suggestive, not that it was, not that they did a final conclusion. they called it suggestive of lung cancer or consistent with lung cancer. consistent with a lung primary, consistent with carcinoma in the left lung. but we asked dr. scott, well, what did they mean when they write down things like that? again, she does not have a dog in this fight. she is not being paid by anybody. she is not a family friend of anybody. her only interest is to tell the truth. and what she said, she said, well, when the pathologist wrote down that it was suggestive of bronchogenic carcinoma, that was just an idea as to what might explain mrs. gore's symptoms and where she got the cancer. dr. scott called it a provisional diagnosis or a working diagnosis, and she said that to the doctors it was irrelevant where the cancer started and it was not important to find the primary tumor, because mrs. gore was in such bad shape that it really did not matter at all. 3535 so they never -- you heard from dr. scott, the doctors actually never went in. there is no autopsy. they never did anything to try to figure out did it actually start in the lung or did it start somewhere else. they never did that. this is dr. scott's testimony from yesterday as well and this is after the ct scans, the bone scans, everything else, and talking about what they are writing down as a possible explanation, not a final diagnosis. "by this point in time, including the ct scan of the thorax, we do not have any actual information pointing to a cancer in the lung, correct?" and dr. scott said "correct." so all the evidence dr. scott is looking at in the medical records, the doctor who treated mrs. gore for her cancer says we do not have any actual information pointing to a cancer in the lung. if there is no actual information pointing to a cancer in the lung, then there is no proof that mrs. gore actually had lung cancer and they certainly have not met their burden of proof. i have more of these, but this is just 3536 dr. scott explaining more that this was a cancer, unknown primary. they did not know where it started. again, more of the same. at the bottom here, "you can say it is consistent with lung cancer" -- which is what they said in the records -- "but that is not saying you have sufficient evidence to say it was lung cancer?" "a: right, right. correct, correct." mrs. gore's own doctor could not say, would not say it was lung cancer. they showed you in their closing a little snippet from dr. scott's testimony where she said at the time, "at the time we believed it was lung cancer. at the time i believed it was lung cancer." if you think back to when the questioning was done, all of the plaintiff's counsel's questions to dr. scott asked her what she thought at the time. they did not ask her looking back on all the evidence, having the benefit of hindsight and looking at the full record, what is your opinion? we did that and she said, "my opinion is i cannot say it is lung cancer." they asked her what she thought at the time 3537 and she said, "well, at the time i thought it was lung cancer," but she admitted they never tried to figure out whether it was lung cancer or not. they get a chance to get up afterwards after i do and i'd ask you to look very closely if they put up more testimony from dr. scott. look at how they asked the question, because it is all going to be at the time what did you think, not what do you think today with the benefit of looking back at all the records. so just to sum this up, dr. burns admitted that the one thing that was seen in the lung, that 12-by-12 millimeter mass or abnormality, was not where the cancer started. mrs. gore's doctors never sought to determine where the cancer started and dr. scott -- no dog in the fight -- testified it is not possible to say mrs. gore had lung cancer or that the cancer started in her lung. that is the evidence in this case. now, i would submit to you that this is the most important medical record on this issue and here's why. because you will see it is dated up here -- you will have it in evidence, but the date there is toward the end of may. remember, 3538 mrs. gore was diagnosed with cancer in april, early april of 2000. she passed away in june of 2000. this record is filled out toward the end of the process, with the benefit of all the information the doctors had at the time. it is hard to see. this is the record where dr. scott was describing that what they do, they are part of this american joint commission on cancer. the hospital and the doctors work with this commission and what they do is when they have cancer, they have to fill out a form that they send back to this commission on cancer. they have to fill out the form designating, if they can, where the cancer started, what type of cancer it is, so that the government can put together statistics on the cause of cancer deaths in the country. dr. maholtz filled this form out and what this says up here -- i know it is hard to read -- it says "primary tumor." this is the spot, if the doctor knew where the cancer started, this is where the doctor would write it. what did dr. maholtz do? did she write lung, no. did she say bronchogenic carcinoma, no. she put a big "x" there. and dr. scott said 3539 she put a big "x" there, what that means is it means they do not know where the cancer started. that is why you put an "x" there. so this is late in the process, after all the available medical evidence the doctors had. they fill out the form they are required to fill out for the government and they put a big "x" where the primary site is. that means that in 2000, when the government tallied up lung cancer deaths, when they tallied up all these forms and counted how many lung cancer deaths occurred in the united states, mrs. gore was not included as a lung cancer death in 2000. that is the purpose of this form, and mrs. gore was not included as a lung cancer death. she was not included because nobody could say she had lung cancer. if she is not included as a lung cancer death on this reporting, they have not proven that she was a lung cancer death in this case, where they are asking for millions and millions of dollars. this is what dr. scott said about that form: "q: this means on the face of it, this means that dr. maholtz did not know what the 3540 primary location was? "a: correct, yes. "q: your interpretation of dr. maholtz putting that big "x" there is that dr. maholtz did not have information to point to the primary site for this tumor in mrs. gore? "a: that is correct." the only person who told you in this case that mrs. gore had lung cancer is dr. burns, who never treated her, never saw her, never reviewed any of those cat scans, is getting paid money to come here, like he does in every other case. we brought you mrs. gore's actual doctor and she told you "we cannot say it was lung cancer." they have not met their burden of proof on this issue. you get this far in the question -- if you get this far on the verdict form, the answer should be "no". this is another one where if your answer is "no", the case is over, it is done. everybody goes home. if you answer "yes", you go on to the next question, which is this one. now, this is question three and i really want to pause here, because i want to show you 3541 something. you have seen this question. but you know, when mr. foote was talking about it he was pointing you down here about concealing or admitting material information and the argument he made was, well, mrs. gore did not know everything the tobacco companies knew and so she relied on that stuff and you should check it "yes". but what mr. foote never actually pointed out to you is how this question actually starts off, which is very important, as you will see based on the evidence. the question does not ask about whether information was just concealed or omitted from mrs. gore. it says, "please state as to each defendant whether mrs. gore reasonably relied to her detriment on a statement or misinformation made by each defendant after may 5, 1982." it is not whether mrs. gore -- there was information one of these companies had that mrs. gore did not know. it is whether she relied on a statement that one of the companies made or misinformation put out by the companies after that date. why is that so important? why did they not 3542 talk about that part of this question? it is so important, because when you go back and look at the evidence, you can look through every box in there and you will not find a single statement in evidence by either of these companies after may 5, 1982. there simply are none. you can look through every evidence box till you are blue in the face, they did not put into evidence any statement that philip morris or r.j. reynolds made after that date. there is nothing. there is nothing. that is why, you know, they played that clip of heimann, the guy on the deposition from 1986, and mr. foote said was shown on national television. he said it was shown on national television because he was hoping maybe that would be a statement made after 1982. then we corrected him and objected and he said, no, it was not shown on national television. it was a deposition. they have to actually show that these companies made a statement that mrs. gore could have seen or heard or relied upon after that date, and there is actually no statements. you can look through every piece of evidence and they have not put anything in. 3543 so i got ahead of myself. i did want to talk about what the elements are in this, and one thing is the statement, that they have to prove there was a statement made after that date. they have to prove that mrs. gore relied upon the statement or misinformation. so she has to have heard or seen it and believed it and done something based on it. of course, there is nothing in evidence that meets the first criteria, so there is nothing she could have relied on. and to her detriment, i'm going to talk about that last. so no statements, okay. so what statements are in evidence? okay, let us go through every one of them. you know, you heard so much in this case about advertising and mr. foote went to the trouble of writing down the big number that was spent on advertising, and mr. gore talked about television advertising mrs. gore supposedly saw in 1990s and it talked about all this advertising for low tar or light or filtered cigarettes. there is four ads that are in evidence, four ads. the television commercial in 1949 for camel, it is before 1982. the television 3544 commercial for winston, in 1960. the "i love lucy", from 1952 or 1951. and there was another philip morris brand ad, television ad in the 1950s. that is all the advertising they put into evidence. mrs. gore never smoked any of those brands. none of those brands were low tar or light cigarettes or ultralight cigarettes, which they say the whole fraud is about. she never smoked any of them. this may have even been a time when she did not have a television, according to mr. gore. there is no evidence that mrs. gore saw any of those ads and she certainly was not influenced by them to smoke a brand. so what other statements or misinformation is in evidence? remember, it has to be something that went out publicly, because it has to be something that mrs. gore could have heard or seen or relied upon. so what else? well, you have that speech to the vending machine association in 1954 in st. simon, georgia, when mrs. gore was a 14-year-old girl. dr. proctor said, well, there is no evidence that 14-year-old girls from 3545 vero beach were there. she did not see that. the frank statement in 1954, which there is no evidence it was published in a vero beach newspaper. there was that newspaper article they showed from the greensboro, north carolina daily news, at a time when mrs. gore was not living in greensboro. she was living here. they had the "see it now" interview in 1955. that was on cbs. there is no evidence mrs. gore saw that. the clip they showed you earlier from 1964, the howard cullman clip, no evidence mrs. gore saw that. "face the nation", where the philip morris executive makes the inappropriate comment about women preferring smaller babies, there is no evidence mrs. gore saw that. as inappropriate as that may be, they are showing it to try to make you mad, because there is no evidence that mrs. gore was influenced by it at all. they had a new york times article from 1967. no evidence mrs. gore was reading the new york times in 1967. and they have a new york times article in 1969. what do all these have in common besides the fact that there is no evidence mrs. gore saw or 3546 heard them? they are all before may 5, 1982, every single one of them. there is no piece of evidence of any statement by these defendants during the time period they have to prove we made a statement that she relied upon. there is just absolutely nothing. there is nothing. all you have is dr. proctor's testimony that the companies were denying that smoking was addictive and denying that smoking caused cancer, but they actually have not put into evidence any statement like that after may 5, 1982. there is just nothing. so then the plaintiff says -- i think their theory seems to be, well, mrs. gore relied on advertising for low tar, filtered, ultralight cigarettes, and that is what she relied upon and that is the basis they are arguing why you should check this "yes." first of all, there is no evidence again after that may 5 date as to any marketing advertising a filter or low tar light cigarettes. so they have not proven what they need to prove even on that. but even more so, they actually did not put into evidence any advertisements of filtered -- i 3547 guess the winston ad, the television add in 1960, that is a filter cigarette, does not say anything about filters. they did not put in evidence of any advertising of low tar, light or filtered cigarettes other than the 1960 television commercial that mrs. gore, there is no evidence she saw it. so their whole theory of this case is that the tobacco companies were advertising these cigarettes, low tar filtered lights, as being safer and mrs. gore was being duped by it. if philip morris and r.j. reynolds were really advertising those cigarettes as safer and mrs. gore was duped by it, do not you think they would have put at least one of those ads into evidence? they put nothing into evidence on this. they showed you a benson & hedges lights, that black and white one earlier. that was actually not an ad that was shown to have run in any magazine. that was i think being tested at the time in the test market and it was part of an internal company document. if mrs. gore really and truly was misled by tobacco advertising, they would have put the ads 3548 into evidence. there is nothing. again, you can look through all the boxes they bring back there, all the binders, whatever they bring back there. look as long as you like, you are not going to find a single ad that says light cigarettes or filters or ultralights are safer. the reason why is because their own expert, dr. proctor, admitted when we cross examined him, he admitted that philip morris and r.j. reynolds never marketed filtered cigarettes, low tar cigarettes, light cigarettes or ultralights as safer. they never did it. he says they never did it because they had an agreement not to do it. say he is right, but the important thing is they did not do it. they did not advertise those cigarettes as safer and they cannot show you any ads where they did, and it is their burden of proof. on this filter issue, it is important to keep in mind what we talked about with dr. burns and dr. proctor, and that is that there were dozens and dozens and dozens of studies done over the years comparing smokers of filtered cigarettes to smokers of unfiltered cigarettes, and all of those studies show that filters did reduce the 3549 risk of lung cancer in some cases by as much as forty percent. there is epidemiology published through this time from 1968 to 2000 all pointing to filtered cigarettes as reducing the risk of lung cancer. i'm going to talk about this more in a minute. but their claim is that these companies had secret information about low tar, light and filtered cigarettes, and what you are going to see is that is not true either. finally, you know, mr. foote said this morning that ultralight cigarettes are not any safer than other cigarettes, and that is the type of cigarette that mrs. gore smoked from the late 1980s until her death. mr. foote said ultralight cigarettes are not safer, but his witness, dr. proctor, said when i cross examined him -- he said, yes, ultralight cigarettes are safer, because it is too hard to compensate and get as much tar and nicotine from the ultralight cigarette. it is just too hard to do it, and that they do reduce the risk of lung cancer. mr. foote is the only person who said that ultralights are not safer. his own witness, dr. proctor, said they are. 3550 so let me talk about their claim that we supposedly concealed information for people on low tar and light cigarettes. i'd submit to you this is completely irrelevant, because they have to show that there was some statement after may 1982 that mrs. gore relied upon, which they have not. but since they went down this path, let us talk about what they talk about. this is one of their exhibits, and what they showed was: "as we know, all too often the smoker who switches to a hi-fi cigarette winds up smoking more units in order to provide himself with the same delivery he had before." in other words, that some people when they switch from a higher tar and nicotine to a lower tar and nicotine, smoke more cigarettes and thereby defeat the lower tar. remember, i asked dr. proctor about this exact thing and dr. proctor said that was well known. that was well known. the surgeon general talked about it in 1964 and that it is common sense. yes, if you switch from a high anything, a high alcohol beer to a low alcohol beer and you drink more beer, you are going to cut -- you are going to cut into or eliminate the reduction in 3551 alcohol per beer. if you go from smoking 20 cigarettes to smoking 30 low tar cigarettes, yes, you are going to undermine the reduction in tar because you are smoking more cigarettes. they want to make this seem like it is some secret, but their own expert said it is common sense and everybody knew it. here's the other philip morris document that they have shown you a few times and i've shown you a different part. this is supposed to be the big secret that philip morris had that they did not share with anybody. this is the nine-person study that we talked about with dr. proctor. nine people; five marlboro red smokers, four marlboro lights smokers. in the study they forced them to switch cigarettes. this is the part that plaintiff's counsel showed you, without showing you the rest of the document. it says: "in effect, the marlboro 85 smokers in this study did not achieve any reduction in smoke intake by smoking a cigarette, marlboro lights, normally considered lower in delivery." what you are about to see -- this is an 3552 example of what is going on with a lot of these documents, where they are going from page one to page 18 to page 35 and showing you little snippets, but not the rest. you saw this when dr. proctor testified. but yeah, when the five people were forced to switch as part of the study to lower tar cigarettes, they smoked -- they took bigger puffs, they took faster puffs. they smoked more of the cigarette to get the same nicotine they were getting before. so these were not people who were switching to the light cigarette for the benefit of health. they were not doing that. they were just doing that as part of the study. what the document talks about is that the people who switched on their own before the study, the people who were smoking marlboro lights cigarettes, actually did get less tar that the marlboro red smokers. these were not people who were forced to switch as part of the study. these people voluntarily chose marlboro lights. it says the marlboro 85 cigarettes were smoked and it has the tpm -- remember total particulate matter -- delivery was 24.7. so 3553 they are getting 24.7 milligrams of tar, the marlboro red smokers. marlboro lights, on the other hand, delivered 19.6 milligrams tpm. so even in this big secret study that they point to of nine people, this is what they point to. even in this the marlboro lights smokers were getting less tar and nicotine than marlboro red. and this is the type of thing when you do look through the documents, you are going to see things taken out of context all the time. what they are doing when they present the document to you is they show you one document from one company from 1953, jump forward 20 years to what a different company was saying, jump backwards 10 years to what another company was saying, to give an impression of this story they want to tell. but when you actually look at the details, what you see is you see in the details there were no secrets that the marlboro lights smokers were getting less than the marlboro red smokers. in case any of this matters at this point, because there is no evidence of a statement made after 1982, what you saw is the idea that people may change the way they smoke their low tar 3554 cigarettes and get the same amount of tar, and some people may do that. that was no secret. it was published in 1976 in consumer reports. you have, "less tar and nicotine" at the top, "is that good?" i went through that with dr. proctor. this is just for lay people, written in terms that ordinary folks can understand, and dr. proctor said this is a good example of the information that was out there, but it appeared in many other places. so there were no secrets on this, and what the plaintiffs are showing you is not representative of what is actually in these documents. last point on this is mrs. gore, not only does there have to be a statement -- which they have not proven -- not only do they have to prove that mrs. gore relied and heard the statement -- which they have not done -- she actually has to have relied to her detriment, and what that means is that mrs. gore, based on whatever statement is not in evidence, that mrs. gore made some decision that if she had made a different decision, she would not have gotten sick from smoking. 3555 in other words, they have to prove to you that she relied on something these companies said and decided to keep smoking instead of quitting. they claim -- i guess their claim is that mrs. gore somehow, if she had not switched to filtered cigarettes, was going to quit smoking. of course that is not true, because mrs. gore never switched to filtered cigarettes. she always smoked filtered cigarettes. and there is no evidence that mrs. gore, when she switched to light or ultralight cigarettes, if she had not switched, was going to quit. so even if mrs. gore saw advertising and decided to choose her brand of cigarettes based on the advertising -- which again, has not been proven -- she was still going to smoke no matter what and still would have wound up in the same position. so she never relied to her detriment on anything, even to stuff they claim. there is no evidence she was going to quit smoking if she had not smoked those other kinds of cigarettes. so this summarizes what i've been talking about and that is, the answer to this question is "no" for a variety of reasons, but the simplest one is that there is just no evidence of any 3556 statement after that date that mrs. gore heard or relied upon. so i'd ask that you check "no" on both of those for both defendants. verdict form question four is very similar. again, mr. foote did not mention this, but it requires proof that mrs. gore reasonably relied to her detriment on a statement or misinformation after that may 1982 date. for the same reasons i just talked about, there is just no evidence of that, of any statements, much less reliance. there is no evidence she relied on anything these companies said at any time, much less after may 1982. again, their theory is that mrs. gore relied in smoking ultralight, light, and filtered cigarettes. this is that so-called conspiracy claim, and dr. proctor admitted that the marketing of filtered and low tar and ultralight cigarettes was not part of any conspiracy or agreement. so that is just an extra reason, along with the whole list i gave you on that other question, an extra reason why this one should be "no" as well. this is the question on allocating responsibility, and i'm going to go through the 3557 evidence on this. this asked you -- and again, you only get to this question -- you do not get here if you answer the first one "no". you do not get here if you answer the second one "no". it is only if you answer those "yes". if you make it this far, here's what i'd ask you to consider in terms of responsibility. you will see i'm going to ask you to give mrs. gore, if you get that far, one hundred percent of the responsibility, and here's why. because mrs. gore knew the entire time she smoked, she knew the dangers of smoking. she knew that if she smoked, she could get cancer. mrs. gore enjoyed smoking and did not want to quit smoking. she did not try to quit until after she got sick. philip morris or r.j. reynolds, to have some fault, we have to have done something that actually had some impact on mrs. gore, and there is no evidence that mrs. gore was ever influenced in any of her smoking decisions by anything r.j. reynolds or philip morris was saying or doing. again, mrs. gore never viewed it. there is no evidence that she viewed philip morris or r.j. 3558 reynolds as having some responsibility for her smoking. i went through these slides earlier. you have already seen this evidence of what mrs. gore knew and when she knew it. but i'd submit to you on this question of responsibility, everything you need to know comes from mr. gore himself in his deposition and his comments on who bore responsibility for mrs. gore's choices and decisions she made in life. "q: do you know whether any of the doctors your wife ever worked for encouraged her to quit smoking? "a: i know every doctor she went to told her to quit smoking. she would come home in a bad mood. "q: what would she say? "a: did not have to say it; the way she acted, you know. "q: did she tell you the doctors had -- "a: quick short answers, you know. just like i smacked my momma. you know, she just -- i mean, she would just go off. "q: what would she say when she would go off? 3559 "a: well, she would just tell me that that was none of my business and she was going to do what she was going to do and i was not going to change her mind. "and that is right, you cannot change anybody's mind. i mean, you can talk till you are blue in the face, but they have to -- you know, they have to be responsible for their actions. "q: and during that 15-year period did you ever ask mrs. gore to stop smoking around you, since you had quit? "a: i did not ask her to stop smoking. i knew she was going to smoke. i just know i just made up my mind that i was going to do it for me, and you know, no matter what she did. "it did not bother me. i got to the point where if she wanted to kill herself, let her do it. "q: was her decision -- was whether or not to continue smoking something that was up to your wife, it was her decision? "a: yeah. "q: and your decision to quit smoking for 15 years, that was your decision? "a: yeah. you cannot make somebody do 3560 something, you know. you can lead them to the water, but you cannot make them drink. "q: you mentioned that you got to the point in your life that you started thinking if she wanted to kill herself, let her do it, correct? "a: well, i probably should not have used that term. i just decided that her life is her life and you cannot change -- i grew up, you cannot change people's minds by sitting there and giving an argument. "people have a right to be individuals. people have the right to have their own life, and if that was what she chose to do, i came to the realization that all the talking in the world -- if i put her in the rehab or something like that, she would hold it against me. i just said that she has a right to her own life. "q: you came to appreciate over time that mrs. gore had the right to make her own decisions in her life, correct? "a: yes. "q: and one of those decisions was whether or not to smoke cigarettes, correct? "a: exactly. i quit, that was -- at that time that was my decision." 3561 as mr. gore himself testified, mrs. gore, she had the information she needed to make her choices that she made, and she made the choices and lived her life the way she wanted to live. i'd ask you to think of this. in what other setting when somebody knows what they need to know about a behavior they engage in and they make a choice to engage in that behavior and the behavior has consequences, good or bad, in what other setting do we say the person is not one hundred percent responsible for the choices and decisions they make in life? we all have the freedom to make choices. with that freedom comes responsibility, and mrs. gore made the decision she made. she smoked, that is what she wanted to do. i'm not being critical in any way. she enjoyed it, did not want to quit and did not try to quit. for that, if you make it this far in the verdict form, i ask that you put down one hundred percent responsibility on mrs. gore. if you do that, this is another spot where the case is over. it is done. it is a defense verdict. now we get to the amount of damages, and they are talking about seven and a half million 3562 dollars. i'd like to just a second point out that there is no claim, there is no evidence in this case, they are not seeking medical bills for mrs. gore for her cancer or the carotid artery disease. they are not asking for money for medical bills or economic damages. they want all this money for pain and suffering. so let me see if i can put this in context, because we might read newspapers and see a lot of big numbers out there. they are asking for, if you round up, $8 million. if you had a job and you earned $50,000 a year, it would take you 20 years to get just $1 million. if you worked for 40 years at $50 million -- or $50,000 a year, it would take you 40 years to make $2 million. to make the money they are asking you to award, you would have to take your own earnings, your father or mother's earnings at that amount, your grandfather or grandmother's earnings at that amount, and your great-grandfather or great-grandmother's earnings at that amount to total up 160 years of working at $50,000 a year to make the money they are asking you to award. i'd submit to you they are asking for an 3563 absurd amount of money in this case, an absurd amount of money, and that the real award in this case, if you get that far, should be zero; that you should not award mr. gore any money. and when you are considering all the issues in this case, they said, well, mr. gore, you do not look at his fault. but you can look at his truthfulness and you can weigh his truthfulness on every issue in this case, including damages, and i want to go through some of the things mr. gore told you and told us, and what you saw were simply not true. what you see is that mr. gore is somebody who is willing to say anything if he wants something from somebody else. if he wants free wine glasses from philip morris, he said he is willing to sign and say he is a smoker when he is not. if he wants a chainsaw, he says he was not a smoker, but he is willing to say he was. he is asking for $8 million, which i'm sure he wants a lot, and he told you a lot of things that you know are not true. the first was this story that you heard on direct and he kept at it on cross-examination for a little bit, about mrs. gore believing her 3564 ultralight cigarettes were safe around the time her father died because of television advertising she was seeing for ultralight cigarettes. mr. gore kept telling that story until we showed the stipulation, which showed there was no television advertising for ultralights or any other cigarettes in the 1990s or '80s or 1970s. they were off the air. and mr. gore admitted -- when i asked him, he admitted the story he told on direct about this advertising in the 1990s. he admitted it was not true. one of you picked up on this. mr. gore, as part of the story of how he was suffering after his wife's death, said he had never had problems with alcohol, and one of you picked up the fact that the medical records said that he had had problems with alcohol before. again, it is not a big issue in the case, but what it shows you is that when mr. gore wants something, he will say whatever he thinks will benefit him, even if it is right there out in the open that it is not true from his own medical records. when i cross examined mr. gore, he said mrs. gore did not believe the warnings on her 3565 packs, and then i showed him what he said under oath in august where he said she always believed the warnings on her packs. he said mrs. gore saw advertisements for light cigarettes in the 1960s, and it was pointed out, first of all, that he said he did not have a television in the 1960s and then it was pointed out to him that light cigarettes had not been invented in the 1960s. he said mrs. gore thought her cigarettes were safe and then on cross-examination admitted that she knew her cigarettes were hurting her. you also heard from dr. burns that mrs. gore never told her doctors that, "oh, i do not need to quit smoking. i'm smoking these light cigarettes. they are safe." and none of the children heard their mother say, "i think light cigarettes are safe or ultralights are safe." she knew they could cause cancer, because that is what the warnings said on the pack. i showed the readers digest article from 1964 to dr. proctor and dr. burns, and then mr. gore comes in and says, "oh, we did not have a subscription back then. she would not have seen it." then what you learned is in august under 3566 oath he testified they had a subscription to readers digest the entire time they were married, including 1964. mr. gore said mrs. gore did not know that smoking was bad for her health when they first met, and then on cross examination you heard in august he testified under oath that mrs. gore knew the dangers of smoking ever since he met her back in 1962 or 1963. he said when he was here, he said mrs. gore's doctors did not talk to her about the dangers of smoking in the 1960s. then you learned that in august under oath he said mrs. gore's doctors did talk to her about her smoking in the 1960s. same thing about when she was pregnant in 1963. he denied that the doctors talked to her in 1963. then you learned under oath in august he had said the doctors did talk to her in 1963. i want to pause on this one, because this in many ways is the least significant issue in this case, right, because mr. gore is not the cigarette smoker in this case. so whether or not he started smoking again after mrs. gore passed away really is of no significance, except this 3567 tells you all you need to know about whether mr. gore's testimony can be trusted, and here's why. because mr. gore told this story along with he starting drinking after mrs. gore died saying he never had any alcohol problems, he said, and "i was so upset i went back to smoking cigarettes. i had quit for 15 years and never smoked a single cigarette until my wife passed away." what you learned when we cross examined him -- and i'm going to show you some of the documents -- is that mr. gore was smoking cigarettes before she passed away. for example, this was a form he sent in to philip morris, january 13th, 1999. he admitted it is his signature down here. we typed that up, it is hard to read. his wife's alive and he certifies with his signature that he is a smoker 21 years of age or older. mr. gore said, "well, i just filled this out because i wanted free stuff." if mr. gore is willing to lie for a couple of wine glasses, what is he willing to do for $8 million or whatever they are asking for? 3568 there is other evidence to substantiate that he was smoking at this point in time. for example, yesterday in the deposition you heard mr. gore say that he and mrs. gore used the patch together and they both got blisters from it. they both tried to quit at the same time using the patch and both got blisters from it. the patch was only available starting in the 1990s, when he says he was not smoking, and he could not have only used it with mrs. gore before she passed away. so if that story was true, that he was using the patch with mrs. gore and they both got blisters, if that was true it means he was smoking in the 1990s, not started back after his wife died. in addition, you heard the story that he told in his deposition that he was dipping in vegas and spitting in all the beautiful flowers and killing them and mrs. gore caught him and she said, "i'd rather you smoke than dip," and he says he went back to smoking. so that is his testimony on that. what you are going to see is that this is another record he sent to philip morris, april 2, 1996, when he says he was not smoking. it says, 3569 "by signing below" -- and he said that is his signature -- "by signing below i certify that i am a cigarette smoker 21 years of age or older." so mr. gore is telling philip morris he is a cigarette smoker, please send me coupons so i can get a chainsaw or wine glass or something else. and here's another one. same thing, 1996, when he told you he was not smoking. he tells philip morris -- he signs and certifies that he is a cigarette smoker. so when was mr. gore lying? was he lying on the forms he sent to philip morris or when he testified here? when was he not being truthful? he says it was when he was filling out the forms and he was just being untruthful because he wanted free stuff. this is the form mr. gore fills out after mrs. gore passes away, when he goes to the trouble to photocopy his driver's license, fill out the form and send it in so he can get free stuff. he admits he is smoking at this point in time, right? so he has no need to lie on the form, because he is already smoking at this point in time. what does he say about how long have you 3570 smoked this brand? he fills out that he is smoking marlboro. he has a choice, less than one year. if he really did start smoking again after mrs. gore passed away, then the answer would be less than one year, because it was nine months ago. no reason to lie about this, because he is a cigarette smoker. but mr. gore checks one to two years, meaning he did go back to smoking before mrs. gore passed away; just like his testimony about the patch would tell you, just like that las vegas story would tell you. so the point of this is not -- it is not whether mr. gore was smoking or not after she passed away. it is whether you can believe his testimony. all the evidence is mr. gore was smoking before she passed away, so why would he come in here and tell you under oath, why would he tell you that he went back to cigarette smoking for the first year after 15 years, after she passed away? he told you that because he is hopeful that it will show that he was so upset that you should award him a lot of money. mr. gore, the evidence is, will say anything 3571 at any time if he thinks it will help him get something, and that is what he did sitting in that witness stand here. and for that reason and all the other reasons i've talked about, if you get this far in the verdict form, nothing. mr. gore should get nothing. the last thing i want to talk about and then mr. geise is going to talk to you, is the last question on punitive damages. punitive damages. they want you to come back after your deliberations for another day or two so they can ask you to give mr. gore even more money than they have already asked for. and that money goes to mr. gore, it would go to mr. gore. now, this has to be proven by a higher standard, clear and convincing evidence. you will see that in the jury instruction. i'd submit to you there is not any evidence supporting any of their claims in this case under the lower standard of proof, the greater weight of the evidence. there is absolutely no clear and convincing evidence of anything in this case that would justify an award of punitive damages. there is no reason why anybody should have to come 3572 back for two more days, and if you get this far in the verdict form, you check it "no". that is what i would ask. mr. gore should not get compensatory damages and he certainly should not get punitive damages. there are four different ways that your verdict can be a defense verdict in this case, and i'd submit to you that you can pick any one of them and they are all justified by the evidence in this case. if you find that mrs. gore was not addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine or even if you find she is addicted, but find they did not prove that addiction caused her carotid artery disease and you check it "no", it is a defense verdict. the case is over. if you find that they did not prove that mrs. gore's cancer started in her lung, they did not prove that, you check it "no", it is a defense verdict. if you decide that mrs. gore is one hundred percent responsible, that is the end of the case, it is a defense verdict. if you decide to award mr. gore no damages, if you write a zero there, if you get that far in 3573 the verdict form -- which i'd submit you should write a zero and not get that far -- but if you get that far and write a zero, the case is over. mr. gore does not get damages, the case is done, and you do not get to the punitive damages question. any of these verdicts would be a verdict for the defense. all of these are justified by the evidence and justified by the plaintiff's failure, complete failure to meet their burden of proof on any of these issues. so i appreciate your attention. mr. geise is up next. again, thank you for listening. i did take longer than i expected to, but i really appreciate your being here and paying attention to me. thanks a lot. mr. geise: may it please the court, mr. foote, mr. corr, mr. gore, and ladies and gentlemen of the jury. good afternoon or almost good evening at this point. once again, i'm speaking third. once again, i'm going to try to be brief or at least briefer than the first two presentations you heard today, but i do want to start out by thanking you. as i said in opening, we could not have a jury trial without a jury. so thank you for that. the lawyers, we have to be here. we choose to do this for a living. mr. gore is here, he chose to file a lawsuit. but you all did not choose any of this. we chose you to be here. so thank you. for the past three weeks now you have made sacrifices in your daily lives, from your personal responsibilities, from your jobs, to be here every day to listen to the evidence, and other than standing up when you enter or leave there is really not much we have been able to do to show our thanks. yesterday when it was raining, we could not 3578 even share an umbrella with one of you. so it is kind of a different situation. but for everything you have done for this jury process, for your civic duty, for everything, i thank you on behalf of myself and my client for what you have done. now, you might recall during my opening statement when i predicted that reynolds would not be a major character in the story of mrs. gore's life, and that turned out to be exactly the case. now, i want to walk through some of the evidence about that, but first, you recall mr. foote said earlier today that mrs. gore started smoking r.j. reynolds cigarettes. there is no evidence at all to support that argument, none. what evidence did you hear about mrs. gore smoking my client's cigarettes? i'm going to walk through every witness you heard. lynn lilliquist, mrs. gore's cousin and coworker, she came in, she did not mention a single reynolds cigarette. sandy yencho, mrs. gore's friend going all the way back to high school, she did not mention a single reynolds cigarette. 3579 jerry joe schick, mrs. gore's high school boyfriend, offered no mention of any brand. michael tierney, mrs. gore's first husband, did not recall any brand she smoked. christina savage, one of mr. and mrs. gore's daughters, she said she had a recollection of her mother smoking belair sometime in the 1960s, she did not know the time period, and she did not mention kool at all. kelly welton, another daughter, came in and had the same story as mrs. savage, recalled belair sometime in the 1960s, no mention of kool. and you heard yesterday from mary faith shepherd, the third daughter who came and talked to you. she did not mention any cigarette brand at all. then there was mr. gore. he said that mrs. gore smoked kool and belair sometime in the 1960s, but again, he could not tell you how long she smoked either of those brands. that is it. that is it. that is the entirety of the evidence about r.j. reynolds cigarette smoking in this case. that is it, eight witnesses. no one, no one came in and said she started smoking with an r.j. reynolds brand. 3580 no one came in and said she smoked an r.j. reynolds brand in the 1950s. no one came in and said she smoked an r.j. reynolds brand when she was 14, when she was 16, 17, 18, 19, nobody. nobody, there was no evidence of it. eight people who knew mrs. gore came in and testified either in person or by deposition, five of them never mentioned reynolds at all. as i promised you in opening, reynolds would not be a substantial or a significant part of mrs. gore's story. do not let mr. foote tell you otherwise. you heard the evidence. in opening statement i asked you to keep your focus on mrs. gore and the evidence that relates to her, and you remember i asked you then to keep your focus on mr. mccarter's five facts, and you can see now why i asked you to keep your focus on that. you can see now after mr. mccarter's closing it is critically important to focus on these key facts. yes, throughout the trial plaintiff's counsel tried to take the focus off of those facts, tried to take the focus off of mrs. gore. they wanted to talk about things that had nothing to do with her or in some cases they only wanted 3581 to give you half the story. they would plant a seed with you on direct examination and wait to see if mr. mccarter or mr. cruz-alvarez or myself would get up and show you the rest of the story or talk about mrs. gore. i want to give you just a few examples, because frankly, it was one of the reasons i guess i was here, to have to refute these examples that they brought out that had nothing to do with mrs. gore. mr. foote showed you a winston ad with the flintstones. do you remember that during dr. proctor's direct examination? they are just planting a seed with you that reynolds advertises with cartoons on a kid's show, and that is all they said with dr. proctor. so i had to get up. it is one of the few times i had to ask questions of a witness, and i had to ask dr. proctor about it and i had to show you the other side. i actually had to show you. i had to act it out, because dr. proctor did not show you the part i acted out for you. you learned that the flintstones were originally an adult cartoon on prime time tv, not a saturday morning cartoon. you learned that 3582 they were modeled after the honeymooners, and it aired in the evening and that the flintstones were cosponsored by alka seltzer and one a day vitamins, hardly targeted at kids. you also learned that reynolds only sponsored the flintstones for that first year and it was a few years later when the flintstones moved to a morning show and reynolds never sponsored it then. now, not only was there no evidence that mrs. gore ever watched the flintstones or ever saw that ad, you learned something else. mrs. gore never smoked winston, never. there is no allegation of that at all. another example. dr. proctor again showed you a camel ad that had a doctor in it or doctors in it in 1949. again, no one ever suggested that mrs. gore saw that ad. now, the other side of the story was that the ad was for an unfiltered cigarette, which you know from listening today and the last two weeks she did not smoke unfiltered cigarettes, and more importantly, she never smoked camel. so the two ads they showed you, as mr. mccarter pointed out, winston and camel, are 3583 two brands my company makes, but two brands mrs. gore never smoked. according to their allegations, she smoked kool and belair and as you know by now, you never saw a single ad for kool or for belair. instead they wanted you to focus on things that had nothing to do with mrs. gore. other times they focused on just half the story. here are a couple of examples from some of the documents that you may have seen or you might see later this afternoon. 1953 -- this is pt3608. it is claude teague and he does that research memo, and you probably remember that, the plaintiff told you that he did this research project and he found out all this information and that reynolds did not make his memo public. but on cross examination i had to ask dr. proctor and on cross examination he showed you that document, the last three pages. 78 published articles are what dr. teague relied on to write it, 78. there was nothing in there referring to anything that was private, anything secret. dr. teague -- dr. proctor said some of those 3584 articles were hard to find. well, they may have been hard to find, but you should not criticize dr. teague for doing a thorough job. and the final thing that dr. proctor had to admit about that document is that there was no independent research by reynolds in it, none. one other example that i did not plan on talking about, otherwise i would have made a slide for it, but mr. foote talked about it again in his closing today, and this is this 1984 document. it is pt3400, a 1984 document from somebody named diane burrows and r.j. reynolds. you know in 1984, that mrs. gore was 45 years old. it is titled "younger adult smokers." that is the title. and that term is defined in this document. it is defined as people 18 to 24. now, when you go back there, if you want to look through the whole document, look through it. you will see it is defined as 18 to 24 almost 200 times, 18 to 24. so what you know is at 18 to 24, especially in 1984, every one of these people 18 to 24 is of legal age to smoke, every one of them. legal anywhere in america, legal here in florida. 3585 you heard today in the instructions, and you can look at them again when you deliberate, that the making and manufacture, the sale and the advertising of cigarettes are all legal activities. you cannot hold somebody responsible for a legal activity. and that is what this document is about, making and selling cigarettes to people 18 to 24. now, they showed you two documents -- two pages out of this and the funny thing was it came up with dr. proctor, i think, and i was not going to make a big deal about it, but it came up today. the one page, page two, that they showed you and they had everything highlighted on it today except for the one line that said "repeated government studies, appendix b, have shown that" -- so repeated government studies. so i thought there is no way this is the same thing. but sure enough, appendix b is the page they showed you. but this chart they showed you, that when people start it had the ages, 12, 13, remember that? well, the interesting thing about that, mr. foote said today this is a reynolds study. 3586 this is reynolds data. it says, "source: average of hew data reported in adult use of tobacco, 1970 and 1975." hew, the department of health, education and welfare. it is government data, not reynolds data. now, they talked in opening about marketing to kids about 1951 and 1957. that was a promise they made to you, and they showed you a document from 30 years later talking about adults. and worse, there is no evidence that mrs. gore smoked a reynolds or philip morris product between 1951 and 1957, none. every reynolds or philip morris cigarette that mrs. gore smoked, she smoked it as an adult. that is the facts in this case. mr. foote talked about putting a feather on the scale. you remember that? well, they gave you a feather. we gave you a fact on that. the fact is every cigarette she smoked of these companies was as an adult. so why did you have to wait for cross examination to get this full story? why did you have to wait? the answer is simple; to try to got you mad, to get you upset, to get you to lose the focus of these five facts, to get you to look 3587 at somebody other than mrs. gore for the facts related to her case. because as mr. mccarter explained to you a little while ago, if you focus on the facts and not on the feathers, mr. gore loses in this case. now, mr. mccarter walked you through the questions on the verdict form. i'm going to talk about those, but i'm going to hit different points than he hit or stress something that i need think needs to be stressed. on the first question he discussed the definition of legal cause and he showed you why she was not addicted, and he also showed you why addiction would not be the but for cause of her disease. even if you ignore her other risk factors for carotid artery stenosis, the answer with regard to legal cause and the answer to question number one is still "no" because of this question: "if mrs. gore was not addicted, would she have continued to smoke" -- you probably want to see that, do not you. "if mrs. gore was not addicted, would she have continued to smoke?" and the answer is, of course she would have, because you heard she had 3588 no interest ever in stopping smoking through the '50s, '60s, '70s, '80s, up until the 1990s. for this reason alone addiction cannot be a legal cause of her disease, because it was far from a substantial cause for the reason that she smoked. so even if you decide she was addicted, that addiction is not a legal cause. now, in your jury instructions you will learn that what legal cause is it must directly, naturally, continuously, and substantially cause something. you saw that it did not. let us look at this. the plaintiffs would like you to believe, okay, if somebody is addicted it automatically leads to injury and there is nothing in between, nothing in between. it is a straight shot. but you saw what comes in between. you saw what interrupts that. you saw that addiction is not the direct and natural and continuous sequence, because what is in between any addiction and any injury are mrs. gore's choices; her choice to begin smoking against her father's wishes. you heard that her parents were dead set against it. her choice to continue smoking despite decades of warnings from her family, to 3589 continue smoking despite her doctors' advice, and to not make an attempt to quit for decades. when others told mrs. gore to make a different choice, to choose to quit, she told them to mind their own business and leave her alone. now, although mr. gore respected mrs. gore's choices while she was alive, now in this lawsuit to ask for seven and a half million dollars he does not want to respect her decisions. he wants to take her out of this picture. he wants to take her choices out of this. he wants you to ignore her decisions, he wants you to negate her choices, but you know, she was doing what she wanted to do. and as she recognized, she had a right to do it. she had a right to smoke and she wanted to protect her right, and that right to smoke and her choice are what was the legal cause of any injury she suffered as a result of smoking. so for these additional reasons i echo mr. mccarter and say your answer to question number one should be "no". now, i'm not going to say much about question two, because i think mr. mccarter 3590 covered that in detail, but i do want to stress one instruction you received this morning; and that said, "smoking a defendant's cigarettes was a legal cause of lung cancer and death if smoking that defendant's cigarettes directly and in natural and continuous sequence produced or contributed substantially to producing such injury, so that it can be reasonable be said that but for smoking that defendant's cigarettes, the injury would not have occurred." can it be said that but for mrs. gore's kool and belair smoking, that her lung cancer would not have occurred? no, no one said that in this case, not even dr. burns and how much he paid -- how much he was paid in this case. you heard all the testimony, i recapped it for you about the lack of evidence of mrs. gore using reynolds cigarettes. such an insignificant smoking history cannot contribute substantially to any disease she got. so this is another reason, a separate reason that your verdict on question number two should be "no" for r.j. reynolds. so when you add up what mr. mccarter talked about and these other points, the answer to 3591 question one and question two for both defendants should be a "no". i'll spend a little bit of time on these two questions that mr. mccarter talked about, the question with regard to concealment and any agreement to conceal. now, there are essentially two parts to each of these questions. the first part is you need to determine if information about the health risks and addictive nature of smoking was a secret to mrs. gore. did she have the material information or not, and if so, you will need to determine if she reasonably relied on any statement or misinformation to her detriment. well, here you know that the information was not a secret to mrs. gore and you know she did not rely on anything that reynolds or philip morris or any tobacco company said. so the first part, were the dangers of smoking a secret, mr. mccarter went over all the reasons the answer to this question with respect to mrs. gore is a resounding "no". she received decades of information about the health risks of smoking. so on this first prong for questions three 3592 and four, the plaintiff cannot prove that the material information about the health risks and addictive nature were secrets from mrs. gore. they assuredly were not, not at any time during her smoking history and certainly not as of may 5, 1982. so for this reason alone the concealment claims, questions three and four on the verdict form must fail. your answer must be "no", because the information was known to her. there is another component to these questions and another reason your verdict has to be "no", and that is the issue of reasonable reliance. now, another way to maybe try to explain this is around vero beach there are a number of bridges, bridges going over to orchid island, and that is really what needs to happen in this courtroom. the plaintiff needs to build a bridge. but in the courtroom they need to build a bridge from a statement or misinformation from reynolds or philip morris and then some action by mrs. gore on the other side. they have to build that bridge. they just cannot put separate things out there. they have to connect it, and for purposes of the verdict form this bridge is 3593 called legal cause, this bridge is called reliance. when you look at the jury instructions they will say mrs. gore -- all of the questions on the verdict form relate to mrs. gore, not some other smoker. they have to show that mrs. gore relied to her detriment on a statement or misinformation after may 5th, 1982, and any reliance must be reasonable. the plaintiff cannot build that bridge, not for philip morris and certainly not for reynolds. not only did mrs. gore not rely on anything, but any reliance would not have been reasonable based on what she knew. mr. mccarter talked to you about filtered cigarettes and what was known and how they are not going to be a basis for liability and how there was not a conspiracy or agreement on that. i want to talk about filtered cigarettes, though. before mrs. gore picked up her first cigarette, filtered or not, her father told her smoking was not good for her. moreover, every warning she received from her family and her doctors was about a filtered cigarette, the kinding of cigarette she was smoking. she was 3594 told that her filtered cigarettes were another nail in her coffin or cancer sticks. every message she got referred to the filtered cigarettes she was smoking. let us talk quickly about what she knew during this period of time that she allegedly smoked reynolds in this 1960s. you heard in 1963 what mr. gore and her doctors told her when she was pregnant with kelly. you heard about the '64 surgeon general's report. you heard about the warnings that came out in 1966. you heard about what mr. gore and her doctor told her in 1967 when she was pregnant with mary faith. you heard all that. and with all that information that she had, she did not even choose to try to quit, not at all. but more importantly, during that entire period of time she never doubted the health risks. she never doubted them. she never told anybody, "you are wrong, it is not going to cause that." she never said that. and as mary faith said yesterday, she never told her that one type of cigarette was safer than a different type of cigarette. she just told people leave her alone and mind their own business. 3595 now, if there was any evidence at all that mrs. gore relied on a statement or something from a tobacco company, do not you think they would have given that information to dr. proctor so they could tell you about it? of course they would have. but they did not, because it does not exist. now, you heard argument today about light cigarettes and low tar cigarettes and ultralight cigarettes. i'm not really going to say anything about that. why? because those arguments do not apply to reynolds at all. mrs. gore never smoked a reynolds cigarette that was a light, a low tar, a low nicotine, or an ultralight cigarette, never. so these are additional reasons why the plaintiff did not and could not prove that mrs. gore reasonably relied on anything that reynolds or pm said or did not say. so for these reasons you have to check "no" to questions three and four. one more reason, and that is the date may 5, 1982. mr. mccarter talked about the lack of evidence after may 5, 1982. on top of that, for reynolds, for my client, there is one other point. 3596 mrs. gore never smoked a reynolds brand after the 1960s, never. more than a decade before 1982 she stopped smoking reynolds products. there can be no way that mrs. gore relied on something reynolds said or did not say after 1982, when she stopped using our products over a decade before. mr. foote said you do not check your common sense when you serve on a jury and you take your common sense back to the jury room with you. i agree with that. common sense tells you if she did not smoke our product after 1982, she was not relying on anything we said or did not say after 1982, and the fact in this case is she had not smoked our products for over 10 years at that point. now, beyond that, there was no suggestion that mrs. gore was ever waiting for information from reynolds or philip morris. she had the information she needed. she just was not interested in quitting. as you heard her own doctors say and you heard her husband say she was not motivated or "you can lead a horse to water," and that sums that up. by 1982 her husband, her children, her 3597 family, her doctor, her parents had been telling her for decades about the material information, about the health effects and addictive nature of smoking. mrs. gore did not take action in response to what they were telling her. is there any reason to think she would have taken action if she heard something else? of course not. so if we look at questions three and four again, first, because she did not smoke an r.j. reynolds brand after 1982 and indeed not after the 1960s, the answer for reynolds on both of these questions has to be "no". it has to be "no". moreover, because mrs. gore knew the material facts about the health effects and addictive nature of smoking at all times she was a smoker and certainly by 1982, the answer to questions three and four for both philip morris and r.j. reynolds must be "no". finally, because there is no reliance or no legal cause or no bridge at all between anything the company said or did and mrs. gore at any time and certainly not after 1982, it is yet a third reason that the answer to questions three and four must be "no". 3598 mr. mccarter talked about this allocation of responsibility, and i'm just going to add a couple of points on that. one thing to keep in mind is this responsibility question is not a global comparison of conduct over time. it is not a question of whether mrs. gore was a nice person or a special person. that is not the issue, and it is not a question of whether you think the tobacco companies have done bad things over the course of years. it is a comparison of actions that were the legal cause of her death. it is a very, very narrow inquiry. now, you may have seen things in these documents or statements that you do not like, that r.j. reynolds or philip morris or their people said that you do not like and you do not agree with, but the issue in this case is whether they actually affected mrs. gore and caused her death. if you find something you do not like is not connected to mrs. gore, it cannot be considered for purposes of this comparative responsibility. mr. foote asked was mrs. gore special. i'm going to ask a different question. was mrs. gore responsible? if mrs. gore had to assign responsibility, would she accept it? you heard 3599 nobody made decisions for mrs. gore, no one could. she believed she had a right to smoke and did not want anyone to take that choice or the responsibility that comes with it away from her. you heard that mr. gore -- and you saw the video again. he said people like his wife, who do not want to change their minds, have to be responsible for their own actions. finally you heard mr. gore's attorneys tell you that they accept that mrs. gore is responsible, and for those three reasons i agree with mr. mccarter that she is a hundred percent responsible. i'm not going to repeat anything. that is all i'm going to say about the question on percentages and the question on damages. i want to talk to you for a few moments about punitive damages, because if you get all the way through this verdict form -- and i do not think you should. i think you should hit that hard stop after question one, and if for some reason you feel like going a little bit farther, i think you hit the hard stop after question two, and i think we are done. if you move beyond that to questions three 3600 and four, there are multiple reasons the answers have to be "no" to those questions. but if you do make it to the back of the verdict form, you will have already fully compensated mr. gore for his wife's death. punitive damages are not about compensating or making someone whole, they are purely about more money for mrs. gore, and that is damages in addition to those that fully compensate him. they are damages that can only be awarded for conduct that was a legal cause of the harms suffered by the plaintiff. finally, and this is important, your instructions told you that punitive damages cannot be based on these findings. mr. foote talked about them, you heard them in the instructions, you cannot use those as a basis to find punitive damages. as mr. mccarter pointed out, there is a higher level, a higher burden of proof that needs to be met here and it is called clear and convincing evidence. i think when you consider the evidence, you will see they do not even come close to meeting that, and i want to walk through some of that evidence. 3601 first let us consider what dr. proctor told you. he told you that in the 1950s, when these articles came out saying that smoking was bad, that the companies, both reynolds and philip morris, they went to work. they went to work trying to identify the constituents and the compounds that may be causing disease, or at that time it was not known a cause were associated with it. things like benzpyrene, you probably remember that word in this trial. you heard from dr. proctor that dr. rodgman at reynolds was one of the first people to identify a whole host of these constituents and they found them in tobacco smoke in the 1950s, and he submitted his research to the surgeon general's advisory committee about those constituents. dr. proctor told you that dr. rodgman even gave a speech to the american chemical society. now, mr. foote told you today that we did not share that information. dr. proctor told you on the stand that we did. you heard about ph and you may hear about it again when i sit down. dr. proctor told you that reynolds identified the method to measure ph in 3602 smoke and they published the method in 1967 so anybody could measure it if they wanted to. you remember this document i used with dr. proctor. this is a document in 1968 from the president of reynolds to the head of r&d. and what does it say? it says: "in cooperation with others, you should push the work concerning tobacco and health. you should prepare a plan to foster any relationship with government personnel in the quest for mutual understanding of facts, ultimately to gain their cooperation in proper research of the subject." then in the second point he writes: "if there is a safer cigarette, let us continue" -- which means the work was already going on -- "and increase our efforts this program. please prepare a plan to carry it out." you heard how that plan was continued. you heard how the research continued in the 1970s and 1980s. you heard from dr. proctor that reynolds developed cigarettes that heated instead of burned the tobacco in cigarettes. they were called premier and eclipse. now, dr. proctor said those were less harmful cigarettes. this is dr. proctor's testimony in this case. i asked him, "but they also found that premier reduced a number of 3603 things?" he said, "yeah, the polycyclics in particular." "so the cancer-causing polycyclic hydrocarbons were actually reduced?" and he said "yeah, dramatically. "and everything else being equal, you think both premier and eclipse are less harmful than traditional cigarettes?" and dr. proctor said, "probably, yeah." another point about these cigarettes is mr. foote said there was this agreement that we were not going to make safer cigarettes, we were not going to market them. these cigarettes were on the market and dr. proctor told you they were not that popular, but you also heard something else about those cigarettes coming on the market and i do not know if you remember this. remember that dr. proctor said that despite the fact that they recognized that premier could be a safer cigarette, that the office of smoking and health and the centers for disease control called premier a problem, and 3604 they had that meeting and they decided we are not going to wait for any more research. we are going to initiate a war against premier. so reynolds developed a product that dr. proctor says is less harmful and safer and the office of smoking and health said we do not want this on the market. you heard about publications and dr. proctor in his testimony called it distraction research. but you heard the tirc and ctr-funded research that included thousands of published articles in the peer-reviewed literature including ten from researchers that went on to win nobel prizes. you heard from dr. heimann yesterday in that video that in one year alone there were 174 articles published on smoking and health. that is about three a week. and the publications included this one from 1963. remember, i used this with dr. proctor. again, this is in evidence. it is aiw-2649. this is 1963. importantly, it says: "this work was supported in part by grants from the american cancer society and the tobacco industry research committee." 3605 i went through a lot of the findings in this with dr. proctor, but today i'm just going to leave you with one of the summaries and conclusions. "heavy cigarette smokers thus appear to be true addicts." this is 1963. this is research funded by the tobacco industry research committee and supported by reynolds and philip morris. this is not distraction research. this is real science that was relied on and then later cited by the surgeon general. this is not bad science and it is not a secret that heavy cigarette smokers thus appear to be true addicts. when you look at the question of punitive damages, this is not a record of wanton conduct or disregard for human life. this is a record of trying to lower the risks of an inherently risky but always lawful product. this is a record of trying to contribute to science and things that were recognized by the public health community as far back as the 1950s and 1960s, and trying to lower the risks of an inherently risky but lawful product should not be punished or deterred. a couple more points. if you were upset by ctr and ti and tirc even existing, you heard from 3606 dr. proctor they do not exist anymore. a lot of the times when mr. foote or mr. corr would use a document with you they would point out, "does this say secret, does this say confidential?" well, dr. proctor talked to you about those documents. there is a public website with millions of documents available. i think he said it is the largest online document database in the country, the largest in the country, with over 85 million pages. so when this trial is over and judge cox says you are released, you can do whatever research you want on your own. if you want to look at every dr. teague document, go online and look. if you want to look at what dr. rodgman said in the '50s and '60s, go online and look. it is all available. now, looking at this information, there is no need to punish or deter for changes that already took place. so if you get to this point on the verdict form, and i do not think you should get there, the evidence does not justify awarding mr. gore more money. so i would ask you to check "no" to question 3607 seven, if you get there, for both philip morris and r.j. reynolds. the plaintiff has not met that higher burden of proof. the plaintiff has not shown anything by clear and convincing evidence. at the beginning of this trial i told you that the evidence would point towards a defense verdict. now at the end of this trial it does just that on the question of class membership, question one. on the question of what diseases mrs. gore had and where they started and the question on the legal cause of those diseases, the plaintiff has failed to meet its burden of proof. mrs. gore made her own decisions throughout her life. she was a strong, stubborn, smart and responsible woman who wanted to live her life the way she wanted to live it and was not about to be told otherwise. one of her decisions was the decision to smoke. mrs. gore never saw herself as a victim and never blamed the tobacco companies. do not reward mr. gore by making mrs. gore a victim in this lawsuit. this is the only chance i get to speak you. 3608 as the plaintiff with the burden of proof, you can see mr. foote and everybody over here are working on things to say when i sit down. they worked throughout mr. mccarter's closing, they have been working throughout mine. just remember when he gets up how mr. mccarter and i have responded to everything they have said through this trial, how we have pointed back to the five key facts of this case, how we have pointed back to the facts about mrs. gore, how we have pointed back to the evidence that you heard. keep these key facts in mind and focus on the facts, not on the feathers. ladies and gentlemen, it is been a pleasure to try this case in front of you. i thank you for your time.