mr. cofer: counsel, mr. goveia, members of the 3620 jury, good afternoon. i told you in opening statement that we believe this case comes down to three pretty straightforward questions: why did mary goveia smoke; why did she wait so long to quit; and what, if anything, did the defendants do wrong to cause mrs. goveia to smoke and get sick? you maybe remember from opening statement, i told you that the evidence would be that mary goveia smoked because her entire family smoked and she liked to smoke. and i told you the evidence would be that she always had the ability to quit smoking whenever she decided she wanted to quit and was willing to work hard to quit. i told you the evidence would be that nothing the defendants did or not -- did or did not do, said or did not say caused mary goveia to become a smoker. you may remember i started my opening statement by telling you the things that were not in dispute. and i told you i was doing that so we could take those off the table and focus on the real issues in this case. i want to start my closing argument doing the same thing. i want to talk about the facts that are not in dispute. i prepared a timeline that will 3621 hopefully help you follow along and listen during my closing argument. the top half of the timeline basically has events for mrs. goveia's life, and the bottom half has information that is been reported about the dangers of smoking at various points in time. i do not have enough room to put both boards up at the same time, so this is from 1920s to 1960s, and i have another board that talks about events in mrs. goveia's life and what was being reported about the dangers of smoking from the 1970s on. so let us start with question 1. why did mary goveia smoke? why did she become a cigarette smoker? you may remember dr. burns told you that one of the most important factors in whether someone becomes a smoker is whether their family smokes. dr. burns was a senior reviewer of the 1995 surgeon general report, and he told you that the surgeon general found that the principal determinant of whether an adolescent starts smoking is whether her friends and family smoked. he told you that if a parent smokes or someone's brothers and sisters smoke, it is more likely that they will become a smoker too. mr. mitnik said something that is really 3622 consistent with all our common sense. he said young people imitate behavior that they see. and those of us who are parents know that is true. it is not -- do as i say, you know, not as i do. but we do know kids imitate behavior they see in their families. and it is undisputed, members of the jury, that basically everyone in mary goveia's life smoked. her dad was a pipe smoker. you heard that all of her brothers and sisters were smokers. her husband, john, was a cigar and pipe smoker for 40 years. do you remember he testified he started in around 1946, and he quit smoking pipes and cigars in the late 1980s after he heard on the news that a pipe could cause lip cancer. now, i want you to think something else, though, about mr. goveia, mr. goveia and his smoking experiences. he grew up in the same period that mr. mitnik talked about. you may remember when i had the privilege of asking john goveia questions, i established his birthday was june 1st, 1924, and he was actually born one month after his wife, may 1st, 1924. remember, it is may day. so he grew up in this very same time period. but he never was a cigarette smoker. and do you remember what the evidence was about 3623 the one time he tried it? his wife, mary, before they were married, gave him a cigarette. she wanted him to try it. do you remember what he told you? he said he took one puff and his eyes filled with tears and he started coughing again, and that was the last cigarette smoke he ever inhaled into his lungs. he grew up in the same period of time. same advertisements, same town, same theaters in boston. people are different. we do know, though, that the rest of mrs. goveia's family smoked. both her son and daughter smoked. you remember that her son, michael, started smoking when he was 12 or 13 years old in 1971 or 1972. he smoked until he died in 2009, so he smoked for ten years after his mother died. you heard that debbie is a smoker. you may remember that debbie told you that her mother gave her permission to smoke when she was 13, and she told you she is been a regular smoker since she was and she still smokes today. her husband, clyde nadeau, jay, was a smoker as is their son, jamie. now, i want you to think about that for a 3624 second. the whole goveia family blames these defendants for mrs. goveia's death. in fact, mr. goveia -- mr. mitnik: objection, your honor. that is an improper statement. the court: sustained. mr. cofer: well, mr. goveia feels so strongly about it that he brought this lawsuit to recover money for his wife's decisions to begin and continue smoking. mr. mitnik suggested to you that the floor was $5 million in his closing argument. yet jamie nadeau, mrs. goveia's grandson and debbie goveia's son, decided to start smoking after mrs. goveia was already sick with copd. he did not start smoking until about 1995. now, clearly he understood when he started smoking -- mr. mitnik: objection, your honor. relevance. mr. cofer: and this is predicate, your honor. it is closing argument. the court: i understand, but you are going to have to approach it another way. mr. cofer: okay. let -- well, let me; let me set the predicate now. plaintiff argues that the reason that people 3625 smoke is because they are seduced by advertising into smoking. plaintiff argues that the reason people smoke is they do not understand that smoking can be hard for you; can be hard to quit and can be bad for you. but if you just look at mary goveia's own family, you can see that that is not true. there are people in her family who started smoking after mrs. goveia was sick with copd and people that continued to smoke after mrs. goveia died from copd. the evidence was, members of the jury, that smoking is just a way of life in the goveia family. the goveia family has smoked for generations. mary goveia's family smoked before mary got sick; they smoked while she was sick; and they are still smoking after she passed. is it any wonder that mary goveia was a smoker too? so that takes us to the next question: why did she wait so long to quit smoking? while it is true that smoking can be addictive, it is undisputed that even addicted smokers can and do quit smoking. both the plaintiff's expert witnesses told you that. both dr. burns and dr. henningfield told you that all smokers, 3626 including addicted smokers, have the ability to quit. they told you that just because someone is addicted to nicotine does not mean that she cannot quit. dr. burns told you that by the time of the 1990 surgeon general's report, almost half of the people alive at the time that used to smoke had already quit. you heard evidence that by the time of mrs. goveia's death in 1999, somewhere between 45 and 50 million americans had quit smoking. today, 60 million americans have quit smoking. and both dr. burns and dr. henningfield told you it was their opinion that the vast majority of those people who quit were addicted. they told you that the vast majority of those people had changes to the brain that dr. henningfield talked about. the single-most important factor in quitting smoking is motivation and persistence. the bottom line is you have to want to quit, and you have to try to quit. and, members of the jury, when you think about the evidence, there is very little evidence that mary goveia really wanted to quit or that she tried very hard to quit. you heard about the times when mrs. goveia 3627 tried to quit smoking. you heard that in 1956, after she had her daughter debra, she may have quit for a few hours or at most a day. when she was pregnant with michael in 1959, she may not have tried to smoke for two or three hours. if you cannot see that, please raise your hand and tell the court. i can put it on the overhead too. mr. goveia told us between 1960 and 1972, that 12-year period, she may have tried to quit cold turkey two or three times. and then remember the hypnotist. remember the evidence about the hypnotist. so the evidence was that mr. and mrs. goveia went to see a hypnotist. it was a half-hour session. and they walked into the hypnotist's, and after the hypnotist did what he did, mrs. goveia reached in her pocket, took out a cigarette and lit it and laughed at him and refused to pay. mr. goveia told you that they laughed about their experience in the car on their way home, and they said the whole thing was ridiculous. mr. prysock asked mr. goveia if his wife was disappointed the hypnosis did not work. do you remember what mr. goveia said? he said, well, she was in a way, but she did not care one way or 3628 another. does that sound like someone who was distressed about her smoking and was really committed to quit smoking? sometime after the visit with the hypnotist, mrs. goveia bought some phony cigarettes, but she continued to smoke real cigarettes at the same time. then here, after 1985, after they moved to florida, she used the patch once and she may have used nicotine gum. but you heard the evidence was that she never actually put her cigarettes down, she never stopped smoking, and she never really quit. it is undisputed that she never threw away her cigarettes or her ashtrays or her lighters. in fact, until she went on oxygen, the longest that mrs. goveia may ever have gone without a cigarette was a day or two. and mr. goveia was not even sure about that. you heard her daughter debbie tell you she does not remember her mother ever going a day without a cigarette. she never went to a stop-smoking clinic. she never asked a doctor for help in quitting. there are no pharmacy or medical records showing she was ever given a prescription for any kind of 3629 stop-smoking aid. and when she was diagnosed with copd and dr. fakih told her to quit smoking or you will die, mr. goveia asked her to quit. but she did not quit. instead, she told her husband that she was going to do what she wants and she was going to smoke whether he liked it or not. mr. goveia testified that his wife continued to smoke until after she went on oxygen. after that, he said he never saw her smoke another cigarette. you have heard about her going down to see jacob bayorek. you heard that was in '94 or 1995. you heard that was before she went on oxygen. so please do not be confused about that time. when she went to see jacob bayorek and smoked one cigarette every couple of days for a year because she was not supposed to be smoking around her husband, that was before she was on oxygen. that was 1994 or 1995. so i want to make sure there is no confusion about the time with that. now, let me be clear. i am not suggesting for a minute that it is easy for everyone to quit smoking. some people are lucky and it is easy, relatively easy. other people have to really try. they have to try hard. they have to try more than 3630 once. but i'll tell you, members of the jury, it is common sense if you do not make any sincere efforts or any efforts to quit, you are not going to quit. and if you do not really want to quit, you are not going to quit. and do you remember what dr. henningfield told you on cross-examination? he said, even today -- remember, i showed him that article that his friend wrote, michael fiore, last month in the new england journal of medicine. he said, even today, 70 percent of smokers tell their doctor they are not ready to quit yet. from the time mrs. goveia became a regular smoker, it is not clear that she ever put her cigarettes down for more than a single day. so let me ask you something. in 50 years of smoking, if a person is not willing to put her cigarettes down for more than a single day, do not you have to ask yourself, how committed was she to really trying to quit? dr. burns told you that a smoker is able to quit smoking when she can muster sufficient internal resources and is provided with sufficient external support. what does that mean? it means she has to really want to quit and it is very helpful if her 3631 family and friends encourage her to quit and support her efforts. mr. mitnik: objection, your honor. the court: overruled. you can raise it again if you think it is appropriate. mr. cofer: dr. burns told you, and this is a quote from dr. burns, quote, "it is very clear from the literature that family support is an important aid in helping people successfully stay off cigarettes." dr. burns also told you -- and this is a quote -- and i was very careful to read the question so it would be very clear what he said -- "dr. burns encourages people trying to quit to talk to their family and draw support from their environment." mr. mitnik: objection, your honor. mr. cofer: that was a direct -- the court: the objection is overruled. well, let me just ask, what is the legal basis? mr. mitnik: well, the basis is relevance. mr. cofer: it goes to why she continued to smoke, your honor. the court: i'm not asking for a response at this point. mr. cofer: i'm sorry. 3632 the court: objection is overruled. mr. mitnik: prejudicial outweighed by probative. the court: overruled. mr. cofer: okay. just to back up so it is clear where we are, dr. burns said it is very clear from the literature that family support is an important aid in helping people successfully stay off cigarettes and that dr. burns himself encourages people who are trying to quit to talk to their family and draw support from their environment. but, members of the jury, mary goveia never asked anyone in her family for help in quitting smoking. debbie said that, you know, she did not weigh in because her mother was an adult and it was her mother's business to decide whether she wanted to smoke. in fact, i want you to think about the evidence. the evidence was that even after mrs. goveia was sick with copd -- in fact, even after copd was so bad that she was on oxygen, debbie kept smoking around her. mr. mitnik: objection, your honor. sidebar. the court: sustained. 3633 mr. mitnik: move to strike. mr. cofer: may i approach, your honor? the court: you may approach. (a sidebar conference was held outside the hearing of the jury as follows:) the court: the sentence that was objected to was that the daughter continued to smoke around mrs. goveia. go ahead. mr. cofer: and it is all in evidence in the next line. it is, in fact, she gave mrs. goveia drags off her cigarettes. this is in evidence. the jury has heard it. their own expert said that it is an important reason why people are able to quit smoking or they do not quit smoking. this goes to legal cause. the douglas opinion specifically says we can argue there are other reasons why people continue to smoke other than addiction. they -- i said they could have a curative instruction. i said they could have an instruction that -- you know, there is no place on the jury verdict form to blame or allocate fault to the family members, so i'm happy to tell the jury that right now. but the point is, this is my theory on class membership. it is in evidence, and it is a proper line of argument. this is closing argument. mr. mitnik: he does not need -- there is -- to be talking about what someone else did is going straight to implying comparative fault. the court: okay. mr. cofer: okay. i'm -- the court: sure. just a minute. i agree with him. all of this is in evidence; okay? the issue, then, is how it is being applied. mr. cofer: and -- i'm sorry. i'm sorry. i apologize. the court: okay. i'm going to allow -- it is in evidence, but it has to be clear that they cannot consider that other people in any way contributed. mr. cofer: i'll address that right now. i'll make that crystal clear. the court: appreciate it. (the sidebar conference was concluded, and the following proceedings were held:) mr. cofer: members of the jury, where we were is that dr. burns told you that he encourages people who are trying to quit to talk to their family and draw support from their environment. it is very clear from the literature that family support is an 3635 important aid in helping people successfully stay off cigarettes. the evidence is mrs. goveia never asked anyone in her family for help in quitting. debra goveia testified she never encouraged her mother to quit because her mother was an adult and it was her mother's business to decide whether she wanted to smoke. even after mrs. goveia went on oxygen, debbie continued to smoke around her. and, in fact, the evidence was that she would occasionally give -- debbie would occasionally give her mother drags off debbie's cigarettes. now, let me be very clear. i am not suggesting that debbie goveia has any fault for her mother's decision to continue smoking. i'm not suggesting that john goveia has any fault for his wife's decision to continue smoking. when you look at the verdict form, there is no place on that to allocate fault to either debbie or john goveia, and i'm not suggesting that at all. but the question is, why did not she quit? why did she keep smoking? what were the circumstances that affected her decisions? debbie goveia told you that when her mother was not smoking and would, quote, get really bitchy, 3636 her father would tell her, "jesus christ, mary, why do not you light up a cigarette?" or he would offer to go to the store and buy her a pack. similarly, mr. goveia testified he would buy her a pack of cigarettes just to keep her quiet. and if you credit mr. goveia's testimony, he had no reason to suggest that she quit until she got copd, because he told you that until the 1990s when his wife got sick, they had no idea smoking could be bad for them. they had no idea cigarette smoking could cause cancer or could cause emphysema. up until then, the only reason his wife wanted to quit was because she did not like the smell. so if you did not know smoking could be bad, if you never heard it could cause cancer, if you never heard it could cause emphysema, why tell people to quit? now, interestingly, back in the 1980s, mr. goveia did tell you that he heard on the news that smoking cigars and pipes could cause lip cancer. so what did he do? he broke his pipes, he threw all his cigars away, and he never smoked again. the plaintiff wants you to believe that he and his wife missed all the news reports, public service 3637 announcements, and other information that cigarette smoking causes disease. well, dr. burns told you that the 1964 surgeon general report was one of the biggest public health stories of the 20th century. how did they miss it all? well, mr. mitnik says it is defendants' fault. mr. mitnik said that r.j. reynolds and philip morris hid all the information, and so mrs. goveia had no reason to know that smoking could be dangerous. so that takes us to question 3: what, if anything, did the defendants do wrong that caused mrs. goveia to smoke and get sick? i told you in opening statement that the evidence would be that mrs. goveia always had access to the information she needed to make an informed decision whether to smoke or quit smoking. members of the jury, not one single person ever suggested that mrs. goveia was confused about the risks of smoking. not one single person ever suggested that philip morris or r.j. reynolds tricked her into becoming a smoker. in fact, the evidence was the opposite. the evidence was -- the information was available. 3638 and i want you to think about what you heard during trial. dr. burns told you that it has been known for a very long time that smoking can be bad for you. he told you that a hundred years ago people were referring to cigarettes as coffin nails and to cigarette smokers as nicotine fiends. you heard in 1899 the state of florida actually banned the sale of cigarettes in part because smoking could be bad for you. here was a 1906 florida health notes i showed to dr. burns, so over a hundred years ago. "today, the cigarette is looked upon by all smokers as the very worst form of tobacco addiction." that was july of 1906 talking about cigarettes being the worst form of addiction. 1912, florida health notes, referred to cigarettes as coffin nails. "every time you light a cigarette, it is another nail in your coffin." 1938, time magazine -- this was when mary goveia was 14 years old -- specifically had an article referring to cigarettes as coffin nails. dr. burns told you in the 1930s and 1940s and 1950s that reader's digest repetitively ran articles on smoking and disease. he told you that reader's 3639 digest was one of the most popular magazines in the country. well, here's an article from 1941, the year after john and mary goveia met. it is written by gene tunney, the former heavyweight boxing champion of the world. "nicotine knockout or the slow count: the cause of most of the trouble is of course nicotine. the powerful poison is the source of all the pleasure derived from smoking." 1941. here's one from two years after they were married. "cancer by the carton. recent medical researches on the relationship of smoking and lung cancer." as you can see, members of the jury, right around the time that mr. and mrs. goveia got married, right here in 1950, studies were being published that reported on the link between cigarette smoking and lung cancer. remember i talked with burns about the epidemiological studies, both the retrospective ones that looked backwards and prospective ones that looked forward in 1950. you heard about the 1953 mouse skin-painting test. that is where they shaved the backs of mice and they painted tobacco tars on and they produced 3640 skin tumors. it was recorded in a medical journal. and here's how it was in life magazine, an oversized pictorial magazine, one of the most popular magazines in the world. "smoke gets in the news. doctor reports tobacco tar induces mouse cancer, note rise in cigarette use and human lung cancer." and let me tell you, we know for a fact that these studies were getting a lot of attention and people were talking about them because in june of 1954, four years after the goveias married, the gallup company conducted a national poll where they asked the question: have you heard or read anything recently to the effect that cigarette smoking may be a cause of cancer of the lungs? ninety percent said yes. how many questions can you ask, you know, a group of people these days and get ninety percent to say yes? this was 1954 when mary goveia is 30 years old. ten years later in 1964, the surgeon general of the united states published his landmark report announcing to the world that cigarette smoking was a proven cause of cancer in men. the data for women, though less extensive, points in the same direction. now, i want you to think about that. is not 3641 that interesting? plaintiff tells you that by the 1950s, the defendants should have known that cigarette smoking causes every disease on the face of the earth. yet in 1964, with the epidemiological studies, with the mouse skin-painting studies, the surgeon general said the data was not extensive enough to even reach the judgment that smoking causes lung cancer in women. think about that. plaintiff's own experts told you this report was a big deal and got a ton of publicity. as i mentioned, dr. burns told you it was one of the top public health stories in the last 100 years. it was the lead story on nightly news; it was on the front page of newspapers; it was on the cover of national magazines. people were talking about it and talking about it big time some of you may remember that there were only three television stations back then: cbs, abc, and nbc here's how the story was covered on cbs news with harry reasoner. queue it up. (a video clip was played and transcribed by the court reporter to the best of her ability as follows:) 3642 "unidentified speaker: this is a cbs news extra on smoking and health; the findings of the surgeon general's committee. "unidentified speaker: almost from the moment that cigarettes were introduced, they were attacked. but the attacks took a new turn ten years ago and culminated in today's report by the surgeon general's committee. "this, in summary, is what the committee says: cigarette smoking is a major cause of lung cancer in men, and data on women smokers points the same way. cigarette smoking is a significant cause of cancer of the larynx and probably the most important cause of chronic bronchitis. cigarette smoking may be related to other lung diseases. "male smokers have a much higher death rate from heart disease, although it is not proven that smoking is the cause. "on the question of filters, the committee said there is no evidence they do any good, but it did not exclude the possibility that an effective filter might be developed. "in short, the committee said, 'if you smoke cigarettes, you increase your chances of dying early. the sooner you start, the more you smoke, 3643 the more you inhale, the worse your chances are.' "the surgeon general's committee presented its report at a news conference in washington. "unidentified speaker: after long and exhaustive deliberations, the committee reached the overall judgment that cigarette smoking is a health hazard of sufficient importance to the united states to warrant remedial action. "this overall judgment was supported by many converging lines of evidence, as well as by data indicating that cigarette smoking is related to higher death rates in a number of disease categories. "more specifically, the committee states on page 61 of the report, and i quote, 'in view of the continuing and mounting evidence from many sources, it is a judgment of the committee that cigarette smoking contributes substantially to mortality from certain specific diseases and to the overall death rate.' "unidentified speaker: cigarettes have been an intimate and reassuring companion. the familiar slogans, the familiar packages have been a part of our lives. it is like being told that an old friend had all along been betraying you. in a case like 3644 that, you give the old friend every possible chance before you finally decide to believe what you have been told, and maybe even then, you give him a chance to reform. "in this kind of a country, it comes down to you, whether you like it or not. no one is going to forbid an adult to smoke. and it is now quite clear that no one is going to tell him it is good for him either. the decision is his, the decision and the health that may depend on it. "this is harry reasoner. goodnight." (the video clip was ended.) mr. cofer: throughout this case, plaintiff has told you defendants said that smoking was not addictive, was not an addiction. well, let us see what the surgeon general said in 1964. the surgeon general said that smoking was more accurately characterized as a habit and not an addiction. and the reason why is, the definition at the time -- the world health organization's definition at the time required that the substance be intoxicating. and cigarette smoking, unlike alcohol, cocaine, heroin, is not intoxicating. and you heard it was not until 24 years later in 1988 that the surgeon general adopted a different 3645 definition, dropped the requirement of addiction, and then said, okay, it is now an addiction. but i want you to remember something else. in 1964, when the surgeon general called it a habit, he was very clear to say: correctly designating the chronic use of tobacco as habituation rather than addiction carries with it no implication that the habit may be broken easily. no one was saying it is easy to quit smoking. and it did not matter whether you called it an addiction or a habituation. the point is the definition, the medical definition at the time, the surgeon general said it is not an addiction. what is more, dr. burns told you that even today in 2014, mental health professionals do not like to use the word "addiction" because of its uncertain definition and its negative connotation. now, as a result of the surgeon general's report, congress got involved and the first warning label went on the packs. this was 1966. congress told the companies exactly what the warning would say, how big it would be, and where it would be located on the cigarette pack. now, today that looks pretty mild. but, you know, to take a cue from mr. mitnik, if you put 3646 yourself back in time, there were no warnings on coffee. there were no warnings on soft drinks. there were no warnings on alcohol. this was a big deal. so this warning went on every pack of cigarettes sold from january 1st, 1966. three years later in 1970, the warning label changed, making it stronger. the 1970 label said: "warning: the surgeon general has determined that cigarette smoking is dangerous to your health." for the next 15 years, every cigarette that mary goveia smoked came from a package that had that warning label on the pack. now, dr. burns admitted that in 1981, clear back in 1981, dr. burns gave a speech to the american lung association where he said 95 percent of people were thoroughly aware of the risks of smoking and ninety percent realized that their smoking was harming their health. but it is plaintiff's position that neither he nor his wife had any idea smoking could be bad until a decade later, until the 1990s. members of the jury, i told you in opening statement that the evidence would be that 1985 was a very important year in this case. the warning changed. 3647 now, in his closing argument, mr. mitnik said that the companies continued to hide the fact that if you quit smoking you reduce your risk. he said that was something they should have told mary goveia so she would have known she could have quit. well, beginning october 12th, 1985, the warning was on the pack that specifically said, "quitting smoking now greatly reduces serious risks to your health." right here, 1985, about the time that john and mary goveia moved to florida. but the warning said something else too. did not say may be harmful, did not say is dangerous, it said: "surgeon general's warning: smoking causes lung cancer, heart disease, emphysema, and may complicate pregnancy." and dr. burns told you that emphysema is synonymous with copd. it is the same thing. so from 1985 through the rest of mary goveia's life, there were warnings on packages that said two things: quitting smoking now greatly reduces serious risks to health and smoking causes the very disease that she would later develop and die from. and, members of the jury, the surgeon general's warnings was not the only information mary goveia had in the mid-1980s that cigarette smoking could 3648 cause copd, could harm the lungs. paul downing, mary goveia's nephew, told you that his mother, kathleen, was mary goveia's older sister and that kathleen and mary were close. and he told you that after his mother had copd, mary came up to visit in about '86 or '87. remember, all of mary goveia's brothers and sisters were smokers. do you really think that when mary goveia went up to see her sister after her sister was sick with copd they did not talk about her copd? kathleen was not the only member of mary goveia's family who was experiencing lung problems in the 1980s. in 1987, debbie goveia moved to florida. she left her husband, and she and her twin boys moved in with her parents, with mr. and mrs. goveia. and shortly after she arrived to orlando in 1987, mary goveia came down with pneumonia. and, remember, she told you it was really bad and she was admitted to the florida hospital. and she was treated by dr. faisal fakih, who is a local lung doctor. mr. goveia told you that in 1987 was when he and his wife first met dr. fakih. they met him when they were visiting their daughter, debbie, in the 3649 hospital where she was being treated for emphysema. dr. fakih later became mrs. goveia's pulmonologist. he was the doctor that took care of her the rest of her life. debbie testified that dr. fakih saved her life and she is sure he told her to quit smoking because, quote, "pulmonologists hate smoking." do you really think that when mary goveia visited her husband -- visited her daughter in the hospital in 1987 when she was being treated for pneumonia by dr. fakih that she did not know that the doctor told her daughter to quit smoking because smoking was harming her daughter's lungs? and that was not the only information that mrs. goveia had in the 1980s that smoking could be dangerous. because you remember, mr. goveia read somewhere or heard on the news that smoking a pipe could cause lip cancer. so he broke his pipes, threw away his cigars, quit smoking in one second, and never smoked again. why did he quit? because he did not want to run the risk of getting cancer from smoking. now, these warnings and these experiences are critically important in this case, and here's why: because it is undisputed that if a smoker quits 3650 smoking before she gets significant copd, she will not go on to get it, at least not from smoking. remember, there is a chart from the 2010 surgeon general's report that we showed you with dr. burns. and what dr. burns told you was that the more a person smokes and the longer she smokes, the worse her copd will get and the worse her symptoms will get. but when a person stops smoking, the progression of her copd slows and her loss of lung function goes back to that of a never-smoker. that is one of the reasons why doctors tell smokers to quit. and this is critical in this case. if you look at it, see the middle chart, if someone stops smoking at age 50, look what happens to their lung function. they never get to the point where they have disability or death from copd. even if you smoke all the way to 65 and you are disabled and stop, it gets better and you get years back. mr. mitnik [sic] told you that his wife had no health problems until she was diagnosed with copd. mr. goveia testified that his wife's health was perfect. he said that it was perfect when she lived in massachusetts and that she was a healthy, healthy woman right up until the 1990s. 3651 well, if that is true -- and dr. burns told that to you too -- and if they are right, then if mrs. goveia would have quit smoking when the warnings went on the pack in 1985 that said quitting smoking now greatly reduces serious risks to your health and smoking causes emphysema, and when she went and visited her sister kathleen in massachusetts who was already suffering with copd, and when she visited her daughter in the hospital, at florida hospital in 1987, when she was recovering from very severe pneumonia, and when her husband quit smoking cigars and pipes when he heard they could cause lip cancer, if it is true that she did not have significant copd at that point, had she quit when she had that information, we would not be here. but as you know, she did not quit. in fact, when her husband quit smoking, she did not try to quit. okay. i want to talk to you a little bit about some of the documents that you have seen throughout this trial and that mr. mitnik showed you this morning. you may recall i told you in opening statement that if you look back over the 60 years, the last 60 years at the millions of pages of documents written 3652 by the thousands of employees of philip morris and other companies, i told you they said some dumb things. i told you they said things like smoking was not a proven cause of disease and smoking was not addictive. i told you they hung their hats on too many technical distinctions. i told you they hung on to those views for way too long. but i want you to think about how plaintiff showed you those documents. they literally took snippets out of context from a series of documents written 30 and 40 and 50 years ago. mr. mitnik: objection, your honor. i object because of the comment about counsel. the court: sustained. mr. cofer: i apologize. i apologize. and when i say "counsel," i mean plaintiff. because everyone knows the parties are represented by counsel. i have the privilege and responsibility of representing my client, just like mr. prysock and mr. mitnik have the privilege and responsibility of representing their client. so if i say "counsel," i apologize. i mean plaintiff. so i want you to think about how plaintiff showed you these documents. they took snippets out of context from documents that were written 30 and 3653 40 and 50 years ago and they strung them together and they did not even try to tie them in to decisions that mary goveia made or to this case. and they did not tell you the full story either. and let me give you just a couple of examples. remember they showed you a 1961 philip morris r&d memo that had a partial list of compounds in cigarette smoke also identified as carcinogens. and on direct examination, plaintiff tried to leave you with the impression that philip morris knew something that the surgeon general did not. well, it was not until cross-examination that you learned that these compounds came from the public literature. this information was available to the surgeon general, any scientist, anyone who wanted to look. but plaintiff also tried to suggest that philip morris did not share this information with the surgeon general. and then i showed you that, actually, seven months before the 1964 surgeon general's report, philip morris sent them a list of the compounds and the carcinogens in cigarette smoke. philip morris did not hide this information. they said, here's a list of the constituents of cigarette smoke including polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, 3654 nitrosamines, ammonia, metals, arsenic. what they said is, we do not think they are present in large enough amounts to be harmful. you remember i talked with dr. henningfield about something called dose/response. and you remember we told you there are carcinogens in the air we breathe and we are breathing right now. there is carcinogens in the water we drink. there is carcinogens in the food we eat. but unless you ingest enough of those carcinogens, they never cause problems. here's another example. on closing argument, mr. mitnik said -- talked about the power of nicotine addiction is the secret ingredient that the companies kept secret. he said that we were selling a drug that was addictive and kills and did not tell anybody. well, frankly, that is just nonsense. the 1906 florida health notes referred to cigarette smoking as the worst form of tobacco addiction. dr. henningfield told you it has been known since the early 1900s that smokers smoke for the pharmacological effect of nicotine. mr. -- dr. burns, mr. prysock -- mr. mitnik, in his closing, showed you excerpts from a few 3655 documents, and plaintiff suggests that philip morris was trying to hide the fact that people smoked for nicotine. and then i showed you the speech. this was a public speech given by bill dunn, a researcher at philip morris, where he said that people smoke for nicotine. this was 1972. after the speech, he gave an interview to the newspaper, sunday edition, where he said people smoke for nicotine. and then after the speech and after the interview, he published a book that said people smoke for nicotine. if philip morris were trying to hide the fact that nicotine is an important reason why people smoke, they certainly chose an odd way to do it. and, incidentally, dr. dunn's book has been published by the surgeon general in several cited -- not published. cited in several of the surgeon general reports, including the 1988 surgeon general's report that dr. henningfield edited on nicotine addiction, which you did not see, the speech, the interview, or the book until cross-examination. why not? one last example. today in closing argument, mr. mitnik referred to this document and he showed 3656 you this document during direct examination. 1964, a couple weeks after the surgeon general's report, george weissman, employee of philip morris, says, "however, at some point, reflecting the same seriousness with which we met the report, we must in the near future provide answers which will give smokers a psychological crutch and a self-rationale to continue smoking." well, that sounded really bad; right? but what you did not learn until cross-examination is that george weissman did not make up the term "psychological crutch." it was in the 1964 surgeon general's report under the beneficial effects of tobacco. quote, "the drive to use tobacco being fundamentally psychogenic in origin has the same basis as other drug habits and in a large fraction of the american population appears to satisfy the total needs of the individual for a psychological crutch." and it was not until cross-examination that you saw the last paragraph of mr. weissman's memo. in closing, the main essence of the report and the publicity to me is that it has still left smoking on an individual basis, the individual's own choice of the psychological benefit versus the alleged hazard. anything that impinges on the right 3657 of the individual to make this choice is contrary to our most basic traditions. george weissman did not invent the term "psychological crutch," and he used the term to talk about the psychological benefits, people weighing on an individual basis the benefits of them to smoking versus the risks of smoking. you also saw some articles and some video clips where employees of philip morris and tobacco institute and other companies said they did not believe that smoking was a proven cause of lung cancer. but to put that in context, let us -- it is important to know why they said that. the companies never denied that smoking was statistically associated with cigarette smoking. their position was, however, that statistics alone cannot prove causation. and the reason why they took that position is eighty percent of smokers never get lung cancer and nonsmokers get lung cancer too. so smoking is not a necessary and sufficient cause of lung cancer because you can get it if you never smoked and eighty percent of people smoke and never get it. so the company said, come on. something else must be going on. 3658 now, those are technical arguments. i admit they are technical arguments and they are not very convincing. and i'll tell you, looking back, you will see it and you go, "what were those guys saying?" but here's the point: unless plaintiff proves that mrs. goveia saw or heard those statements and they affected her decisions in some way, they have absolutely nothing to do with this case. the issue is not whether the company said some dumb things. the issue is whether they said something that fooled mrs. goveia or caused mrs. goveia to begin and continue smoking. and where was the evidence at, members of the jury? i want to talk about light cigarettes. mr. mitnik talked about light cigarettes and filters and argued they were a fraud because the companies knew people could change the way they smoke to get more nicotine. well, the fact that people could change the way they smoke to get more nicotine has been well known since the 1960s. you remember i told you -- showed you the statements that the companies made to the ftc when the ftc was considering smoking machines. and remember dr. henningfield said, well, the companies 3659 were not telling us anything we did not know. we knew people could change the way they smoke. compensation was not a secret. you remember i showed you the consumer reports article. this is from may of 1976. "less tar, less nicotine, is that good?" where it says, "nicotine is an addicting agent for most smokers. when cigarette smoke contains less nicotine than such smokers are accustomed to, their bodies simply contrive ways to get more smoke." and they described in detail the various ways that many people compensate. the 1979 and '81 surgeon general reports specifically talked about compensation. yet even knowing that, the surgeon general said in 1971 and 1975 and 1979 and 1981 that if smokers were not going to quit, they should smoke lower-tar cigarettes. and why did the public health community, the surgeon general say that? is because 50 epidemiological studies reported that people who smoked filter and low-tar cigarettes had lower lung cancer rates. you remember i showed you the video of the american cancer society that reported in 1975 based 3660 on a 12-year study of tens of thousands of smokers, low tar and nicotine users had a 26 percent less chance of getting lung cancer than those who smoked high-tar cigarettes. that is what the epidemiology showed. and why? why is that true? because not every smoker compensates. and compensation is not always complete. dr. henningfield told you that. you remember i asked him twice to make sure that it was clear. i said, "dr. henningfield, you believe that compensation is not complete. you believe it is incomplete." and he said, "yes, i believe that." he had a different opinion than dr. burns. and you may also remember that i -- he talked about iarc, the international agency for research on cancer. we were comparing it to the national cancer institute. and what dr. henningfield told you was in 2003, after he and burns and the public health community got all the tobacco company documents, in 2003, iarc published a monograph concluding that the evidence establishes that filters are safer on a population basis, and that is because people smoked their cigarettes differently. some compensate and some do not. and burns told you that if you actually 3661 get less tar and nicotine, that that is a good thing. to be clear, members of the jury, while the public health community was urging smokers to switch to filtered and low-tar cigarettes, they never said low-tar cigarettes were safe. they always said they were safer and they always emphasized that the only way to avoid the risk completely was to not smoke at all. mr. mitnik argued that the defendants' advertising fooled mrs. goveia into thinking light cigarettes were safer. he told you in closing arguments that in the '80s and '90s, mary goveia encouraged her daughter to smoke lights because they were supposed to be less damaging and harmful to health. well, you may remember that debbie goveia testified that at one point in the 1980s, her mother told her that marlboro reds were too strong and she suggested that debbie smoke marlboro lights. but debbie also testified she does not know where her mother got that information about lights. she specifically said she does not know whether it came from tv or family or friends. mr. goveia told you he thinks his wife saw a tv ad for marlboro lights and that is why she smoked 3662 them, but you know that could not possibly have happened because all the cigarette ads went off tv and radio on january 2nd, 1971, and marlboro lights were not even on the market at the time, so clearly mr. goveia's memory was mistaken. members of the jury, there is no evidence that mrs. goveia smoked a particular cigarette brand because of an ad. debbie goveia testified her mother never told her she bought a particular cigarette brand because of an ad. mr. goveia never discussed any cigarette ads with his wife; she never told him why she switched brands; he does not know why she smoked any particular cigarette. so there is no evidence that mrs. goveia ever said that she bought light cigarettes or low-tar-and-nicotine cigarettes because of an ad. but here's the kicker: if you think about plaintiff's argument, it really does not make any sense, because on the one hand, plaintiff says that mary goveia smoked light cigarettes because she thought they were safer. on the other hand -- and she did that in the '70s and '80s. on the other hand, he said until the 1990s and she was diagnosed with copd, she had no idea that any type of 3663 cigarette was dangerous at all. and if mrs. goveia did not know that any type of cigarette was dangerous until the '90s, why did she possibly tell her daughter in the '80s that light cigarettes were less dangerous? plaintiff cannot have it both ways. either mrs. goveia knew in the '70s and '80s that smoking was addictive, that smoking was dangerous, or she did not. there may be some people who smoked light cigarettes because they were somehow confused about the risks, but, members of the jury, there is evidence that mary goveia was not one of them. okay. let us talk for just a few minutes about you smoking. why is plaintiff trying so hard to convince you that it is philip morris and r.j. reynolds' fault that mrs. goveia began smoking when she was young? well, because we know kids should not smoke, because we are protective of our kids. because plaintiff is asking for punitive damages in this case. and plaintiff understands that you smoking is an emotional issue and it pushes people's buttons and it makes people mad. but where is the evidence? where is the evidence? because the only evidence there was with 3664 respect to mary goveia is that everyone in her family smoked and, as mr. mitnik told you on closing argument, kids imitate what they see. with respect to philip morris, members of the jury, there is no evidence that mary goveia regularly smoked any philip morris brand until the 1980s when she switched to marlboro lights. there is no evidence whatsoever that she smoked philip morris brands when she was a kid. and there is simply no evidence to support plaintiff's argument that either philip morris or r.j. reynolds caused mary goveia to start smoking when she was a kid. so let us talk about the burden of proof. we talked about that in voir dire and we talked about it in opening statement. and i told you in opening statement that in this country, if someone thinks they have been harmed by the actions of others, they can file a lawsuit and they can ask a jury of their peers to decide whether they are entitled to recover. but they have the burden of proving their claim, and they have to prove it through competent, persuasive evidence. in this case, it is plaintiff's burden of proof. so i want you to think about the evidence the plaintiff has offered and the positions that he is 3665 taken. i want you to know, they called no witness who knew mary goveia before 1940. i'm not blaming them for that, but the fact is there is no evidence on that. and that is the period of time where plaintiff claims that his wife was already a lifelong cigarette addict. no one told you when she began smoking or why she began smoking or who she was with or what brand it was or when she became a regular smoker. there is just no evidence on that, and that is plaintiff's burden of proof. the only witness who testified about mary goveia's smoking decisions between 1940 and 1965 is the plaintiff, mr. goveia himself. and he testified that during that 32-year period, up until the '80s, he worked two jobs. he was only home between 5:00 and 11:00 during the week. he was only home six hours a night, that is monday through friday, during all that period. for 32 years, mr. goveia had a very limited opportunity to observe his wife's smoking. he was not there during the week when she woke up in the morning to know whether she smoked a cigarette. plaintiff presented no other evidence to corroborate that testimony. 3666 there were no medical records. they did not identify a single doctor who ever treated mrs. goveia before dr. fakih in the 1990s. and this lack of information is important because plaintiff has taken inconsistent positions about what mrs. goveia knew about the risks of smoking. the court: mr. cofer, one hour. mr. cofer: thank you, your honor. on the one hand, mr. goveia testified that until his wife was diagnosed with copd in the 1990s, they had no idea smoking was bad. on the other hand, he argues in the '70s and '80s she told their daughter to smoke light cigarettes because they were better. you cannot have it both ways. plaintiff also argues that mrs. goveia had no reason to know smoking was bad until the 1990s, but her personal experiences show otherwise. you heard about paul downing in 1986 or '87. mrs. goveia went to massachusetts to visit her sister who had copd. the next year in 1987, mrs. goveia went to the hospital to visit her daughter who was recovering from pneumonia. it is inconceivable that mary goveia would not have known that dr. fakih told her daughter, debbie, that she needed to stop smoking because it was harming her 3667 lungs. and as you also know in the late 1980s, mr. goveia quit smoking pipes and cigars. finally, members of the jury, the goveia family cannot even agree on what year it was that mrs. goveia was rushed to the hospital in an ambulance because she was having trouble breathing. in his deposition, mr. goveia said it happened before he met dr. fakih in 1992. at trial he said, well, no, actually, i now remember i met dr. fakih in 1987, but the 911 incident did not happen until '95 or '96. and debbie goveia testified to a specific date. do you remember? she said it was december 26th, 1998. it is a key fact in this case. to this very day, john and debbie goveia cannot even tell you what year it happened. finally, i want you to think about the two paid expert witnesses the plaintiff did call: dr. burns and dr. henningfield. neither one knew mrs. goveia. neither one made any effort to investigate her life or what she knew, other than just review the materials the plaintiff sent them. and both were listed as experts who would give case-specific 3668 opinions two months before they ever heard mary goveia's name. you heard that plaintiff paid dr. burns $4,800 a day for monday, for tuesday, for wednesday, for thursday, for friday, for monday, and for tuesday. dr. burns got paid $33,600 just for flying in to orlando to attend a trial. he is told you he is been paid between 1 and 2 million dollars in the engle cases alone. and in 30 years of testifying, neither dr. burns or dr. henningfield have ever testified in a court of law that it is their opinion that the plaintiff was not addicted. that is why plaintiff could name them two months in advance before they ever heard of mary goveia because plaintiff was comfortable with what they were going to say, no matter what the facts, because that is what they always say. dr. henningfield talked about design change in the cigarettes and how they had made cigarettes more addictive. he talked about reconstituted tobacco and expanded tobacco and ammonia and filters and ventilation. he talked about all those things, you know, that made cigarettes worse or more dangerous. mr. mitnik said, until they alter the product 3669 in laboratories to get it down into the lungs. that is when it all started. said people are particularly vulnerable when they are teenagers. do you remember one of the last things i asked dr. henningfield on cross-examination? do you remember i put that chart up from the surgeon general report? i said, "dr. henningfield, it is your opinion that mary goveia was already addicted by 1940. that was before there was reconstituted tobacco; right? that was before there was expanded tobacco; right? that was before there was ventilation; correct? that was before there was ammonia technology; right? those cigarettes did not have filters on them, did they?" and he said, "yeah." so you heard -- and dr. henningfield is an impressive witness. and you heard about his work and his opinions and heard about it more than a day, but then he admitted it, that those design changes and those design innovations he talked about had nothing to do with mary goveia becoming addicted because she smoked cigarettes that did not have them. he also told you that initially when these design changes were being implemented, the public health community thought they were a good thing 3670 because they would reduce the amount of tar and nicotine, and everyone thought if you could decrease what you are exposed to, you could decrease the risk. you may remember in opening statement i suggested to you that as you listen to the evidence, you should ask yourself, what does any of this have to do with mary goveia? well, what dr. henningfield told you was all those design changes had nothing to do with his opinion that she became addicted by 1940 because they were not on cigarettes. okay. let us look at the verdict form. lee, could you put up the first one? okay. so the first question you will be asked to decide was whether mary goveia was a member of the engle class, and there are really two questions you will have to decide. the first is: was mary goveia, in fact, addicted to nicotine, and, if so, was her addiction a legal cause of her copd? it is plaintiff's burden to prove both of these things. and if he fails to prove either, then the case is over and we all go home. so let us talk about the word "addiction." was mary goveia addicted to the nicotine in cigarettes? there is nothing in the jury instructions that 3671 defines that term for you. that is something you are going to have to decide yourself. you heard the definition's changed over time. you heard until 1988 the surgeon general said it was not addictive because it was not intoxicating. you heard the surgeon general uses a different definition now. dr. burns told you that he defines addiction as a loss of control and a chronic relapsing brain disease. well, if that is the definition, does it apply to mary goveia? the evidence was that during the 50 years that mrs. goveia smoked, she only made a handful of attempts to quit smoking. she may have quit for a day in 1956; she may have gone a day or a few hours over the next 40 years. is that evidence that she lacked control and that she suffered from a chronic relapsing brain disease, or is that evidence that she really did not want to quit? which is it? where is the evidence that mrs. goveia was really trying hard to quit smoking, but nicotine kept forcing her to smoke? where was that evidence? basically, plaintiff's argument is that mrs. goveia continued to smoke until she got sick; therefore, she was addicted. but that is an argument. that is not evidence. 3672 but let me tell you something. i'm not sure it really matters whether you decide she was addicted, because the real issue is whether it was a legal cause. plaintiff has to prove more than that mrs. goveia was, in fact, addicted. he also has to prove that mrs. goveia's addiction was a legal cause of her copd. and the evidence is that it was not. the evidence is that mrs. goveia smoked because she liked to smoke and she did not want to quit. you remember in both voir dire and opening i told you there is a difference between a cause in fact and legal cause, and i gave you the example of a guy that steps out in the street and gets run over by a truck. what is the cause in fact? he got run over by a truck. but what is the legal cause? you need to know more. you need to know why he got run over by a truck. did he ignore the warning light? was he texting? was the truck speeding? and so on. i want you to make sure it is clear that you understand the difference between a cause in fact and legal cause. and here's the definition in the jury instruction: "an addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine is a legal cause of a disease or medical condition if it directly and in a natural and 3673 continuous sequence produces or contributes substantially to producing such disease or medical condition so that it can reasonably be said that but for the addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine, such disease or medical condition would not have been suffered. in order for addiction to have been a legal cause of mrs. goveia's copd, plaintiff has to prove she was, in fact, addicted and that her addiction was so strong and so substantial that it can be reasonably said that but for her addiction, she would not have smoked and she would not have gotten sick. in other words, plaintiff has to prove that had she not been addicted, she would have quit sooner and she would not have gotten sick. where was the evidence of that? burns and henningfield told you all smokers, including addicted smokers, have the ability to quit. sixty million people in this country have already quit. burns and henningfield told you that the vast majority of those people, in their opinion, were addicted and had brain changes. where is the evidence that mrs. goveia was any different than the 60 million americans who had quit? 3674 members of the jury, there simply is none. the bottom line is addicted smokers can and do quit smoking every day. they quit when they decide it is more important for them not to smoke than it is to smoke. when mary goveia was diagnosed with copd and dr. fakih told her to quit smoking or she would die, she told mr. goveia she was going to do what she wants and she was going to continue to smoke whether he liked it or not. mr. goveia told you his wife was headstrong. she just did what she wanted to do and you could not tell her nothing. those were his words. members of the jury, the evidence is mrs. goveia always had the ability to quit whenever she truly wanted to quit. mrs. goveia smoked not because she was a helpless addict; she did not quit because she did not want to quit. dr. henningfield told you even today seventy percent of smokers tell their doctors they are not ready to quit yet. an addiction to nicotine did not prevent mrs. goveia from quitting smoking earlier; she was not ready. members of the jury, i respectfully suggest that the answer to question number 1 is no, 3675 plaintiff has not met his burden of proving that addiction was a legal cause of mrs. goveia's copd. and if you agree, then you should check "no" to question 1 and you should knock on the door and tell the deputy that you have your verdict. if you disagree, you go to question 2. and this asks: "was smoking cigarettes manufactured by reynolds" -- and a separate question, philip morris -- "a legal cause of mrs. goveia's death?" a legal cause of mrs. goveia's death. for the very same reasons that an addiction to nicotine was not a cause of her death, i suggest the answer to this question is "no" also. do you remember dr. koop's website where dr. koop said a cigarette does not light itself and jump into a smoker's mouth? the legal cause was that mrs. goveia chose to keep smoking and she chose not to quit. she chose to ignore all the warnings. she chose to ignore her doctor's advice, and she chose to continue to smoke. and with respect to philip morris, the answer is "no" for an additional reason. and that is, mrs. goveia did not regularly start smoking any philip morris brand until the 1980s when she switched to marlboro lights. and dr. burns told you 3676 that it takes 30 to 40 to 50 years of smoking before a person damages her lungs enough to die from copd. and dr. burns told you that mrs. goveia already had severe copd by 1992. plaintiff has offered no evidence that philip morris's cigarettes were a substantial cause of mrs. goveia's death, and i respectfully suggest that the answer to both 2 and 3 is no. questions 4 and 5 ask, "please state whether mrs. goveia reasonably relied to her detriment on any statement by r.j. reynolds or philip morris that concealed or omitted material information concerning the health effects and/or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes, and, if so, whether such reliance was a legal cause." in order to prove this claim, plaintiff has to prove that mrs. goveia reasonably relied on something philip morris or r.j. reynolds said or did not say. members of the jury, there is absolutely no evidence of that. not a single witness testified that she was confused about the health risks. john goveia specifically testified that his wife never told him she relied on anything any tobacco company said or did not say to start or 3677 continue smoking. there is no evidence that she ever heard of the frank statement or the council for tobacco research or the tobacco institute or tirc or that she was ever influenced by them. respectfully, i suggest the evidence shows the answer to these questions are "no." also, i would ask both before may 5th and after may 5th, 1982. the answer to both those questions, i respectfully suggest, members of the jury, is "no." if you think about after 1982 -- the court: mr. cofer, 45 minutes for the defense. mr. cofer: thank you, your honor. if you think about after 1982, the warnings had already been on cigarette packs for 16 years. for over a decade, the warning specifically said cigarette smoking is dangerous. again, for all those reasons, i suggest the answer to these questions are "no." the next questions asked whether mrs. goveia reasonably relied to her detriment on any statement that was made in furtherance of reynolds' or philip morris's agreement to conceal or omit material information concerning the health effects and/or 3678 addictive nature of smoking cigarettes and whether it was a legal cause. for the very same reasons that the questions to -- these questions before was "no," the question to these -- the answer is "no" as well. and that is because, again, mr. goveia told you, she never said she heard the frank statement, ti, ctr, or tirc. she never said that she relied on anything the companies said or did in her decisions to smoke. the next question is something called comparative fault. if you decide that both mrs. goveia and the defendants are responsible for causing mrs. goveia's death, this is where you assign how much responsibility each party has. and let me tell you something so there is no confusion. you never get to comparative fault unless you decide that mrs. goveia was a class member. this is a completely separate question. if plaintiff does not prove that mrs. goveia was a class member, then the case is over and you never get this far. but if you do get this far, here's where you have to decide how much mary goveia's responsible, how much philip morris was responsible, and how much reynolds was responsible. 3679 mr. mitnik told you plaintiff admits that mrs. goveia was partially responsible for causing her copd. so i want you to think for just a minute about what that means. it can only mean that mrs. goveia knew and understood that her smoking was dangerous and it can only mean that mrs. goveia had the ability to quit smoking in time to avoid her copd. because if you think about it, if she did not know that smoking was dangerous and she did not have the ability to quit in time, how could she have any fault? the fact that they admit that she is partially responsible is an admission that she knew it was bad for her and she had the ability to quit in time to avoid her risks. so if you get this far, members of the jury, i respectfully suggest that the answer is mrs. goveia is one hundred percent. and the reason i think that is because only mary goveia had the ability to decide whether she was going to smoke and continue to accept that risk or whether she was going to quit. the next question is compensatory damages. it asks, "what is the total amount of any damages sustained by john goveia for the loss of his wife's companionship and protections and for his pain and suffering as a result of mary goveia's injury and 3680 death?" i cannot help you with this. you know, you saw mr. goveia. he told you about his relationship with his wife. and if you get this far and you decide that mr. goveia is entitled to recover damages, then it is up to your collective judgment to decide what is a fair amount to compensate him for his loss. so that takes us to the last question, question 10. "under the circumstances of this case, state whether you find by clear and convincing evidence that punitive damages are warranted against each defendant." let me be clear on what you are being asked to decide. you are not -- as mr. mitnik told you, you are not being asked to decide an amount. that will be a different phase. the issue is whether by clear and convincing evidence plaintiff has shown that he is entitled to punitive damages. so do not spend one moment thinking about an amount. when you look at the instructions, you will see that they have to prove punitive damages by something called clear and convincing evidence, and that is defined for you. and it is a much higher standard than the greater weight of the evidence. with respect to punitive damages, you will see the evidence must be precise, explicit, lacking in confusion, and of such great...that it produces a firm belief or conviction without a hesitation on the matter at issue. it is a much higher standard. you have to be really, really convinced they are appropriate. and let me tell you something else: you have to decide, if you get this far, that punitive damages are warranted based on the conduct that injured mary goveia. mr. mitnik: objection, your honor. that is a misstatement of law. [#deleted objection dialogue#] mr. cofer: this is john goveia's case. this is not a class action. other people who believe they have been harmed have an opportunity to bring their own lawsuits. they have an opportunity to have their own juries. they have an opportunity to have their own counsel. so the question with respect to punitive damages in this case is you may consider the harm that... mr. weaver: 22. mr. cofer: no, it is not. thank you. and this is in your jury instructions, so i want to make sure you know where it is. "when considering whether to award punitive damages, you may consider any harm defendants' conduct caused mary goveia." let me repeat that again. it is very important. "when considering whether to award" -- "whether to award punitive damages, you may consider any harm defendants' conduct caused mary goveia." you may also consider similar harms suffered by other persons not parties in assessing the 3692 reprehensibility, or how bad the conduct was. but the first line, "when considering whether to award punitive damages, you may consider any harm defendants' conduct caused mary goveia." that is why from opening statement on, i said this case is about mary goveia. and as you listen to the evidence in this case, you should ask yourself, did it affect mary goveia? did it affect mary goveia? did it cause mary goveia to smoke? did it confuse her in some way? and so it is very important when you think about this that you think about, did it impact her, did it affect her, or did she have the information that she needed to make an informed decision whether to smoke or quit smoking? and let me say one more thing about philip morris. dr. burns testified that marlboro light was mary goveia's principal brand, philip morris brand. it did not come on the market until 1971. debbie goveia testified that her mom did not start smoking marlboro light until the 1980s. and you remember why her mom started smoking marlboro lights? her mom ran out of cigarettes and she borrowed one of debbie's marlboro reds and she liked the way it tasted, but she wanted a lighter 3693 cigarette. debbie told you, then, that marlboro light was the brand that she preferred once she tried it. debbie told you her mother was always trying to find a different flavor. the evidence was that mrs. goveia smoked marlboro light, philip morris brand, not because of something philip morris said, not because of an advertisement, but she tried her daughter's cigarette and she liked it. there is no evidence in this case that anything philip morris did or did not do caused mary goveia to smoke as a child. there is no evidence that she smoked philip morris cigarettes as a child. the only evidence is that she smoked philip morris brands regularly when she was in her 50s or 60s when she was an adult in the '80s. and plaintiff has failed to tie any of the evidence he presented to mrs. goveia and her smoking decisions. and he clearly has not done it under the clear and convincing standard. and i respectfully suggest to you, members of the jury, that if you get this far, the answer to question 10 is no. okay. basically, my time's up, and so let me just say this: this is my time to thank you for your service in this case. i told you clear back in 3694 voir dire that we have the best system of civil justice any country has ever known. and the reason we have it is because men and women like you are willing to take time out of your lives and come in and spend a couple weeks to help parties to decide a dispute they could not decide on their own. and you have been incredibly patient and incredibly diligent, and, on behalf of everybody, we appreciate it very much. i told you in opening statement that all i ever really wanted, i just wanted a fair shot. i asked you to please listen and give us an opportunity to ask our questions and to tell you our side of the case. i know that you have done that. and, again, it is an important case to the goveia family. it is an important case to r.j. reynolds and philip morris too. and thank you very, very much for your service and thank you for agreeing to serve as jurors in this case and thank you for listening to my closing argument. mr. weaver: mr. goveia, counsel. good afternoon. like anything in life, if you want to get better at something, if you want to attain a goal, there are certain standards you have to meet, certain thresholds you have to pass. if you want to learn a language, if you want to learn spanish or french, when it comes time for your final exam, you cannot go in and start speaking in german to the teacher. there has to be a connection. there has to be a connection between what your goal is and what you use to achieve that goal. number 1, please. put another way, plaintiff has burdens of proof. and i told you about this in opening statement. they are like glasses. they are not like scales. because since the plaintiff has the burden of proof in this case, on any claim, the plaintiff 3696 has to start with those burdens being completely empty. it is their burden to show you the evidence that is convincing. it is their burden to show you the connections. and they have to fill the glasses up beyond halfway in order to prevail based on the standard, the greater weight of the evidence. number 2, this is mary goveia's case, but they are john goveia's -- they are mr. goveia's burdens; they are mr. goveia's glasses. it is his case about her decisions. it is about her choice to smoke; it is about her choice to continue smoking; and it is about her ability to quit smoking. fifteen years ago in 1999, ladies and gentlemen, unfortunately mary goveia died. but in looking at what has happened over her lifetime, in looking at the facts and the evidence, the plaintiff still bears the burden on all issues. and, generally, those burdens break down into three issues. number 3, please. addiction, brands, and conduct. in each of these subjects, the plaintiff has to prove that an addiction was a legal cause of mrs. goveia's death, that defendants' brands were a legal cause of the death, and that there was wrongful conduct that was 3697 a legal cause of her disease and her death. it is the connection that the plaintiff has to make between the facts and the evidence. i also talked in opening about the verdict form, and mr. cofer just finished going through it with you. and if you look at the first nine questions, mary goveia's name appears in every one. in the tenth question, it talks about under the circumstances of this case. this is the goveias' case. every question is about mary goveia. let us talk about addiction causation for a minute. first it was up to mr. goveia to show that an addiction to the nicotine in cigarettes was a legal cause of the copd and the death. let us go to number 5, please. mr. mitnik talked about -- in opening about how mary goveia was trapped, trapped in addiction. you did not hear a lot about being trapped. you heard about being trapped in deceit, but you did not hear the same theme that you heard from mr. mitnik in opening. that is because the facts and the evidence are such that mary goveia was not trapped in a cycle of addiction. and what we have heard from the plaintiff experts is that dr. burns says any addiction to any substance can be broken. every 3698 smoker has the ability to quit smoking. number 6, please. and in this particular case, mary goveia smoked because it helped relieve her stress and anxiety, not because of an addiction to the nicotine in cigarettes, because it was her coping mechanism. the facts and the evidence show in this case, ladies and gentlemen, that she made infrequent attempts to quit smoking. let us look at number 7. mary goveia's quit attempts, i've tried to put these down -- and i would encourage you to rely on your own notes and your recollection of the evidence. but when we look at the quit attempts in context and in certain periods, 1956, the evidence is undisputed that because a newborn is delicate, she attempted to quit smoking. and you heard dr. henningfield indicate that that was powerful evidence that she was aware of the hazards of smoking. i asked him that question, powerful evidence. three or four attempts from '60 to '72. and after '86, we do not know exactly when she attempted to use the fake cigarette. dr. fakih tells her that she is going to die if she does not 3699 quit, but she does not choose to quit. and she bought patches and gums. well, if you take these quit attempts and you put them on a calendar of mary goveia's life -- let us go to 8. -- it looks like this: each of these white dots would represent one of the quit attempts that i laid out on the slide before. when you look from 1940 to 1999, that does not look like they are the quit attempts of a person that is trapped inside addiction. it looks like the quit attempts of someone who does what she wants to do no matter what. there was nothing preventing mary goveia from quitting smoking, and we know this because plaintiff admits it. plaintiff admits that mrs. goveia has some responsibility. so as mr. cofer pointed out, that can only mean one thing: she knew of the hazards and that she had the ability to quit earlier, but she did not do it. the evidence showed -- number 9, please. -- how motivated she was throughout her life. she was headstrong, she was intelligent, she was well read, she went to night school to get her 3700 beauty license. she dealt with the uncertainty of a son who had juvenile diabetes. she went to a world-renowned clinic and learned about medicine, learned about how to take control of that on behalf of her son. she was the brains of the family business. some people smoke, ladies and gentlemen, because of enjoyment, anxiety, stress, or an addiction. but it was plaintiff's burden to show you that in lieu of an addiction -- that in lieu of those other reasons that the addiction was the substantial contributing factor and they did not do that. let us look at 11, please. the substantial contributing factor portion of the addiction is what i want to focus on. and what we saw in this case, ladies and gentlemen, was dr. burns and dr. henningfield, two public health advocates, come in, but you did not hear any evidence from a treater that she was -- that she was diagnosed as addicted. you did not hear any evidence from a medical record that noted that she had an addiction to the nicotine in cigarettes. you did not hear any evidence that she received regular, ongoing treatment. 3701 you had drs. burns and henningfield come in and say, we looked at the situation. we read some of the depositions, not all of them. dr. burns said, well, i did not do a family history. that is his way of saying, i only read what i needed to read, what i felt was important. not the whole context of the case, but just the facts and the evidence that plaintiff provided to me. let us look at 42, please. so who says that mary goveia's addicted? it is just dr. burns and dr. henningfield. and you heard dr. burns say that when someone is addicted, that is how you get into court. so he knows what to say. and in this particular case, the plaintiff knew he would say that, even before he had picked up the first deposition. i want to go to 13 for a minute. you know, mr. mitnik talked about the findings; at some point, if you decide that she is a class member, the findings will come down with a large noise. plaintiffs would like that noise to scare you into a verdict. but, ladies and gentlemen, the findings -- mr. mitnik: objection, your honor, to that comment. 3702 the court: sustained. mr. weaver: the plaintiff would like you to look at those findings and assume the worst. they want you to presume that those findings end up being liability. but the instructions, as the court read to you, indicate that the findings do not mean that there is liability on behalf of the defense. the findings do not provide you with that connection of the facts and the evidence to mary goveia. that was the plaintiff's burden. and when we look at the plaintiff's burden of proof, it is the question mark that the plaintiffs have to fill in with facts and evidence. they have to complete those chains to show that there is liability, and they have not done that. mr. mitnik talks about circumstantial evidence. he talks about inferences. that is another way of asking you to guess. when you look at the evidence in this case, there is direct, competent evidence that mary goveia knew about the hazards even before the warning labels went on the packs in 1966. that is direct evidence, and we will look at it before i'm done. but what mr. mitnik and the plaintiff has to 3703 do -- number 14, please. -- is they have to use evidence to show a direct, a natural, and a substantial connection between all of the documents they showed you and mary goveia. the plaintiff's burden was to prove to you that reynolds and philip morris brands were each a substantial contributing factor in the development of mrs. goveia's injuries; they did not do that. when you look at brands, ladies and gentlemen, the second hurdle that they have to get over, the evidence was very muddled. we heard from mr. goveia that brand-named cigarettes were very difficult to get in the 1940s because of world war ii. and he admitted during my questioning that she smoked multiple different brands. he remembers camels and lucky strikes, but he does not remember any camels or lucky strikes after the 1940s. and remember in 1943, he went off to fight in the war, service for which we are very grateful. but he was not around. so to simply jump to the conclusion that camel and lucky strikes were smoked during the entire decade is not supported by the evidence. that is 3704 asking you to guess. debra testified that mrs. goveia smoked only light cigarettes, but you may recall me asking dr. henningfield about more cigarettes. more cigarettes were the brown-wrapped cigarettes that were high nicotine and high tar that, according to debra goveia, she smoked. well, if she only smoked light cigarettes after a certain period of time, why was she smoking more cigarettes? mr. goveia told you that he just did not pay attention to the brands that she was smoking. l&m and lark were mentioned by debra goveia. l&m and lark are not manufactured by r.j. reynolds or by philip morris. so when you look at the brand slide -- number 15, please. -- that the plaintiffs showed you in opening, which they have changed from what they showed you in closing, there are problems. salem and kool, the menthol, you heard all of the evidence that mary goveia was in perfect health. if she was in perfect health, she never smoked those cigarettes because those are the ones that, on the one hand, plaintiff would tell you she smoked when she was sick. you cannot have it both ways. 3705 finally, ladies and gentlemen, plaintiff had to show you that some wrongful conduct was responsible and attributable to the defendants that directly impacted mary goveia. it cannot be just the manufacture, sale, and advertising of cigarettes. it has to be something more. but let us remember what i asked you to do in opening. 16, please. you have to look at the facts and the evidence and ask yourself, what does it have to do with mary goveia? dr. burns, again, he came here and said, i did not do a family history. his way of saying, i did not do all the work that was necessary of me. i only read certain depositions. i only looked at a portion of the evidence. number 18, please. dr. burns and the plaintiff want you to be angry at the defense. and you bet i'm going to show this, but not for the reason that mr. mitnik indicates. this is a slide that goes to the burden of proof. the plaintiffs had to prove that mary goveia reasonably relied to her detriment on some statement by the defense. there is no evidence of that in this case, ladies and gentlemen. none. 3706 you will have the definition. there is none. fifteen days after you came in for jury service, fifteen days, you still do not have anything that makes a connection between mary goveia and the documents that the plaintiffs want you to look at. when we look at those documents, though, they are snippets that the plaintiffs asked you to look at. and we know that -- number 20, please. -- because when the plaintiff talks about regulating or controlling nicotine, this was one -- one document that the plaintiff, in talking to dr. burns about, said, you are aware of these secret internal documents. and it was not until cross-examination that i pointed out this was a 1935 letter sent by the american tobacco company to people outside of the company. and it talks about rigid control of nicotine is an absolute prerequisite for a cigarette. same way with the tobacco working group. number 21, please. they talked about manipulatory control of nicotine, but this was in a public document working -- the companies were working together with the national cancer institute. 3707 use of special tobacco. strains of the tobacco plant. again, not a secret. and in terms of whether or not it results in disease, you remember i went back and recreated that timeline with dr. burns. number 22, please. with dr. rodgman, a highly respected scientist inside r.j. reynolds where we started with a reader's digest in the 1950s that talks about benzopyrene, a polycyclic hydrocarbon -- aromatic hydrocarbon, going all the way down to 1959. and you recall dr. burns telling you that reader's digest was one of those publications that would repeat what had been published already from other periodicals. dr. henningfield told you, ladies and gentlemen, that both reynolds and philip morris made efforts throughout the years to reduce the carcinogens in cigarettes and they worked to make a safer cigarette. but there is no safer cigarette. marketing was also a big topic, and i do not want to spend a lot of time on it, but if we could just go to 24, remember what dr. burns told you. smart people do not come to him for marketing and advertising advice, yet he was the one who sat in 3708 the courtroom on the 23rd floor and said, you need to believe me when i say all of these ads are targeting youth. but look at 25. santa claus, sports heroes, movie stars. they were not used uniquely by tobacco companies. it was the exact same type of advertising that was in a public domain. a reynolds or philip morris ad was no different than an ad for mobil motor oil. when you look at the evidence, ladies and gentlemen, look at exhibits 46 and 47. those are the two 1920s memos from r.j. reynolds that dr. burns showed you that started his testimony about youth marketing. if you look at the whole memo, it talks about trying to get men and women to buy cigarettes, not boys and girls. but look at the evidence, 46 and 47. men and women. that is what it says. i showed you on cross-examination -- number 26, please. -- that reynolds from 1980 to 1990 and at all points in time had a consistent policy that smoking was an adult custom. but for dr. burns and dr. cunningham -- or cummings, the gentleman who was on the videotape near the end of the plaintiff's 3709 case, they both want you to think that there is no advertising on earth that does not appeal in some way, shape, or form to youth. advertising, like the sale of cigarettes, ladies and gentlemen, in our society is legal. it is legal. dr. burns told you that in his opinion the only advertising that does not appeal to youth is for depends undergarments. his positions are not only unqualified, but they just do not make sense. all of the company documents that the plaintiff showed you were from when either mary goveia was an infant or she was an adult. in 1973, she was 49. in 1984, during the period of time that diane burrows was writing, she was 60. and, lastly, plaintiff's 53 is a single page ad from a gentleman named long to the ceo named horrigan. and when plaintiff showed you that document, they only showed you the first page. they did not even have it in their notebook in terms of what was attached. but i showed you in tab 27 that the attachment to that memo talked about adult smoker profile tracking and that it was not to be used for marketing strategy. why would plaintiffs show you 3710 only the front page of that memorandum when the attachment to the memorandum completely contradicts the theory that they are trying to advance in this case? plaintiffs want you to guess. they want you to assume that there is some connection. they talk about circumstantial evidence, they talk about inferences, but all that means is that they do not have evidence. let us look at 39, please. this is the direct evidence that you have, ladies and gentlemen, for mary goveia. these are her words provided to us by mr. goveia. she would say she is going to do what she wants. she is going to keep smoking like -- whether i like it or not. in the face of direct evidence like this, there is no reason to look at circumstantial evidence, even if that is circumstantial evidence. these are mary goveia's words. she did what she wanted to when she wanted to and for the reasons that she wanted to. briefly on cooperation -- number 30, please. -- dr. burns acknowledged all of these things, dr. clarence cook little, a distinguished tirc head, 3711 that in 1968, the ceo of reynolds wanted its scientists to push the tobacco and health work to establish a rapport and relationship with the government, that the tobacco working group was created and that they received letters from the tobacco working group and the department of hhs thanking them for cooperating and getting involved. and, finally -- number 31, i think. -- the five tobacco working group reports that were used published as a direct result of the industry cooperating with the government. ladies and gentlemen -- number 33, please. -- there is no evidence in this case that mary goveia's choices were impacted by any statement by r.j. reynolds or by philip morris; none. dr. burns and henningfield both feel that the public health community was deceived, deceived about light cigarettes, deceived about filters. but dr. burns just came in, he did not tell you that all of the 50 epidemiologic studies that were done have all been retracted. he just comes in here and he looks at history and he says, that is not the way it should have gone. the evidence just does not support 3712 it. and certainly the evidence does not support that mary goveia was deceived. number 34, please. would it have been important? mary goveia was intelligent and informed. but for plaintiffs to say that she takes responsibility, it clearly means that she knew of the hazards, she could have quit, and she chose to continue smoking. when mary goveia was diagnosed, did you hear anyone say that she said, "cigarettes have killed me"? did she say, "i thought that filters would save me"? did she say, "i thought lights were better so it was not a problem"? no, you did not hear any of that. you heard her described as disappointed. and she was disappointed, most likely, because she knew that her choices had resulted in her acquiring a disease. she understood that her choices were the cause. number 35, please. with respect to questions 4 through 7 on the verdict form, ladies and gentlemen, i respectfully request that "no" be put on every blank. 38, please. the court: about two minutes. mr. weaver: we talked about our wishes, our 3713 inclinations, and our passions. you have to decide this case on the facts and the evidence, ladies and gentlemen. you may not like my client. you may not like philip morris. you may not like tobacco companies in general. but if you allow your wishes, your inclinations, or your passions to get in the way of the facts and evidence, you are not making an objective decision. and, ladies and gentlemen -- 39. -- the direct evidence in this case is that mary goveia was going to smoke. she knew all the way back to 1956, before the warnings were on, that it was harmful, and she continued to smoke. 40, please. and that is why, ladies and gentlemen, at this point in time -- 40, please. -- there was nothing that reynolds or philip morris could have done to have prevented her death. only mary goveia had the ability to prevent her death, and that she is one hundred percent responsible for the choices that she made. the plaintiff has not given you any reason to second-guess those decisions. his wishes, his 3714 passions, his inclinations would like you to do that, but the facts and the evidence just do not support it. so when you retire to the verdict room -- to the jury room and you look at the facts and the evidence, i would ask you to render a verdict for the defense. thank you.