mr. mitnik: good morning. i want to again thank you on behalf of everybody for the sacrifices that you have made for this important matter that we need you here for, for -- and it is important to both sides that you be here. everybody knows this is a sacrifice. y'all were good enough to say yes, i will add a day on, and everyone knows that is important. it is important that you sacrificed, and we very deeply appreciate it. but we need people like you who are summoned here to sit in judgment in a case in civil justice. this is a case -- and we went through jury selection to make sure we had the people that would come in here and did not -- this is not a place of special interest. it is a level playing field and a place for justice, and we thank you deeply for your time. may it please the court? the court: yes, sir. mr. mitnik: i started out on -- whatever day it was, last -- when we started this -- with an opening statement, and i ended -- and you can turn the powerpoint on. and the last thing i told y'all in opening statement was this is a case about truth and consequences. we now are at the other end. i was laying out what we anticipated proving, we are now at the other end talking about what has been proved. and i hope that now it is clear why i said this is a case about truth and consequences in which these defendants would not tell the truth. not only would not tell it, they twisted the truth beyond recognition, over and over and over and on purpose, and for one purpose: money. knowing full well the consequences that would follow of which one of those casualties was this man's wife. that is why we are here. because it is now time for there to be consequences for those actions. this has been a long road. the engle jury sat back in '94 for over a year. case went up to the supreme court and came back down here, where now you have the instructions from the court. and you are taking at the top from that engle jury and we are proceeding on. and we are proceeding on for consequences, not just in part -- in large part because of what happened to mary goveia, but not just because of that, because the case expands beyond that. because we are also doing it to bring consequences to deter so that -- we know from the evidence that they are still finding ways to reach out to the teenagers and the youth and still selling a product unnecessarily that has addiction in it. and we are hoping, through you in this process, this legal process, to encourage, through deterrence, a change in direction. let me start with some of the fundamental principles and i want to walk you through some of the evidence and the law. the judge gave you what the burden is, and the burden is the greater weight of the evidence means the more persuasive and convincing force and effect of the entire evidence in the case. now, what it does not say -- as if we were in a criminal case, which we are not -- is that our burden is creating doubt creates an out. we do not have that beyond a reasonable doubt wherein creating doubt could create an out. we have this burden, which is a burden which is something that can be applied with common sense. a burden that says what weighs more -- is the greater weight? what weighs more? what persuades me more? what, in essence, makes more sense. so with that proper -- and i'm going to speak to you later when we talk about punitive damages, there is a different burden with punitive damages: clear and convincing evidence. and i'm going to talk to you about that when we get there, but for now, everything up to that point in time, that is the burden. not the criminal burden of creating doubt creates an out, but what weighs more, what persuades me more, what makes more sense. these are undisputed facts of the case. plenty of disputes here, these are not one or -- any of them. cigarettes smoked by mary goveia were manufactured by defendants philip morris and r. j. reynolds. cigarettes smoked by mary goveia contained nicotine. nicotine in cigarettes is addictive. mary goveia had copd and it was caused by smoking cigarettes. we are not fighting over what caused her death. did she die from smoking cigarettes? did she get copd and die from smoking cigarettes? that is not in dispute in this case. she did. mary goveia smoked cigarettes for 25 years before any warnings went on any packs and was deeply addicted. this is a different time and place. this is not someone who picked up cigarettes today. and we have to keep -- if we do nothing else here -- it is so hard, like i talked to you about earlier, to keep that orientation to time and place. i had a space in the other courtroom that i was saying that is -- that is today and let us stay out of there unless i go there on purpose. we have moved. i'll make this our space. there will be a time when we talk about what is happening today with the marketing to teenagers today. but the rest of the case it is not fair to be in there. it is not fair to mary goveia; it is not fair to justice. it was a different time in a different place. you saw the pictures. it was a time when we had those funny-looking cars. it was a time where people smoked everywhere. it was the social norm. for goodness sakes, there were ashtrays in the ob/gyn's office with pregnant mothers smoking and doctors smoking. we -- it is utterly unfair to mr. goveia and to the concept of justice to apply what we know today in judging this case. and i ask you to please keep that front and center. the statute of limitations defense. you have heard the judge tell you -- because there was talk earlier, i want to make one comment, and that is that the statute of limitations is no longer an issue for your consideration, so we can put that aside one hundred percent. we have got other issues to deal with; that ain't one of them. all right. the verdict form. class membership. that is the question. lawyers may pose hypothetical questions to frame issues in the case. i may do it from time to time. they are going to do it. they are going to say the question is. well, we can, as lawyers, pose questions to say here's what i want you to focus on, but there is only one person in this room who decides what the questions are and it is her honor. i do not. he does not. he does not. so when you hear the question is, i ask you to always keep in mind, use that as some kind of guide for persuasion to look at evidence. that is the question, the first question, and only questions come from that verdict form. was mary goveia addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, and if so was such addiction a legal cause of her copd? the answer to that question -- and i'm going to go through the evidence in just a moment -- is yes. the burden of proof, more persuasive, more convincing, what makes more sense -- was this lady addicted? what is the proof to the contrary? where is the evidence she was not? it is overwhelming, but it is certainly more persuasive, more convincing, makes more sense, weighs more. was the addiction one of the reasons that she smoked enough to get sick? was it a substantial contributing cause as opposed to some insubstantial or insignificant thing on the sideline? she got up first thing in the morning and had a cigarette every single day. it is not that tasty. all day (making inhaling and puffing noise) for 50 years -- or how many years every day, all day, when there is an opportunity, and right before you put your head on the pillow, suck one more down, and get up the next morning and start it all over again with more. that is not pleasure, enjoyment. that is addiction. does it mean addiction like it is the only thing going on? no. that is why we have law that is fair. it need not be the only thing going on. the question is: did it contribute? was it a substantially contributing cause? it is smoking in that frequency that makes no sense if you take addiction out of the equation. it just does not add up without addiction. for that much every day for that long to get -- to be told you got a lung disease -- by a doctor -- that could kill, and to keep smoking. can that be explained fairly and reasonably if you take addiction out of the equation? thirty to 40 cigarettes a day. is it that much fun? having oxygen on and still sneaking cigarettes out of ashtrays. a nasty ashtray with butts. addiction? do i need to say it for it to be so? a dignified lady by all accounts. you heard from the neighbor, a nice lady. did not curse. just a nice lady. sneaking down a hundred feet -- 300 feet, a football field away, to bum a cigarette from a young man so her husband would not know, and then walking all the way back. that is just -- she did not like it. yeah, she was addicted. was addiction -- the second part. was addiction a legal cause of her copd? a. a, right there, may be the most important little teensy word. it is the only one of the few words in the english, maybe the only -- one i guess is i. that is only one letter, but, boy, does it carry importance in this courtroom. a legal cause, not the legal cause. a. was it one of the reasons she smoked enough to get sick? one of the reasons? take it out of the equation, and does it make sense? does any of this add up? there is -- all of the evidence was that she was intelligent and strong willed. there is no evidence that she lost her mind. how do you explain this if you take addiction out? sole cause? nobody is saying it; nobody has to say that. a cause, absolutely. i would suggest overwhelmingly it was, but certainly it is more persuasive, more persuasive. certainly it weighs more, persuades more, makes more sense. so that i would suggest to you the answer is clearly yes, which brings her into class membership. and before i stop, this was -- a juror: ah, what the hell. mr. mitnik: i'm sorry. the court: let me just check in. just by nod of head, are you okay? a juror: yeah. mr. mitnik: are we all right? okay. this is just trying to show you in a demonstrative picture way what i've been talking about. addiction to nicotine was a legal cause in why she smoked enough to get sick. we know she got copd from smoking. and was the nicotine addiction one of the reasons? the power of nicotine addiction is their secret sales ingredient. this is the way it works. back then -- i would suggest today people do not realize it is a highly addictive drug they are ingesting every time they take a toke on a cigarette. every puff is a highly addictive drug they are getting. there is a reason they keep going out in the cold and the rain. there is a reason they race off airports into little smoky rooms. there is a reason they get up first thing in the morning and suck another one down. it is because it is the perfect driving force for someone in the business of selling product, because you get on it and you get physical tolerance which drives you to need more to maintain the effects of that drug. and there is no governor on this one. it is unlike any other addictive drug. any other drug -- cocaine, heroin -- any of them, you can only do so much. you end up making a fool of yourself; you end up getting arrested; you end up getting a divorce or getting fired; you end up vomiting or you end up with a horrible hangover. there is nothing to slow this one down. they call it lightening in a bottle, and they unleashed its full power through inhalation. they took a product that already had some -- a drug in it that could be addictive that people did not understand, but was it causing an epidemic of addiction and disease? because, in its natural state, it was too harsh to inhale and it just trickled up through the mucus into the mouth. and people -- you would hear of cases of people saying: i cannot give up my chewing tobacco, i cannot give up my cigar, but not this wave of out of control, run-amuck addiction until they altered that product in laboratories to get it down in the lungs. less harsh. okay? and when they got it in the lungs, now you got it, bam, to the brain, and now you have got the kind of addiction. when you converted -- when people converted powder cocaine into the free-base form, now you have got something that will sell your product. but because it does not come with the bells and whistles, you do not have to go down an alley to get it. you march down main street in addicted america. and the problem was it then triggered, from all that exposure after exposure after exposure, disease. an epidemic of disease. and when they found out, what did they do about it? buried it under a pile of an entire industry locking arms and coming together and pouring money into a campaign that went on for decades to create enough noise and distortion that it would get tuned out by many, many, many millions of people, particularly the addicted ones who had built in, by addiction, denial. and they did it full well knowing the consequences. and mary goveia was one of those mass of people that were casualties of it. it is not just mitnik up here talking about it. i heard in opening i was passionate. this is not -- what the lawyers say is not evidence. we brought you evidence. i may be stirred up about it, but the evidence is coming from here, not me, and i cannot create evidence by the tone of my voice. but it cannot be hidden in the light of a courtroom. who ain't for money? do we really want to tout cigarette smoke as a drug? it is, of course -- this is them talking in secret. it is, of course, but there are dangerous fda implications. their market would collapse without the chemical compound. we would all lose our jobs and our consulting fees. the exit gate from the market should suddenly open, we could be out of business almost every -- overnight. that is how they talked about it in private. that is not how they talked about it to mary goveia and the rest of america. we know how they talked about it to everyone else. you have seen it. smoking cigarettes causes copd and lung cancer. thousands of chemical compounds, including cyanide, arsenic, polonium -- whatever in the world that is -- 210, tobacco-specific nitrosamines, over 70 carcinogens. 45 percent of all long-term smokers die of a smoking-related disease. 45 percent. and it is not from tobacco. it is from unleashing the inhalable form of nicotine that drives profits through the ceiling. mr. cofer: excuse me, counsel. your honor, williams, state farm. the court: same ruling. mr. mitnik: that is what it is about: profits over safety. 42 -- 420,000-plus americans die every year because -- there were different numbers. 460,000 is in the surgeon general general report; dr. burns talked about 420-plus. depending on the exact time you have got different estimates. 460 -- or let us say 450,000 americans every year. right now. right now. time out. now we can talk about now. right now. and they are not dying from that nice american product out in the field called tobacco. we never had this before they turned it into the inhalable form of nicotine through chemicals and alterations. and it does not have to be that way. they can make tobacco without nicotine. they can take the levels down to where it is not addictive. they just will not because that is wherein the money lies. this is the surgeon general's report, 2010 -- 2010, right? mr. prysock: yes, sir. mr. mitnik: this is the surgeon general of the united states of america: highly addictive drug. addiction keeps people smoking. is it a legal cause -- a cause of why she smoked so much? the surgeon general thinks so. he did not speak it directly to her. he does not know her. but he is talking about this drug, and her actions tell you what you need to know about whether it had the impact on her that i does on so many. not everyone. some people are fortunate. people that smoke less, people that smoke four or five cigarettes a day, they avoid it. they may not get addicted. their chances go much lower than some people who get higher. some people can smoke more and be addicted but really not struggle that bad. this is not an all come, all react the same. but for the vast majority, when they smoke enough, particularly when they start as teenagers while their mind is still developing and getting hardwired, their chances of having a life-long struggle to break free and falling short and ending up dying from it are high. and that is classically who mary goveia was. additives and chemicals have helped make them more addictive. that is not just us saying it. filtered, low tar, or light: every bit as addictive and are no safer. you heard evidence in this courtroom lots of people today do not know that about lights. mary goveia sure did not know it in a different time and place when she switched to filters, because what is a filter do but take the bad stuff out and purify it. boy, you are really addicted. the idea of quitting is overwhelming. here. do this instead. what do they -- what is mary goveia got to do with what they did? there you go. and then when they get further down the line with this conspiracy of theirs in this -- this concealment of the truth behind the wall of confusion on purpose, more people are trying, profits are being affected, sales are being affected, public health has not given up. so what do they do? lights. you do not need to quit, switch. what is lights? less tar, less nicotine. safer. what is that got a lick to do with mary goveia? why are they in the courtroom with her? she did not switch to lights. no, she switched to lights. do you think this had an impact on mary goveia? by the way, mary goveia cannot come in this courtroom and tell you. she is not allowed. it is not possible. but actions speak louder than words. her actions can speak for her, and her actions of smoking when the conspiracy hit and the only logical thing was to fervently start trying to break free had the truth been admitted. so it was not some big controversial noise with a bunch of scientists that cannot agree on nothing. it is an admitted fact by the manufacturer. it is not a hot news story with microphones for 50 years when someone says cigarettes cause cancer. it is dead news. no one would show up. it is old news. stale. if it had been stale news because the jury was not -- still remember that statement: the jury was still out. it was not. it was only out because they made it so on purpose, knowing it not to be true. what were her actions? what were her actions? actions speak louder than words. her actions were plow full speed ahead. again, no evidence that she lost her mind, so why? and if they would come out and said, it is true. our products cause lung disease, copd, cancer, no question about it, rather than, we got the best and the brightest scientists in the whole world looking for it; and we do not believe it is there, but if we ever find it, by golly we will take it out or take them off the shelf. so in the meantime, go on enjoying it -- to the addicted smokers. it is your choice. that is what they told the world. the logical reaction, if it worked on you, would be to not start just with a burning desire to try, try until you get off and just keep it up. not hit or miss. if it did not work, that is what you would see. that is not what we saw with mary goveia. we did not see the try, try, try. like millions of others, it worked to a t. the master plan worked. people were not trying to quit. millions were not. some were. for goodness sake. you have heard the number of over that 50-year period like a million a year quit, but that was like 2 percent. the rest of them were not because it worked. is it just a big coincidence? her actions happened to be exactly as designed, to be precisely what you would expect if she was under the impact or the influence of it. and then switched to filters and then switched to lights. she followed their plan as if they said, we are going to draw this up, and i want you to give an example so we can, in the boardroom, see this is how we hope it works. they could just invite mary goveia. but, of course, it is got nothing to do with her. why? because she did not see the frank statement, and she ain't here to say what show she watched. well, the law does not require that she see a show or the frank statement. it does not require it. the instructions talk about inferences. you can -- and your common sense. sometimes actions speak louder than words and sometimes circumstantial evidence is more powerful than direct evidence. direct evidence is when someone says this is what i saw or did. circumstantial is looking at what the circumstances and what the actions were and saying what makes more sense? i'll give you an example. when i was younger and had all my hair, my daughter was young and she was not supposed to drink coca-cola before she went to bed because she would get all wired up and would not sleep. i heard her rattling -- but she loved to drink coca-cola before she went to bed. i heard her rattling around in the refrigerator. i'm out on the dining room table, working. and i hear her, and i think she is getting in the coke. i just hollered, i did not get up, i probably should have just got up, and i said, jennifer, you are not getting in that coke, are you? no, daddy. okay. i probably headed her off at the pass is what i thought. then i hear boom. what in the world? coming around the corner there is a big two-liter thing of coca-cola on the ground spewing everywhere. she is got a little nightie on her with coca-cola on her. she is holding the glass with ice, and it is foaming over. and i asked a dumb question, seeking the direct answer. i said, did you get into that coke? and here was the direct evidence in return: no. but the circumstantial evidence was overwhelming, and the circumstantial evidence in this courtroom is overwhelming: they got coca-cola all over them. so when you hear she did not -- she cannot come in the courtroom and say i saw the frank statement or this show, look at her actions and the circumstances and see if they make sense otherwise. and if the sensible explanation is this thing probably worked on her because it was a mass wallpaper, you heard, effect, where it was not cane pole fishing. they were not going door to door going (knocking noise), mary goveia, come out, we want to tell you what our pitch is. they had too many customers to do it that way. their aim was way higher. they went for the information flow of the united states of america to create where if -- if you lived through that period, you lived through the controversy. there was not any controversy; they made it all up. the controversy lowers the threat level. controversy makes it not memorable. it makes it forgettable. it makes it unimportant. it saps the strength of the truth. they were not cane pole fishing. they were casting a vast net. and it is no excuse to somebody caught in the net to say, well, you did not see it coming. you did not see the worm on the hook. what we know is she ended up on the deck with the haul gasping for air. have we proven reliance under the case law that i will get to you in a while? and based on the proper burden -- not a criminal burden creating doubt creates an out, on a civil burden what weighs more? what persuades me more? what makes more sense? yes, we have. addiction versus choice. you are going to hear choice. i want to pause for a minute before i talk about choice. i talked to you about it in opening. you have now seen the evidence. they used choice out in the field to sew the seeds of denial. while they are denying addiction and not coming clean about they are really in the business of selling an addictive drug, as they call it themselves in their own secret documents that were not shown to mary goveia or the public, they considered it an addictive drug. but their mantra -- and you saw it in the scare tactic document and others: -- it is all just a matter of choice. you just enjoy it. and that gave people the comfort. they did not know they were taking an addictive drug, but they did not want to say, gosh, i just cannot quit. that sounds weak. but you can say proudly: i just enjoy it. this is my choice. and it armed the denial that comes with addiction to the teeth, and they did that on purpose. it would be like going to aa meetings. the corporations all getting together and agreeing: run around the country as best we can and tell people when they raise their hand in an aa meeting: my name is and i'm an alcoholic, or an alcohol and narcotics anonymous: my name is and i'm addicted. they say, shh, sit down. you are not addicted. it is just your own personal choice and you enjoy it. oh, yeah. that is what they did. we are here for consequences. they did it to her. we cannot continue -- we cannot defend continued smoking as free choice if the person was addicted. this is them behind the scenes, worried the word addiction was -- what they knew to be true was going to get out and it was going to have an effect they did not like. two -- this is the surgeon general of the united states america: two factors refute smoking as a matter of free choice. most smokers start smoking as teenagers and then become addicted. refuted as matter of free choice. now, let me pause there. nobody is saying that she does not bear some responsibility. we told you from the beginning when we were jury selecting, we told you in opening, and the judge has told you and i'm going to tell you again: on behalf of mary goveia, mr. goveia has accepted some responsibility on her part. that is fair. but under these facts, when you look at what she was doing as a little girl when she started not knowing any of this stuff we have heard in this courtroom, when she went through the heart of that conspiracy, not knowing any of the stuff we have learned in this courtroom, when she switched to filters, believing it was safer like so many did, and switched to lights believing it was safer like so many did, and the way it was designed. and it was a sham. it was a filter fraud. lights were a trick. and she did all those things. and then deeply addicted, way down in the addiction cycle, she is struggling, cutting back. does that free her for her choices as a heavily addicted person? no. but those choices were constrained and effected. they were not natural choices the way someone naturally makes a choice to say this thing's killing me and i can just put it down. i'll just put it down. now, compare it to the choices that they made. now, compare it to the choices they made. these were not addicted choices. these were not a child's choices. they were not choices living under a storm of misinformation and deception. these were not choices made to believe that a product was safer than it really was not, unknowingly. these were intentional choices behind the boardroom made by an industry, and particularly these two defendants, for one reason only: to make money. knowing it was going to have the effect of spurring this epidemic on. so we are going to compare the choices. but does she share in some responsibility? yes. and any of these exhibits up here, if anyone's interested, those are the actual exhibit numbers on the top after ex 153 and they will be in evidence. legal cause. legal cause need not be the sole cause if it directly and naturally -- you can read it. you do not need me to stand here and read it. the part i want to point out: contributes substantially to producing such loss. did the addiction play an important role, or was it just some irrelevant sideshow? if she was not addicted to nicotine, would she have smoked that much? common sense. common sense. yes, she is a member of this class. and i want to -- on this -- because it is going to come up again, let me just cover it now. on this contributing cause, you will see the words but for: but for so and so. and then each time you see that, you will see: need not be the sole cause so long as it contributes. and i suggest that you use but for and not add the rest of the instruction in the definition. it would be like saying lightening and stop it, and it could be a lightening bug or a lightening bolt. so if we are going to do it, let us do it in context. the need not be the sole cause will be there with every but for. brands that she smoked. and her early brands: r. j. reynolds -- the lucky strikes, the camel. now, let me stop there. they have told you, and i expect they will tell you again: nobody knows what her first brand was. they do not. due to age and because that generation -- they called it the greatest generation -- they came up through the heart of this. they came up out of the great depression and through -- before this conspiracy and when everybody was smoking. the doctors and the policemen and the parents and everybody was smoking. if you did not smoke, you were the odd-man or odd-woman out. they say, you cannot show what you started on. well, due to age and due to the losses of that generation to this disease from this product, we do not have a list of family members or neighbors to come talk. but that is no obstacle to do it justice. you are not going to get an instruction where you got to know what her first brand was before john goveia met her. but what we do know is she was a daily regular smoker when he first met her at age 16. and her early brands included camel -- and primarily camel and lucky strikes. that is r. j. reynolds. that is a teenager. she smoked those filtered brands. look at whose they are. that is the evidence. that is the evidence in the case. now, is the evidence on this day she smoked this brand and then on the 12th of january of 1972 she changed? no. that is not the way it works. who in the world could remember that? but the evidence is here in a reasonable fashion. the only way it could be reasonably presented. and that is what her brands were: philip morris, r. j. reynolds. filtered then went to lights. philip morris, r. j. reynolds. clearly the evidence -- and what is the evidence to the contrary? where is the evidence she did not smoke them? i'm not suggesting they have to prove anything, but that is the evidence. there is not any evidence to the contrary. she smoked them. and it matters. you talk about causation. you talk about addiction causing harm. look -- this is just a demonstrative to show the difference. if someone is smoking a pack a month, just a social smoker, goes out on the weekends, that is how much they have on the left. now look at the wall of exposures that you get if someone is a pack-and-a-half-a-day smoker. look at the number of hits over a 50-plus-year exposure. it is 2 and a half percent less. yes. that is where the disease came from. it is also where the money came from. because, remember -- i'm not going to put the graph up again, but you saw that sales just taking off. dr. burns told you they created a market that did not exist. this is not just fighting from one person to another: i want your smokers. they created an inhalable nicotine market through marketing and advertising. they made it happen. and the sales went wild. and when the cancer scare hit in '53, they came down and they got together and said: what are we going to do? and what they decided to do is: everything in our power to make sure our customers keep smoking so our sales go up. the heck with what happens to their health. that wall of cigarettes is what kills people, and that wall of cigarettes is what creates all of the money. and that wall from addiction is part of why we are here hoping to deter, because you can make cigarettes without it. there is a business out there booming with cigars. turn it, from their own documents, from a need cigarette to a true-choice cigarette with a little encouragement. evidence of addiction. she began as a young smoker when the neuroplasticity of the brain -- you heard the evidence about how profound that is on most smokers. and the statistics is if they do not get them young, they do not get them at all. there is the reason. as they mature and get older, if the brain has not been permanently altered from catching it during the developmental stages, many will get free. but when you are that deeply addicted, this is the kind of situation you see: exactly this horrible story that was told here in this courtroom. she smoked a pack -- a pack-and-a-half to two packs, 30 to 40 cigarettes a day. that is unnatural if you take addiction out of the equation. inhaled 7 to 10 hits of nicotine each day. smoked as soon as she woke up in the morning. would smoke in the middle of the night if she woke up. in the middle of the night, mouth dry, i got to put cigarette smoke in my lungs. addicted? smoke all the time, every room in the house, during different -- whatever she was doing, kept her cigarettes on the bedside. more evidence of addiction. i'm not going to just sit and read all these things. her withdrawals were severe. a nice lady by all accounts would become unbearable when she did not have the nicotine that she needed. yes. i suggest to you this evidence that is just and fair answer. engle findings. once she is a class member, those findings come, boom, down into this courtroom, and they cannot be contested or denied. unreasonably dangerous product. material information not otherwise known or available. i want to stop for a moment because we share each other's -- these powerpoints with each other, and i know one of them they are going to -- r. j. reynolds is going to put up says cannot conceal something otherwise available. you are going to see this. and when you see it, that is what it looks like. i just ask you to remember what that says. material information not -- in -- remember the judge told you what material is: something that would be important enough to consider important in making a decision. material information not otherwise known or available. that is the undisputable facts found in engle that apply here. so i do not know where it was otherwise available, but that is not what the law of the case is. and they intentionally got together and concealed it for the purpose that people would rely on it to their detriment. in order to be the legal cause of the product: several claims. there is the product and the negligence claim. the product defect, which was unreasonable and dangerous. a product that has addiction in it. more dangerous than it needs to be and ought to be. there is the need not be the sole cause. on the concealment and agreement, we have this extra language about, quote, reliance. but, again, rely upon any statement made -- any statements made which concealed or omitted material facts about effects of cigarettes or addictive nature. and then you have the same language about contributes substantially. material fact is one which is of such importance that ms. goveia would consider the same as significant in her decision making. well, they hid this stuff. so we are talking about was the stuff hidden something that would have been important in making decisions? this stuff? we are selling a drug that addicts and kills. we have gotten together to hide it on purpose. lights do not work a lick. filters do not work at all. that would not be important? applying common sense. it is all just a big coincidence that she followed the master plan to a t? one other thing. they talk about, well, you start smoking because a family member smoked or a peer, a friend that smoked. peers and parents. and that is why people smoke. it is got nothing to do with our advertising. here's a question. this is one of those questions you would not find in the verdict form, but i'm giving this just to frame the thought process: why did parents and the peers start sucking hot smoke from a lit stick deep into their lungs? people go around a fire with smoke going -- if you are barbecuing, the first thing you do is (motioning). i'm not talking about blowing smoke rings or chewing. i'm talk about sucking into your taste buds and at the tongue. everybody just spontaneously decided to start sucking all these cigarettes down into their lungs and they had nothing to do with it? they were so effective in all of those ads in even promoting and teaching how to inhale, altered the product through additives, in flue curing, in blending, and all the things they did to make it softer so it could get it in the lungs, and then they demonstrated it though all those ads and suddenly everybody started doing it. and they would say, well, you only do it because of your parents. they engrained into the fabric of society. it was a right of passage to adulthood. one of the tragedies of how that worked is once you injected it into the family it would spread like a virus. in that time and place, it was not unusual at all. it was the norm for everyone in the family to be smoking. but they say, if asked, i did it because of the parents or i did it because of my friends. i'm sure that is a truthful answer. but what role did all that advertising and generating and creating to where that was such a thing that no one could do without it? and it spread through the families like a virus. and that is -- that is not a reason they do not face consequences; it is a reason they ought to face them. the fact that all those family members. just like mary goveia. tobacco companies created a new market, engraved it in the fabric, and it became a social norm, and what did mary goveia do? precisely the way they planned it. millions of smokers started out as adolescent smokers as the industry targeted the teens to fill the void. as replacement smokers -- their word; not mine -- replacement smokers for the people who were dying prematurely. millions of them started as adolescents just like mary goveia. actions speak louder than words. there is your reliance evidence. there is your legal cause evidence that these instructions from engle do apply to her. smokers most commonly switch brands to the leading brands as they were advertised more frequently and gained popularity. just like mary goveia. smoking the major brands as they became popular, that is where she would land. is that just a big coincidence? common sense. a majority of smokers fell prey to the filter fraud in the '50s, just like mary goveia. all just a big coincidence? let us apply common sense. many smokers based on advertisements switched to mentholated cigarettes to help smooth their throat when they had colds. just a coincidence? all just a big coincidence. many smokers were fooled by the illusion of safety created by lights, and switched rather than trying to quit or trying more and harder to quit. just like guess who? is that all just a big coincidence? most smokers were unaware that the cigarettes they were smoking were no better and quite possibly could be worse than the full-flavored ones when they switched. just like mary goveia. cigarette smokers were unaware that cigarette companies had gamed the system as to the lights, and what they were doing is trick the system so they could market it as lights. mary goveia thought they were safer. she did not know what was going on. most smokers are unaware that a cigarette has been engineered for addiction. they do not know that ammonia, flavor, and flue curing -- all these things made them more inhalable and, consequently, more addictive and dangerous. mary goveia did not know. big coincidence? this is evidence showing -- i'm trying to pile all this evidence up so you can see on the reliance of this case and on the legal causation, once engle comes in we have met our burden over and over. each of these are evidence meeting the burden. we do not have to meet it a hundred times. we meet it once and we have met it, but this is over and over proof. smokers had no idea that these companies were up to behind closed doors and manipulating information environment and the truth. absolutely no evidence mary goveia had any idea what they were up to behind closed doors. 95 percent of daily smokers who try, fail to overcome the powerfully addictive effects of nicotine. like who? all just a big coincidence? millions. millions. and one of the instructions you got from the court is you can consider not just the harm to mary goveia but the harm to others in determining whether punitive damages are warranted in this case. mr. cofer: objection, your honor. williams, state farm. the court: same ruling. mr. mitnik: millions were caught in the very same web of deceit that she was. is that just a coincidence she is one of them? just -- these are some of those pictures we showed you, just to help orient to the time and the place. this case is about mary goveia, but it is also -- now, i've talked about mary goveia. everyone said, well, we did not hear about mary goveia. i've been talking about mary goveia and used up dang near an hour. now we are switching to talk about the punitive damage phase and the other people affected. mr. cofer: your honor, same objection. williams, state farm with respect to the demonstrative that is on the screen as well as to others. the court: all right. overruled. mr. mitnik: cigarettes responsible for 443- deaths -- remember, i told you that number's a little different here and there in the evidence, but the point does not change -- accounts for one in five deaths in america. these are the early manipulations in the first cigarettes, so there is no mistake about it. when mary goveia picked up those cigarettes and when she met john goveia and was already a regular smoker, they already had all of these manipulations in it that were done on purpose for inhalability, which released the full power of this nicotine addiction. created a new market where one did not exist. you saw all these ads. inhaling. do you inhale? you cannot help inhaling, but do you inhale? gosh, it is just a big coincidence that everybody started smoking -- oh, sucking smoke in their lungs. it just happened. it was just a freak thing of nature. (a video clip was played as follows:) shall we just have a cigarette on it? yes. what cigarette do you smoke? you will be interested to know how the doctors of america answered that question. tens of thousands of doctors, doctors in all parts of the country in every state of the union, doctors in every branch of medicine were asked: what cigarette do you smoke? do you inhale? then you are better off smoking philip morris, and here's how you can prove it. light up a philip morris, take a puff, get a good -- do not miss the fun of smoking. do not miss the fun of smoking. mildness is a pleasure with pall mall. do not miss the fun of smoking . . . settle back and have a full-flavored smoke. settle back -- settle back -- with a marlboro. let us take a winston break. that is it. winston is the one filtered cigarette that delivers flavor 20 times a pack. winston's got that filter blend. yeah, fred. i tell you, pearl, winston is good smoking. sure wish you could taste it. i am tasting it, granny. (the video clip was ended.) mr. mitnik: targeted teens. you do not have to take my word for it. we are going to take their word for it. you can see it with your own eyes. does advertising work? this is a longer clip. i'm not playing this whole clip again, but i want to play a short part of it to make the point about people do not realize how advertising works it is indirect. but, boy, did it work on america and mary goveia. (a video clip was played as follows:) television advertising of cigarettes ended in the u.s. in 1971. but marlboro made a smooth transition to print and outdoor advertising. this successful transition was largely due to the depth of the marlboro country idea. over the years, marlboro smokers have recognized the quality of marlboro and its leadership decision resulting in continued growth. in 1955, marlboro sales in the united states were a modest 6 billion. however, within only one year, volume nearly tripled, and marlboro sales to smokers took off domestically. marlboro is far and away the leader in the cigarette industry, and the trend is continually upward. in 1990, marlboro sold more than 344 billion cigarettes worldwide. marlboro is marketed in more than 150 nations and territories, making it the most widely distributed consumer-packaged goods product in the world. as early as 1954, philip morris's management recognized the potential of marketing a filtered cigarette. in much the same manner, line extensions such as marlboro lights have taken advantage of changing tastes and attitudes of smokers to build the brand. marlboro was among the first to introduce a lights line extension, and this kind of aggressive marketing has paid off, as marlboro lights has grown to become a significant part of the marlboro business. (the video clip was ended.) mr. mitnik: taken advantage of. their own words. and bragging on the success of it. is it all just a big coincidence that mary goveia switched rather than quit to marlboro lights? it sure is what they wanted to happen, and it did happen. targeting teens. we went through these ads. they are going back into evidence with you. they will be back in evidence with you. you can look at them yourself. remember the one over on the left over here? be happy, go lucky. and that -- you cannot see it from there, but i'm sure y'all remember it. she is holding a prom invitation in her hand. replacement smokers. these are their marketing practices at the time mary was young. school days are here. popular to students. lining up the students as consumers. young-adult smokers have been a critical factor in the growth and decline of every major brand company over the last 50 years. that is 1984. you can do the math. that is right when she was smoking as a kid. all just a big coincidence, or do they belong here and are we right to pursue the consequences? replacement smokers. here's some more. induce a presmoker or nonsmoker -- the court: you are at an hour. mr. mitnik: thank you, your honor. -- to become a smoker or nonsmoker to become a habituated smoker. that was their aim. did it work? is there causation in this case? thousands -- some -- excuse me -- some thoughts about new brands for the youth market: realistically, if our company is to survive and prosper over the long term, we must get our share of the youth market. and remember, you saw the document where they were talking about youth, and then they switched it to young adults. young adults was the code, but we saw in the documents who it really was. it was teenagers. more of these documents. we just cherry pick a document. they are increasing. they are fighting amongst themselves. these two, r. j. reynolds and philip morris, are trying to figure out how to get those kids from each other. 14 to 24. there is the real one. that is their source. they do not have another fishing pond. it does not work once they grow up. here's the one on the right: primarily to 13-to-24-year-old male marlboro smokers. is that -- right here in florida. does that sound like young adults? many youngsters consider cigarette smoking to be an acceptable and socially desirable activity. because the health dangers of cigarette smoking are not brought home to them in an effective and meaningful way, many teenagers take up the smoking habit. that is the federal trade commission of the united states of america. we are in the business of selling nicotine. we are in the business of selling nicotine, an addictive drug, effective in the release of stress mechanics. remember stress mechanic. let me just stop for a moment. i was going to tell you this later, but we are going to see some more how much time they spent on stress. i suspect you are going to hear in defense that she smoked for stress. it has nothing to do with nicotine; it is stress. it is not nicotine; it is stress. it is not nicotine. stress is an essential ingredient in life, and it is an essential ingredient, you will see from their documents, that they studied extensively because it is one of the entire picture of addiction. addiction comes from a drug that serves something, some purpose, to the person using the addictive drug, and one of the primary purposes is the relief of stress. that is drug driven. when you see stress in someone smoking in stress, that is evidence of addiction, not evidence of some alternative explanation. in designing any cigarette -- you can read these. these are just what we -- what we now know. i'm going to move in the box. what we now know: 9 out of 10 smokers start by 18. 99 percent start by 26 or they do not become -- have started by. 2,500 youth and young adults become regular smokers. this is not ancient history. that is why i'm in the box. this is today. this is the surgeon general report 2012: at least a third of replacement smokers will die early from smoking. young people start smoking -- when they start smoking, the more likely they would become addicted to nicotine and the more heavily addicted they will be. many teens who start smoking plan to quit smoking after a few years but find out too late how powerfully addictive nicotine is. for many years tobacco companies paid movie studios to have their product in movies. young people imitate behaviors they see. these kids believe -- stay in the box. these kids believe today, and now i hear it is bad. there is no way to hide that. but you can hide the power of nicotine addiction and make it sound like sparkling water or something. so they think they are going to put it down and now you get them going. and most of them that think they are going to put it down, end up dragging oxygen tanks around. we need consequences. i'm told i need to move along time-wise. that is the plaza hotel. just a picture of the plaza hotel in 1953 when the conspiracy was hatched right there. hill & knowlton. this is -- they knew about the -- that it was causing the disease. make no mistake about it; they knew it. i'm going to show you in just a minute the hill & knowlton document in 1953 that led into the conspiracy in which they said, would not it be wonderful if we could be the first to make a cancer-free cigarette. how in the world can they say they did not know it caused cancer when they are saying, gosh, i wish we could come up with what? a cancer free cigarette. they knew. they knew. and here's what they planned. their own scientists, fortunately cannot break. wonderful if we could come up with the first cancer-free cigarette. but then they were telling the world, we do not know they cause cancer. scientists -- let the scientists do the worrying. go on and enjoy your life. this document, exhibit 62, will be in evidence. it is a very interesting document. one cigarette less a day, that would be maybe 40 billion. that is where their mind is. they came and linked their arms and came together. that is an important fact. i do have to pause one moment here. they are going to tell you how, gosh, everybody knew at the turn of the century that these things were killing people. what is the news? well, what are they panicking for and linking arms if everybody knew? did the cigarette companies miss that class? the frank statement. you saw it. they went public to everybody. started the beginning of effecting the high level they aimed for of the information environment so that you had to have live in a cave not to know there was at least a controversy going on so that it would not be sticking and be memorable to people years later because they muddied it up so much. confusion and doubt. we have been through these. i'm not going to stay long on these. these are their internal documents. they set up these front organizations. an industry shield. ctr was set up as a front. that is them talking about it. 20 years, single most important strategy was this brilliantly conceived holding strategy. well, while they were holding, people were dying. including mary goveia. they were not telling the truth. they know about the carcinogens and they know you cannot filter it out, but they are reporting to the surgeon general after they promised in the -- in the frank statement how they were going to cooperate with public health. here they are misleading public health. and attacking public health. saying what they are telling people -- saying it loud with big megaphones: it is a gross insult to scientific community to suggest these things would hurt you. no, play it. (a video clip was played as follows:) it was suspect from the start. hew secretary califano launched his antismoking campaign a year ago with all the zeal of a reformed sinner. and now, in an apparent attempt to bring some science to the side of his new evangelism, the former three-pack-a-day secretary told the surgeon general, prepare a new report. it is issuance and internal hew memo said, and i quote, would be a media event, close quote. turning a significant health question into a publicity stunt is an insult to serious science. america beware if joe califano ever gives up drinking or other pleasure pursuits, even the most intimate. (the video clip was ended.) mr. mitnik: that is -- remember they said that they were going to cooperate with public health. that is what they were doing. and remember the documents prove they knew it really was doing exactly what the surgeon general was trying to say, and they bragged in their internal documents how they got out in front of it and beat it to the punch. look at all the microphones. if everybody knew at the turn of the century, why is the media on there covering them talking about addiction or disease? why is it a hot story? it is breaking news because people did not know. and there is a huge difference between knowing and hearing. it is night and day. particularly with addicted smokers in denial. there is them bragging about jumping -- getting out in front of it, and then here's the mass of their efforts. this was not just a little drop in the bucket that they were doing by pooling all their money from all of those other companies and these two defendants to fund this conspiracy to conceive this web of deceit. our four speakers covered a quarter of million miles logged and nearly 800 appearances and put in 300 hours on the air. you saw some of what was on the air. you saw the scare tactic document where they go youth, youth, youth, youth. here's who is scared. they are scared that people are going to be deterred from smoking when the surgeon general tried to warn them it was as addictive as heroin. and it is. the likelihood of getting addicted is higher than other drugs. you heard it from dr. henningfield. it is. they wanted to diminish that and sugarcoat it down and mock it and trivialize it. why? for goodness sake, you might actually deter some kids and lose some money. they were steering clear of scientific discovery. these documents are in evidence. they want the subjects to be avoided, attempting to relate human disease to smoking. they do not want their people -- their scientists they promised were going to do this investigation looking into anything that was actually relevant to protecting the customers. just busy work or something. maybe even great research but not on addiction and disease. doubt and confusion. doubt is our product. that is them talking. obviously the word is confusion. psychological crutch. to give a self-rationalization to keep smoking. that is them talking. guess who did not get to read these? mary goveia. did they conceal things that would have been important to her? therefore proves deterrence -- excuse me -- proves reliance? absolutely. hardball victims of cigarette smoking. this is the industry's public relations sham. too, our position constitutes -- continues to mislead the public with a wink. unabashedly behind the scenes thinking what they were up to. but if this committee had not been formed, the cigarette industry now would be in a deplorable position. the tirc has been a successful defense operation. we are -- we are subject to the charge and may be subject to finding that we are making false and misleading statements. there they are in 1968 saying, in black and white, that they are anticipating they might get caught and they might be subject to a finding that they were making false and misleading statements. and it did not deter them at all. full speed ahead. does there need to be consequences? yes. doubt is our product. for goodness sake. these are cumulative. they are not as long as the originals. (a video clip was played as follows:) we want to be the detective just as much as the surgeon general or the ama. we will cooperate in every way. well, obviously a filter takes out certain tar and nicotine. i do not think the industry admits there are any bad elements. if there are bad elements, through our laboratories, through the surgeon general, through the ama, through acts of god and luck, we hope we may find them. and if they are found, they will be removed. we do talk to the question of whether or not cigarettes are hazardous. we do not believe that cigarettes are hazardous. we do not accept that. because when, as and if, any ingredient in cigarette smoke is identified as being injurious to human health, we are confident that we can eliminate that ingredient. you believe that cigarettes are safe? have they been proved to be safe, mr. cullman? i believe they have not been proved to be unsafe. and i concluded from that report that it is true that babies born of women who smoke are smaller, but they are just as healthy as the babies born from women who do not smoke. (the video clip was ended.) mr. mitnik: that is what the public was hearing and that message would domino effect out to the public. it is group dynamics. it is trickle down. you say it enough and you say it all over, it is what someone growing up in that era and smoking that air is impacted by without seeing a single one of these directly, because mary goveia is not here to say she looked at them. but the circumstantial evidence: actions speak louder than words. was she influenced by all of this? think about it. (a video clip was played as follows:) take the controversy about cigarettes. in the 91st congress a house committee heard testimony from leading experts on smoking and health. the record shows that many of the country's most respected doctors openly challenged anticigarette claims. and i have to disagree with you in that we do not know what causes the illness that have been attributed to cigarette smoking. cigarette smoking does not cause cancer? yes or no. (the video clip was ended.) mr. mitnik: i'm just pointing out the bottom, that last one, was in '83; this one is in '84. because on the verdict for you saw, there is a breakdown of before '83 and after '84. so i'm providing you the evidence so when you go back and deliberate, we got the dates so you can see. this thing did not stop in '83. they continued to do things upon which common sense tells us mary goveia would have been influenced by and relied upon after '83. so i ask you -- the one before and look at the dates. (a video clip was played as follows:) and i have to disagree with you in that we do not know what causes the illness that has been attributed to cigarette smoking. cigarette smoking does not cause cancer? yes or no. it is not known whether cigarettes cause cancer. all right, sir. it has not been casually established. cigarette smoking -- no causal relationship between cigarette smoking and emphysema? despite all the research to date, there has been no causal link established. the jury has not come in. it may not be harmful. we are not convinced. it may be or it may not be. we do not know. do cigarettes cause cancer? i do not know if they do or not. i'm not in a position to give you an answer. the medical experts agree that smoking causes emphysema. do you agree? it may. okay. they agree that smoking causes lung cancer. do you agree? it may. do you know whether it does? i do not. yes, i may be convinced. we do not know what causes cancer in general right now, so i think that we may find out what causes cancer and we may find out some relationship which is yet to be proven. (the video clip was ended.) mr. mitnik: they did not know. they did not know. that was their position. you know otherwise. consequences for doing that, to create doubt and confusion, fabricated and made up, knowing better, and they were the only ones creating the controversy. nobody else was. it was all them. we went through the reliance facts. let me just do it quickly here. she started smoking camels and lucky strikes, the top advertised brands. she switched to filters when they came out. she smoked kools when she had the sore throat. she switched to lights when it was promoted as a safe alternative rather than a nonstop quitting effort. marlboro and marlboro lights were the most heavily advertised and most successful in history, and she switched to their brands. is there reliance before and after '83? yes, there is. mary goveia's daughter said she smoked lights because they were better for you. they had less tar and nicotine. defendants continued to advertise cigarettes as lights the entire time mary was alive and all the way until 2009, and she did not have the benefit from what dr. henningfield shared with you. these were the manipulations when the lights come about and later on. more manipulations. all the way down to smoke molecules being engineered to get deeper into the lungs for one purpose: make them more likely to get addicted. they controlled the levels of nicotine precisely. it was not by accident. they say so. they increase the ph, messing with the ph to get nicotine kick and ammoniation. it is the sine qua non. it is the heart and soul of the product they are selling. the addiction they are selling. manipulating -- here's another one that was very telling. they figured out -- you got one brand looking at the other. you got r. j. reynolds looking at philip morris, and they are saying, my goodness. this one product, this marlboro is selling so good it just took off. and they figure out why: they are using ammonia. look above when they figure it out. nobody else had ammonia but the marlboro. everybody jumped on. why? because of the free nicotine, which is like free-basing, and it helps addiction and guess what else? sales. and it shows how the sales were taking off when they figured out the free nicotine and the, quote, code word kick. tobacco industry misled the public about safety of filters. illusion of filtration. too to under -- surgeon general. it as a tool to undermine the prevention and cessation. the illusion of filtration is the internal secret document of the cigarette industry. smokers of filtered cigarette was getting just as much nicotine and tar as he would have gotten from a regular brand. the industry does not believe there are any bad elements. if there are, they are going to just take them out. here's our triple, quadruple, quintuplet filter capable of removing whatever constituents of smoke is currently suspect. that is how they were plotting and playing behind the scenes. dr. henningfield and dr. burns talking about the light sham. defendants allowed public health officials to believe lights were safer even when they knew they were not. they were tricking those, in multiple ways, the ftc machines, until they brought them down and said no more. they continued to market lights 2009, 10 years after mary goveia's death. public health scientists did not learn these defendants were gaming until the internal documents came out and, dr. henningfield's own words, were bamboozled, and the ftc concluded that they would no longer be a smoke screen for tobacco company's shameful marketing practices. these are opportunities along the way. every time they could have made forks in the road, they could have made a corporate choice to do the right thing and did just the opposite, over and over and over. let me back up. annual advertising budget for mary goveia, in evidence at exhibit 111, they spent a billion dollars a year, the industry, on advertising. a billion a year. if you take just 1 percent of that and were to say would 1 percent of it have reached mary goveia, 1 percent, it would be $10 million spent. if it was half of 1 percent reached mary goveia, it would be $5 million in a year spent. was she subjected to and influenced and affected with those kind of numbers? 5 million is a half a percent, 10 million is 1 percent. if she just bumped up against a small percentage, would she have been impacted by all that advertising? when you look at all the ways she changed and tracked the popular brands and moved along the way, yes, there is reliance. damages. you shall consider certain elements of damage. and the judge -- you have them and the judge read them to you. and they are really -- they break into two major categories: the loss of companionship and the mental pain and suffering. companionship is the aloneness. the aloneness of not having that person. mental pain and suffering is not just the loneliness and aloneness, but the grieving and the things that he had to go through both watching her die and then going on dying. and we have to look at it under the circumstances. we cannot just put this in a vacuum. the circumstance in which she died, where he had to see her tethered, tethered to the oxygen tank. where he had to go through the frustrations, the frustrations of his wife after seeing dr. fakih and trying to get her to stop, and her weaning back but her sneaking off and smoking, and having to go down and talk to the neighbor not to give her any more cigarettes. and having watched her. you heard dr. burns talk about the straws going from -- to -- to watching that. the frustration of it. to have her not able to break free from this. he is now learned this thing has caused this horrible thing to my treasured wife, my soul mate. and he cannot get it off of her. like an intruder in the home he could not protect his wife from. that is part of the -- part of the totality of the circumstances. and knowing now what he knows about what was going on and the effect that has on his grieving, to know what was really going on behind the scenes by these defendants. so we have to weigh and assess his loss under those circumstances not any other circumstances. the totality of those circumstances. a man that came up out of what they called the greatest generation. a man who came up and left school to go work coming out of the great depression. a man who volunteered to go into the armed forces in world war ii and was trained on special projects and stormed the beaches of normandy and got special accommodations of valor from the french government. they call it the greatest generation. there were great sacrifices made. he came home, back to his sweetheart, the girl he saw in that factory for the first time and went, that is the prettiest girl i ever saw in my life. he came back. he came back and visited and surprised her like something out of the movies at the factory. and then got back and carried the romance on until he could work two jobs and earn enough money he felt responsible enough they could get married and they got married. they had children. and he worked to the bone two jobs a day to support his family. and then, finally, after all that hard work and the time that keeps you away from your spouse, working to one goal: we are going to get to a point of retirement and they came down here to florida to spend those years together. all those years required to be apart working two jobs, now we can be together. and how did they act? they were inseparable. they were together all the time. and how is he now, having watched the way his wife died and cut short that time? they were, but for this, healthy. you can look and see this is a vibrant man at 88. his wife by all accounts had no health problems until this came up. lots of years together to enjoy this time, and suddenly this horrible disease comes into the picture and death comes into the picture and then knowledge about what was going on. those are the circumstances that we have to weigh and assess this under. and i would suggest under the circumstances and the facts of this case that the starting point of the discussion about what is fair and just for what was taken from him, and what the totality of the circumstances are, would be $5 million. and if you did the math and you took just those two separate categories -- and it says you shall consider the certain elements, plural -- if you took just two of those and took that over 20 years, that is about $15 an hour for those two categories. there is mary goveia. these pictures are in evidence. mary and john. mary and john and the grand kids. part of the pleasure of a grandfather is to watch his grand -- his wife with the grandchildren. granddaddies love their kids, but there ain't nothing like a grandma. she -- he watched his wife again with those grandchildren, and taking that pride and joy of seeing those kids and her together. that is mary goveia and john. and i do not want to be hokey and have that fade away, but i know of no other way to make the point. that space is gone and they played a significant role, these two defendants, in that outcome. a significant role in that outcome. and there ought to be, ought to be consequences. reckless. this is -- now i'm moving to the punitive damages part of it where we are asking you to please return a verdict that says that not only, yes, yes, yes through these questions on the verdict form, but then we go to: were punitive damages warranted? was there clear and convincing evidence? i'm going to talk to you about that. reckless disregard for human life. an entire lack of care. conscious indifference to the consequences. reckless disregard for the safety and welfare of the public. reckless indifference to the rights of others. intentional violation of those rights. goodness sake. is this case not about that? if it is not about that, it is not about. clear and convincing evidence is -- and there is the whole instruction. take it all. but i highlighted the part that seems to make more common sense in the application in this case. if you have a firm belief or conviction about the matters that they did these things: conscious disregard, reckless disregard for the health, welfare, and rights of the public. and if they did and you have a firm belief, which this evidence i would suggest reaches no other conclusion, then the answer to that final question are punitive damages warranted is yes. and we ask you that you answer that question yes, and then we will have a -- one more day to make this all count to try to bring forth change through deterrence and punishment. one more day. no more. and you can consider harms suffered by other persons in assessing the reprehensibility of the wrongness of what they did. i'm going to skip this for the sake of -- all right. i'm going to hit this quick. i'm being told i'm running out of time, but go anyway, so bear with me. this is in evidence. this is the summary of philip morris. their own summaries in literature. either their own research, their own comments -- and occasionally some outside literature they are talking about, but most of it is their own. and it is years of it. and it is so telling. while they were out saying it is not addictive and while they were out saying nobody knows if it is really bad for you, this is them talking. the need cigarette. the vast majority of cigarette smoke is very difficult to quit. we know. defense counsel for philip morris told you in opening statement -- and what he says is not evidence, but it is not disputed. they said it in opening statement, that of those millions of people that did quit -- and the much bigger number were unable, but the ones that did, the vast majority were addicted. we think that most smokers can be considered nicotine seekers. this is how they are talking about it. all summarizing one document. pharmaceutical needs. increased awareness of the deleterious, deleterious -- bad -- increased presence of deleterious substance in smoke may dissuade smokers from smoking, but there is strong evidence, in quotes, that is their quote, strong evidence that she -- that they will -- the will to smoke is impervious to concern persuasive pressures. that is them talking in their own document. that is how they are describing it in their document. we offer the conviction -- and i do not know if that was -- i honestly do not know if that was referring to an external document or internal, but it is them talking about it themselves. ultimate explanation for perpetuated cigarette habit resides in the pharmaceutical effects. under stress. anxiety. i want you to see, this is back in evidence, how many of these talk about stress, anxiety. study it. learn it. and then they are going to tell you, oh, she just smoked because she was under stress. she smoked because she was addicted, and one of the triggers that helps sell cigarettes to addicted smokers is stress. it is not an alternative explanation; it is part of the explanation for addiction. anxiety. anxiety suggests a reduced delivery. they are worried if you brought the amount of nicotine down it may be a stepping stone and could be -- lead to quitting and hurt the industry. there is more. they do not want to risk people getting off the hook. the market would collapse. nobody would get their jobs or consulting fees. this is the one that -- that they anticipated that they could not get caught. one of the tragedies of this and one of the reprehensible things is it is clear they were studying the medical literature closely, closely. so when that literature that they -- the stuff they talked to dr. burns about the relative risks, that if you quit by x you would be okay. but they are on top of all of that. they are keeping close tabs, yet they still kept the holding strategy going as opposed to saying, hey, it is not too late folks. if you quit now, you may make it. they continued to bury it. (a video clip was played as follows:) brenda dawson represents the cigarette companies through the tobacco institute. the industry, like any other industry of consumer products, wants to make sure that those things that are trade secrets are kept as trade secrets. but a lot of the -- a lot of the food products that we see have ingredients, and they list the ingredients, sometimes they even list the percentage of ingredients. and in that list of ingredients you will see words like flavorants, where the manufacturers are not required to, in fact, turn over what can only be termed a recipe. i do not think anyone is asking for the recipe. the manufacturers provide the list to the federal government. could the president of the united states look at the list if he wanted to see it? he would probably have to be designated as an employee of the department of health and human services to look at the list. ron davis was michael hendrickson's predecessor, running the office of smoking and health: i think it is absurd that a product that is used by 45 million americans is used by those people without knowing what is in the product. the list of additives is so secret that dr. davis was required to keep it under lock and key. outside my office, the director's office, was the safe. the safe? the safe. it would take 20 minutes to get into the safe. it is not just the normal lock where you have to turn to three different numbers. (the video clip was ended.) (a video clip was played as follows:) i'd like you to rise and then those who will be testifying as well, will you rise. would you raise your right hand. do you swear that the testimony you are about to give will be the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth? the group: i do. please consider yourselves to be under oath. let me begin my questioning on the matter of whether or not nicotine is addictive. let me ask you first, and i'd like to just go down the row, whether each of you believe that nicotine is not addicted. i heard virtually all of you touch on it. just yes or no. do you believe nicotine is not addictive? i believe nicotine is not addictive, yes. mr. johnston? congressman, cigarettes and nicotine clearly do not meet the classic definitions of addiction. there is no intoxication. we will take that as a no. and, again, time is short. if you could just -- i think each of you believe nicotine is not addictive, i just would like to have this for the record. i do not believe that nicotine or our products are addictive. i believe nicotine is not addictive. i believe that nicotine is not addictive. i believe that nicotine is not addictive. and i, too, believe that nicotine is not addictive. (the video clip was ended.) mr. mitnik: someone who is under a powerful addiction deserves and needs to know the truth so they can get help, not that. not that. this is not like -- and they knew it -- like somebody enjoying chocolate or cake. mary goveia deserved to know the truth to arm herself the best she could to fight it. and remember, decades earlier, we are in the business of selling nicotine, an addictive drug. by any definition you want to slice it, that is what -- there may be changed definitions out. the surgeon general's, while they are trying to figure it out light-years -- light-years behind this industry, if industry knew it way back then this was nothing but concealment and coverup for a purpose: for money. i would suggest to you in filling out this form, these first two questions deal with the class membership just by defendant and that it, as to both, i would suggest you, under this evidence, that the just and fair answer is yes, yes. the next question has to do with showing that there was cause -- it was a contributing cause to her smoking enough to have gotten disease and death. i'm sorry. i feel like i'm crowding you. the answer, now moving to page 4, deals with this reliance stuff that we talked about where materiality is they were concealing important -- information that would have been important to know to mary goveia in these decisions. and i would suggest to you there is no meaningful barrier, as i showed you before, between '82 and before and after '82, and there is no barrier between defendant to defendant. then we go on to the conspiracy: did these people agree, these two defendants agree with others in the industry to help pull this off? we have shown you the evidence. where is the evidence to the contrary? i would suggest -- and this is within the collective wisdom of the jurors, but based on the difference between a child starting smoking and somebody addicted being fooled, where she has responsibility. but it is far different than the intentional conduct, knowing conduct for money, on purpose, by these defendants for so many years, that they share the lion's share of the responsibility. and i would suggest to you that a fair distribution would be 45 and 45 and ten percent. the damages that you decide, this is -- you put your collective wisdom and decide under the totality of the circumstance of this case what would be fair and reasonable. and then under the circumstances is there clear and convincing evidence of punitive damages? yes, there is. and that brings us to the point that we will have done the law regarding mary goveia and we can do some important work that needs to be done. thank you. mr. mitnik: okay. i know you are tired of hearing all of us talk. i've only got 20 minutes. i'm going to move quickly because i've got an hour's worth and i cannot get to it, so i'm going to cover what i can. 3715 they put something up here and they talked about how we picked and choosed -- that the plaintiff pick and choosed things to show you. well, what is good for the goose is good for the gander when you talk in those terms. let us talk about what these defendants picked and chose. they put that statement up making it sound like, boy, she kept smoking because she wanted to. it left out the key thing that she said that is in the testimony -- and you were here; some of you may have taken notes -- that she said she would not because she could not. she said she could not is what her comment was. and that just got left off to make it sound like she just decided -- she was just strong-willed and "i want to do it." could not -- could not -- was the testimony that went exactly with that statement. it just got left out. could not is a whole different story. and it is not alone because we have an independent confirmation that that is how she felt about it, because that neighbor, the boy that lived down the street she was bumming cigarettes from after she had been told you could die if you keep smoking. told the neighbor, quit young while you still can. quit young while you still can. 3716 so let us talk about the real facts here, not pulling it out to make it sound something different than it is. and it goes to that clip of mr. reasoner where he said, remember, it is like a dear old friend. that is the problem with addiction: it is like a dear old friend. and he said you give it the benefit of the doubt. you give it the benefit of the doubt. that is what they banked on and were victorious banking on it, that people who were addicted would listen to that counter-message that was coming out and drowning out what the public health was desperately trying to do. remember, he said they spent -- the cigarette company spent more in a day than the clearinghouse had in a year. they drowned the message out. and it is like listening to an old friend. it is like telling somebody who is a dear old friend that he did -- someone accused him of doing something bad. and you go, i would not believe my friend would do that. and, remember, this time they were, quote, legal. if they are really that bad, they are legal? and you are giving the benefit of the doubt to your dear old friend until the dear old friend comes 3717 forward and says, i really did do it. and that person tells his wife, i would not have believed it if i had not heard it come out of his mouth. they would not let it come out of their mouth, and that is who she and everyone else needed to hear it from. by the way, you heard the evidence. harry reasoner, with all of his intelligence, and he knew the report, the power of this addiction, went on smoking and died from it. taking responsible [sic] for her part. they are trying to turn that into somehow that means it is all her fault. some -- listen to the logic. someone says, i'm going through her husband to take some responsibility for my part in a situation where there is plenty of fault to go around. and that somehow is a bad thing? that somehow would say they have no fault because mr. goveia stands up and says, yeah, there is some fault there? that is sure -- that is not the law, thank goodness. that is not the law and their fault in this is mighty. they say we are guessing, undermining circumstantial evidence and inferences. an inference is not really something you rely on in the 3718 courtroom, except the court gives you instruction on you can rely on the inference. and let us think about it. she is not alive, so we are going to say, gosh, you do not need proof -- and this all started years ago. and the people lived through that and died through that and there are not many people left. so now we are going to say you have to rely on circumstantial evidence and inferences if that is wrong? that would be like my daughter in that situation saying, dad, you are just guessing that i got into coca-cola. you do not have any real proof; it is all just circumstantial. burns and dr. henningfield looking at -- they said that they -- looking at the history of things. they did not just look at the history. those guys lived through the history of this fight. and we heard about money being made by them. the money spent -- those two have been engaged with these defendants and the cigarette industry trying to bring about change for decades and lived through much of this we are talking about. the amount of money spent on the other side of that struggle, what they have been paid is a drop in the bucket. they say she is not addicted. where is the evidence? who -- where is the evidence that she is 3719 not addicted, for goodness sake? she says, stop young when you can. she says -- the testimony is she could not. and she -- it makes sense. what other explanation for someone who says you are going to die if you keep smoking? unless there was evidence she is suicidal, which there is none. she loved them grandbabies and her husband. why would there be friction in a loving relationship over stopping when the doctor tells you this? unless there is addiction in play. it just does not add up. common sense. sports heroes, movie stars were used by motor oil. it works. let us talk -- let us be consistent in what we say. it does not work, but everybody else is just wasting their money on it? it works, but, by the way, motor oil does not have an addictive drug in it, it is not consumed, and it does not cause death and it is not targeted at children. chains and glasses. that glass is overflowing with the evidence. the chain has been linked. i spent the first hour of my closing argument laying all the evidence -- linking it together. i want to give you a quick analogy -- two quick analogies here. one, i drove in this morning. it was foggy. 3720 and i live out in the groveland area. you come through the hills. and i come through a hilly area and i hit the fog and i cannot see and there is a lake over there. and i know there is a lake over there because i go through it when it is not foggy. but if i did not know from driving through already, i'd never know there was a lake there because of the fog. that is what they did with this conspiracy, except it was always foggy. they kept the fog running. and now they say, you should have seen the lake. and let us be clear: this suggestion that she had no idea they were bad for you defies the evidence. the evidence from her daughter was she switched to lights because she thought they were better for her. that is the evidence. the evidence they were talking about was mr. goveia saying, "we did not know" -- he said, "i did not know it was that bad." he did not know it was that bad. and then they asked, "did you talk to ms. goveia about it?" he said, "no, we had not talked about that." but we know she was concerned. she did not know it was that bad because they hid the truth and it is 3721 inexcusable that she would not know it and it is only because of them and they are at fault for that and there is reliance. and there is causation that she did not know and there is a giant difference between hearing and believing and knowing. but we know she heard some because that is what the testimony -- only testimony was. that is why she switched. so we cannot take evidence out of context here. this is important business. one other analogy. cell phone. they make it sound like because there was some evidence out there -- and they make it sound like, gosh -- they put up a clip, clip, clip, and said, everybody must have heard -- remember the amount of money spent, one day versus -- they spent in one day what public health can spend in a year. and they pull a couple clips. but the men that lived through it -- henningfield and burns -- told you how frustrating it was fighting against their message to get it out to people. and now it is like saying that, well, you may have heard cell phones can cause a brain tumor. just you heard that. some people were saying it. but, again, no, it is not proven and you do not really know. and everybody's putting the phones to their 3722 head. this would be analogous to if you move forward 50 years and found out that everyone's got -- there is an epidemic of brain tumors from it and you found out way back then that all of the people that were selling cell phones got together and conspired to keep secret that they knew for a fact it was causing it and causing brain tumors and made it all sound like junk science. and they would then say, well, what is that got to do with us? it was just your choice. they talk about her sister having copd and other things. that is glaring proof of the reliance. it is glaring proof that what they did did touch her in a significant way. those were golden opportunities. but for a powerful addiction and but for them concealing it, how do you explain not reacting to that? she had -- she wanted to live. there is no suggestion to the contrary. if it is just a nonaddictive and put them down and you had been told the truth, your sister gets sick, you stop; the doctor tells you, you stop. the concealment had an impact. her actions and the loss of those opportunities tell you all you 3723 need to know that she was touched deeply by what they did. you cannot square what she did any other way. did she try a million times to quit? that was the exact outcome they targeted. their entire conspiracy was built around the idea of we are going to convince people there is no real reason to try to stop, not while it is all so iffy. and if you are still concerned, here, take some filters and switch. you do not have to give it up. you are addicted. you do not have to. we have given you another choice. and then we are not done. we are going to give you another choice; this time lights. and then they say, well, you did not try. it is because it worked. what more proof is there that it worked? she switched and she thought they were safe, and they were muddying the waters to no end about it. why would not there be more attempts to quit when someone who is warning someone, quit while you are young and you can? why would not there be but for those things? do we know for sure? no, we do not have to prove it for sure. we have to prove it by the greater weight, more persuasive, more convincing, 3724 not -- this is not a grade and -- grades and out case (verbatim). do i have those forms to connect this? here are those brands we keep hearing. the motivation, while he is getting there, has to be red hot and nonstop for someone who is deeply addicted like this. everything they did was to douse that flame of motivation and to make it hard to sustain. and then they say, ah, you did not try harder and more. that -- they were success -- she was a r.j. reynolds and philip morris success story. that is what celebrate. and then say, huh, that proves we did not do anything? it proves they did. these are the brands. in the '60s and '70s over here under the filter brands, that is the '60s and '70s. when you hear philip morris, she did not smoke anything until way later, that is the '60s and the '70s. that is the testimony. you-all were here and taking notes. that is the evidence in this case. then we look over at the marlboro lights. that is in the '70s. that is the evidence, '70s and early '80s. it is not the direct. there is no evidence, you can read those jury instructions, that says you have 3725 to have seen specifically one of these things we showed. if it was, it would be massively unfair. she is not alive. it is not the way it works. but it was cast a big net and we are going to have group dynamics triple down and domino so that everyone in the family is smoking, and this affects society. and then we look at their intended master plan and then what reaction they were shooting for and then look at what her reaction, what her actions were and do they fit. and then look, is there some other really reasonably explanation? everything she did fit to a tee and there is no other rational explanation, and that is the way the law works on proving up causation in a case like this under these circumstances. the warnings from the surgeon general. she would been smoking -- in '85, she would been smoking for 45 years; 45 -- and you saw the evidence. they did not work anyhow. she was deeply addicted by then. what kind of defense is that? the court: five minutes. mr. mitnik: okay. you heard talk about other people, other people under the instruction and other people could make their own claims and this is her claim. 3726 but here's something: you heard from dr. henningfield talking about the importance of coming to court and telling the truth. how many people did not know what was learned in this courtroom when they died? this is an opportunity to make a difference on something significant for someone that falls within the parameters of the law to try and do something here. they said dr. henningfield -- he tells you all you need to know. he says she was deeply addicted, deeply addicted. was he just making it up? you decide. and he described how it affects people and why they keep smoking. there is your legal cause. now we are in the class membership. dr. henningfield answers that all by himself. is he making it up? or is he reliable? they say, boy, everybody knew what they needed to know at the turn of the century with nicotine fiend or coffin nails. well, pick a side. then the next moment they say, well, we did not know as an industry; we did not understand it and the surgeon general did not understand it and nobody understood it. well, how is that? how does that square? it is not about the ability to quit. that is nowhere in your jury instructions. the judge 3727 defines the question. that is why it need be a cause, not the sole cause. people can quit heroin that are in gutters. it is not whether you can quit; it is whether addiction was one of the reasons she kept smoking. and for goodness sake, that is clear. psychological crutch. that was somebody else's word. no. you heard the -- just because someone else at some other point used the same word in the english language does not mean it does not mean the things it obviously meant in the context by these defendants. give me one second. here is -- this is -- run out of time. frustrating, but it is rules and let me be done here. you saw the clip of robert heimann. for the -- who said, "we do not believe that the warnings are justified. we do not believe our products are injurious to health. the surgeon general is wrong to conclude that cigarette causes lung cancer. the warnings are not justified and congress is dead wrong." that is the industry. we need consequences. here's heimann, 1986. it was america's position and his position that cigarettes were not injurious to health. america -- american, the tobacco company, 3728 want -- which is -- r.j. reynolds is responsible for -- wanted consumers to believe those statements. smokers are justified in relying on the statements that smoking cigarettes were injurious to health. common sense versus coincidence. truth and consequences. 440,000 deaths a year. that is -- mr. weaver: objection, your honor. williams state farm. the court: same ruling. mr. mitnik: the rjr one that i read to you -- oh, in 1992 the ceo said, "we do not find fault in our smokers who believe in continuing to smoke." that is what they say. the court: mr. mitnik, one minute. mr. mitnik: yes, ma'am. 440,000 deaths. that is 50 an hour. by the end of the day, that is 1,200 more. this is an opportunity under the law and the facts to try to make a step. in progress, progress is a process. it is like links in a chain. and each step matters. and you never know which step is going to be the one that brings you to your destination. and i ask you to answer those questions yes based on the evidence and the law and give us the opportunity to come back here tomorrow to make that final step that matters in this process that brings us here today and bring back a verdict that says the truth matters.