19 mr. byrd: may it please the court? members of the jury, thank you so much for your time this past week or so. we thank you, my colleague, mr. lantinberg, and myself thank you for your time, and certainly our client, mr. earl graham, thanks you for the vol 07 pm graham, earl time that you spent in listening to the evidence and hearing the facts in the case. 171 when you go back to the room to deliberate, you are essentially going to have three jobs we would submit. you are going to answer questions on a verdict form. you are going to talk amongst each other and try to make sure everybody follows the instructions that the judge gives you. and before you answer, before you -- you are going to get to all talk together and make sure everybody has a chance to explain why they feel the way they feel, and then you are going to come to your conclusions. so for the next 30 or 40 minutes here, i want to try to offer you some ways and some suggestions about how we view the evidence in this case. if you remember when you first came here and were selected by the jury and everybody sat back there, made some commitments. in jury selection, you were asked by the judge and there were questions asked by myself and ms. parker about biases and any biases you had. vol 07 pm graham, earl and you told this court that you could remove those. and you told this court that things like if it was -- if you thought, well, i just do not believe that plaintiffs should be able to sue for things like this, for somebody that is something they chose to do. i just do not believe in that. or i do not believe giving money to somebody that chose to smoke tobacco and then sue the companies who did that. everybody answered those questions, and said those kind of 172 biases and feelings you did not have and were not going to come into play in this courtroom. so we would ask -- thank you for that commitment and make sure in the jury deliberation room that everybody just focuses on the facts and the evidence that came in. and if there are any of the outside biases or reasons, that those are not reasons. because you have explained to the court that you did not have those kind of biases. those would not come into your deliberations. you may wonder from time to time about evidence you did not hear about, things that we are not able to tell you. and the court has rules about that. there are rules of vol 07 pm graham, earl what kind of evidence both ms. parker and myself can give you and tell you about. and you do not need to wonder about things you did not hear, because that -- or make up ideas or guess about why you did not hear about things like that. just consider the evidence, and then we will appreciate all the service that you have given us to give us our shake here. now, when we started, mr. lantinberg explained in his opening statement about why we are here and why we were suing the cigarette company, and he mentioned a few reasons why we are suing the cigarette companies. one is that we were suing the cigarette companies because we submit that they violated basic safety concepts 173 that a company can never lie about a danger it knows about in a product. now, you heard some of the men in the video from the very cigarette companies. you heard mr. colby. he had the transcript underneath him. he was hard to understand. he said the cigarette company has a duty to be truthful and not to mislead. vol 07 pm graham, earl mr. heimann, one of the first videos you saw. remember, he was the guy who got up there and said, you know, he disagreed with every medical public authority, all these medical groups, american medical association, anybody who said cigarettes were injurious. he just did not believe it. they were all wrong. they are all dead wrong. and he said that our advertising is truthful. and we expect people to rely on it. now, that is one reason we are coming in here. another reason is that the cigarette companies violated another rule that we believe, a safety concept, if you will, about not lying about the dangers that it knows about. so the cigarette companies, we submit, lied about the fact that cigarettes cause cancer. they lied about that cigarettes are addictive. the cigarette companies lied about the fact that filters, things like filters, were somehow safer. the cigarette companies lied about the fact that 174 light cigarettes or low-tar cigarettes were somehow safer. vol 07 pm graham, earl not only did they mislead the public at large, they misled the public health authorities about that. and the cigarette companies lied about the fact that, you know, low-nicotine products were somehow any less addictive than the regular cigarettes that they made. the proof of this comes in straight from their own records, their own business records. and we are going to talk about the timeline in a minute. but about when those business records came out, i will say this: when those business records came out -- and you heard dr. gentry from r.j. reynolds say they came out in 1998, formerly unknown, formerly not obtained. no one could get them, because they were internal. many of them stamped confidential you saw. no one was able to get them. it changed the landscape of what people knew about the cigarette industry and understood about what they had been doing for so long. and we are going to talk about that. but that is a pivotal moment in the late '90s when the truth finally comes out. now, another reason we sued, we mentioned, is the cigarette companies violated this concept that a manufacturer vol 07 pm graham, earl should never hide a danger it knows about in its product. and the cigarette companies, we will show you, as we showed on the timeline, studies addiction for a long time. and, 175 remember, they did not even admit that cigarettes were addictive until 1999. and we will talk about what they say about addiction now. dr. gentry and jupe. they will not admit addiction causes disease now, but they did not even admit cigarettes were addictive until 1999. yet, their own documents show back in the 1960s, they started mastering the concept, the ability to rig and engineer this product into a nicotine delivery system that was designed to addict, designed to keep people from being able to stop. and they even know -- this whole time they know most of our customers would rather quit. most of them -- in their own documents, they say that. most of them wish they could quit. now, that does not sound like free choice to me. if there is a product that you want to stop buying and you have to go start getting safety aids and drugs and things to stop being able to buy -- let us say you want to buy vol 07 pm graham, earl a red car instead a blue car. that is a choice. nothing stopping you from doing that. most of their customers wanted to quit, and they knew it, and they could not. we are going to hear arguments from the cigarette companies that this is about free choice. so i would ask you, as we go forward, to have this concept of what kind of choice are we talking about as we go 176 forward in this case. now, the final reason we had to sue was because the cigarette companies have not provided any full and fair compensation. ms. parker: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. mr. byrd: we are here in order to receive full and fair compensation for mr. graham. now, i want to talk a little bit about the jury instructions. i've asked -- mr. lantinberg is going to go over to the elmo with these to the extent we need to show a few. vol 07 pm graham, earl i want to show you a little bit about the jury instructions that the judge is going to read to you. you will have them back in the jury room. and i believe everybody will have their own copy so they can look at the jury instructions themselves. i want to point out a few things. the first thing i want to point out is actually on the first page. it talks about what kind of evidence you can consider, at the bottom. and if you will see down in the bottom, it says, in your deliberations, you should consider only the evidence. and that is what we have talked about. and it goes on to say, but as you consider the evidence, both direct and circumstantial, you may make 177 deductions and reach conclusions which reason and common sense lead you to make. i want to point that out. because the judge will instruct you about what we have to prove just if you want to -- just more than fifty percent, more likely right than wrong. this is not some beyond a reasonable doubt where we vol 07 pm graham, earl have removed every question. he will explain to you what we have to prove. and you can use your common sense. i'm not talking about the kind of common sense that we heard from the philip morris executives at the end of the case: apple sauce can kill you. i know that sounds "logical." i'm talking about common sense from the evidence that you see in the documents that we will submit to you -- you will have back there, and we would submit that you should read. i will point out some of the ones that we suggest you really focus on and read. i'm talking about that kind of common sense. and then the judge will go on to tell you about direct evidence. direct evidence is the testimony of one who asserts actual knowledge of a fact such as an eyewitness. but there is also circumstantial evidence, which is proof of a chain of facts and circumstances tending to 178 prove or disprove any fact in dispute. vol 07 pm graham, earl and the next line is what is extremely important. the law makes no distinction between the weight you may give to either direct or circumstantial evidence. you give them the same weight. circumstantial evidence can be used just like the direct evidence can be used. we would submit as an example the cigarette companies touting lights and low tars everywhere become one of the highest selling products. they are advertising it all over the place. lo and behold around the same time, mrs. graham starts to smoke light and low-tar cigarettes. do we have direct evidence that she saw an advertisement and relied on it? i think so. but it is kind of tough. mrs. graham has died. she is not here. she was not able to be interviewed. we cannot tell you what was in her mind because this case came about after that. so you can use circumstantial evidence she started smoking lights and low tars while they are making all these health claims while she is wanting to quit and infer that indeed she did rely on the things that the cigarette companies did to push that. i would ask you to consider that as you go forward vol 07 pm graham, earl and look at the facts in the case. now, the next instruction talks about -- instruction no. 5, page 7, talks about what we have to prove. 179 the preponderance of the evidence. you have heard this a little bit. this is not a criminal case. this is what you have to prove in a civil case such as this. preponderance of the evidence simply means an amount of evidence that is enough to persuade you that mr. graham's claim is more likely true than not true. more likely true than not. in deciding whether -- well, that is where we come up with this concept. we do not have to go a hundred percent of the way. imagine a football field. you get to the 50-yard line, you get just an inch over the 50-yard line, we have proved our claim. and we do not have to go all the way to the 100-yard line, the goal line. we get right over the 50-yard line and we have proved our claim. we are more likely true than not, with common sense. so if in deliberations someone says, you know, i have some doubts. i have some doubts. i heard about this -- vol 07 pm graham, earl well, they mentioned breast cancer. i have a doubt. well, remind them, we have to look at the evidence and say what was more likely right than not and remind them that we do not have to prove all doubt. we do not have to remove all doubt, because the judge will instruct you that we do not have to remove every piece of doubt. we just have to prove by a preponderance of the evidence. so let us look at the verdict form. before we do, 180 if i may, i would submit the -- basically two avenues, two routes of things to consider in the verdict form. i want to draw this right up here. the first question you are going to be asked -- and we will look at it in a second, and i think the judge will show you it -- is whether faye graham was addicted. that is the first question you will be asked. the next question will be whether addiction caused the disease. we submit this is lung cancer. addiction caused lung cancer and her death. vol 07 pm graham, earl okay. and then the final piece of that whole puzzle down that avenue, you will be asked to decide what is called comparative fault. the fault of all the parties. come in with -- you know, imagine everybody has shared responsibility. we are going to look at this and we are going to see who has what amount of fault. we will call that comparative fault. so i will talk more about this later, this concept later. but i'm going to address the addicted and the addiction causing lung cancer first. my next half of what i would like to talk about is the other avenue that you are going to have to deal with on the verdict form, which are what we call the intentional tort 181 claims. concealment, we will call it for short. we claim that the defendants concealed and omitted material facts. the engle findings have something to say about all those. and i will point to those in a second. the next claim will be conspiracy, that the defendants engaged in an agreement together. we submit vol 07 pm graham, earl starting at the plaza hotel in 1953, which continued all the way until faye graham died and beyond. and then if you answer yes to those two questions, we will address punitive damages. we suggest that where the rubber really meets the road in this case is punitive damages. and this is a case about punitive damages. there is no competent evidence anywhere that came into this courtroom to question this side right here of the verdict form. let us start with that. show the first question on the verdict form. let us do that. the very first question on the verdict form will say, was faye graham addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine? okay. so, remember, we have to prove this more likely right than wrong. i think we would submit there is no question about this. what did you hear in the case? dr. feingold came 182 in and he concluded, you know, without any doubt at all that vol 07 pm graham, earl faye graham was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine. you heard from dr. cummings as well as dr. feingold how nicotine works on the brain. they have spent decades studying this and researching this field. dr. cummings has published countless articles in the surgeon general -- he is edited surgeon general reports. he has done peer-reviewed articles on this topic. he helps -- actually helps addicted smokers try to quit smoking. by the way, we happen to know faye graham was not unlike other customers of the cigarette companies. she was just like most of them. she wanted to quit and could not. smoked until the day she died. after her lung cancer, receiving radiation and chemotherapy treatment, continued to smoke. now, you have heard evidence about the definition of addiction. addiction, as you heard from the experts in this case, chronic relapsing brain disease, compulsive use despite harmful consequences. that is the rough definition. this is a chronic relapsing brain disease, compulsive use despite harmful consequences. vol 07 pm graham, earl dr. feingold explained how cigarettes pass through the blood brain barrier, okay, which we are all born with, all created with. nicotine can get past that and make 183 changes to your actual brain structures and grow these nicotine receptors, multiple of them in this thing called up-regulation, as dr. cummings talked about. nicotine receptors multiplying in the brain. dr. feingold explained in great deal about how nicotine gets from the lung within a matter of seconds up to the brain and how the nicotine receptors start craving this nicotine and demand more and more. and then he told you how he concluded more likely right than wrong that faye graham was addicted. he read -- he did not need to read all the depositions in this case. by the way, we will talk about the witnesses in this case. the defendants did not bring one witness into this courtroom. these family witnesses that they mentioned to dr. feingold, did not bring one witness into this courtroom to deny any fact at all that went to addiction and whether vol 07 pm graham, earl she was addicted. how much she smoked first thing in the morning. did not bring one witness to contradict that in this case, now, despite she smoked one to two packs a day for more than 40 years. you heard mr. herrin talk about she started smoking, i saw it, when she was in her mid-teenage years. he was clear about that. lo and behold, she had also told him, i started smoking when i was 16. and so she is not here, but we think the evidence 184 shows she started way back in 1951 when she was 16 years old. smoked for roughly 40-some-odd years. dr. feingold talked about how that means she is had 5.5 million puffs of nicotine, self-administered doses of nicotine, to the brain. and every time she puffed in, every single time, 5.5 million carcinogens flowing through to the lungs. you heard this compulsive use despite knowing harmful consequences. faye graham tried all sorts of ways to quit. she tried chewing gum. she tried hypnosis. spent a lot of money for that family for a few days of actual vol 07 pm graham, earl earnings to go try hypnosis, and it did not work long at all, but she tried over and over. she wanted to quit. her husband asked her to quit. of course, she knew that there were some harmful consequences to smoking. she was desperate to quit. we are not here to tell you she had no clue these things were bad for her at all. i do not think she understood the full extent of it. i do not think she understood the full extent of it until much later, but, of course, eventually by the '70s or '80s, she is trying to quit. she did not want to be smoking. finally, dr. feingold said she smoked first thing in the morning. that is one of the biggest signs, because your nicotine receptors are empty and they are screaming first thing in the morning. 185 and you heard earl graham testify, who was actually in the same bedroom with her overnight. you heard earl graham testify that that would be the first thing when her feet hit the floor; when her feet hit the floor, she would start smoking. last thing she did when she went to bed at night. every time he saw her, she had a cigarette in her vol 07 pm graham, earl hand from the first time he met her. this is the picture of addiction. this is not smoking just because you like it. and you can read in the 2010 surgeon general's report. it is exhibit 237. we submit this is an exhibit worth perusing. you will actually have your own copy of it back there. it looks like this. there are a couple of chapters worth perusing. exhibit 237. talking about the changing design of the cigarette and what that did and talking about nicotine addiction. we have heard it all -- the end of yesterday and today, nicotine addiction is the fundamental reason. no, maybe it is a. i do not know. nicotine is the fundamental reason people smoke and leads to disease. and that is what the surgeon general report says. and if this addiction concept is so unbelievable and so remarkable that mrs. graham could not be addicted -- 186 vol 07 pm graham, earl you know, we believe generally that somebody could be addicted, but it is not mrs. graham. not mrs. graham in this case. if not that many people are addicted out there, then why -- why did the cigarette companies have in 1985, 1984 and '85, why were they so concerned about nicorette gum coming out? if it is such a free choice, and if you can just lay them down, then why do they need to be concerned about nicorette gum hitting the market and hitting their customers? by the way, what about the free choice to use nicorette gum? is that free choice to stop that from getting to the market or trying to stop it from getting to the market? you can make it, but do not advertise it to our customers. and you saw those documents. those are internal records that had never come out before. you are somebody -- the few people who have seen this. you can go onto a website now, database, and find all these documents. you do not do that while you are deliberating, but down the road anybody can do that. but nobody knew about this until these documents vol 07 pm graham, earl came out that this is the kind of behavior they were doing. and they still denied cigarettes were addictive in 1984 when they were telling dow chemicals, no, no, no, we are going to stop dealing with you if you start doing this nicorette gum 187 thing. now, is it more likely right than wrong that faye graham was addicted? yes. you heard no evidence to say otherwise. earl graham testified. charles herrin testified. barbara beaty testified about seeing her smoke. we will talk about barbara in a minute, because she had a couple of other things to say. let us go on to the next question. question 2 will be: was faye graham's addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine a legal cause of her death? now, you are going to have an instruction about legal cause. and it is no. 9. i believe there is an instruction on addiction being the cause. no. 7. page 9. page 9 at the bottom. in order to prove that addiction to smoking cigarettes containing nicotine was a legal cause of mrs. graham's death, mr. graham vol 07 pm graham, earl must prove that such addiction directly and in natural and continuous sequence produced or contributed substantially to producing such death so it can be reasonably said but for the addiction, the death would not have occurred. in order to be regarded as a legal cause of death, addiction need not be the only cause. addiction may be a legal cause of death even though it operates in combination with the act of another, some natural cause, or some other cause if the addiction contributes substantially to producing such death. 188 so there you have it. addiction need not be the only cause. it just needs to be a cause that substantially contributed to causing her death. and how did it cause her death? you heard from dr. feingold. we are created in an amazing way. the blood brain barrier, it is supposed to keep chemicals out. except it does not work on nicotine. nicotine gets through. our lungs -- you heard him explain the lungs -- have these bronchial tubes that come out and they are filled with all this blood, all these vessels, going everywhere, and these bronchial trees develop. and if you were to take the vol 07 pm graham, earl leaves of these trees -- this is where air hits in the lung and you breathe in -- take the leaves of these trees and spread them out, it would be as large as a tennis court. we have things inside us that are as large as a tennis court for breathing. we are made in an amazing way. and dr. feingold talked about how cigarettes come in and are designed to defeat the very way we are made to deflect things like this that happen to us. what happens is we have cilia in the lungs that operate to try to remove chemicals and toxins that come in and pushes it up and out and gets rid of it. until you smoke cigarettes -- and the cigarettes, what do they do? they bring in carcinogens that freeze the cilia. your cilia cannot do that action that it normally does, which is designed to 189 do, and is completely defeated. and dr. feingold explained how repeated exposure to cigarettes, over and over and over, is what leads to the cancer and what leads to the cells being in such a way to set the stage for mutation to occur where cancer develops, and vol 07 pm graham, earl then because of all the blood vessels in there, it breaks up. it breaks off into the bloodstream and moves on into other organs of the body, including the brain. and that is what she had. now, the defendants will talk about, oh, this lung cancer came from somewhere else. dr. feingold came in here. and they did not bring you one person. they had a lot to say about dr. feingold. they do not like him. he makes money. have a lot to criticize him about. and if there was anybody on the defense side who had tested these slides like dr. feingold, and who had looked at the slides like dr. feingold, who could come in here and actually show you with science this was not lung cancer, trust me, you would have heard it. and you did not. dr. feingold came in here and he explained, he went through the medical records in detail that this is adenocarcinoma. what happened? what happened? they looked at this. they took a biopsy. and, yes, there are different options of where this could come from. and what is one of 190 vol 07 pm graham, earl the first things they do? a mammogram, an x-ray of the breast, and see no cancer whatsoever. they even go as far as to do a female -- a doctor comes in and does an actual physical test of the breasts. no cancer. he said if this had been breast cancer, this would have gone -- this would have gone -- would not have spread to the brain like that. he said there is no question this was lung cancer. look at the medical records. the medical records will be in evidence. they are exhibit 1362 from plaintiffs. look through them. we showed you all of them. defendants, their exhibit, they are going to have a medical record exhibit, too. i do not know what number it is. it has two pages. because they do not want you to see all the medical records. look at our medical records. it has all of them in there. and then look at exhibit 1365. those are the photomicrographs that dr. feingold showed you. and he showed you what he saw. lung cancer. and then he went a step vol 07 pm graham, earl further. you know, we just have to go to the 50-yard line on the football field. he went all the way to the goal line. he took a ttf-1 test, okay. and nothing was stopping defendants from doing these same tests. defendants 191 had every opportunity to have -- they had everything available to them that we did. and he went and did this test. and after the ttf-1, he says, it confirms exactly what all the treating doctors say. ttf-1, 99 percent sure this is lung cancer, not from somewhere else, not from gi tract, not from reproductive, lung cancer. then he goes a step further. crosses the goal line. takes a napsin a test to completely remove any doubt. says we are done. sat down and said we are done, a hundred percent conclusive. they have done nothing to bring that back from the goal line to the 50-yard line, much less the other way. this is lung cancer. the death certificate, exhibit 1351. edward, bring that up, please. vol 07 pm graham, earl the death certificate says, non-small cell lung cancer with brain metastasis. exactly what dr. feingold saw. exactly what she had. and after all the tests, the doctors all agreed. now, the next question you are going to face on the jury instruction form is whether smoking cigarettes of philip morris and r.j. reynolds were the legal cause. well, okay, that is obvious. we read you the stipulations. all the brands you 192 heard about, from charles herrin, from barbara beaty, who listed some brands as well, and from earl graham, all of these brands are philip morris and r.j. reynolds. and dr. feingold -- you remember it was that question i asked him. and i had to ask him three times. there were about a hundred objections. and i said, you know, if she had just smoked the brands from when earl knew her, 1974 on, would just those brands of cigarettes she smoked during that time, was that enough to substantially contribute to the disease? vol 07 pm graham, earl he said, yes, absolutely. why? because it is the repeated exposures over time. but even barbara beaty talked about philip morris and r.j. reynolds cigarettes before then. question 3 is a no-brainer. we would submit question, 1, 2, and 3 are no-brainers. she was addicted. the addiction caused the disease. and smoking their cigarettes -- it was smoking these defendants' cigarettes that created the diseases. now, once that happens, a very important thing happened. turn to page 12 of the jury instructions. 11. i'm sorry. page 11 of the jury instructions. well, i'm sorry, after you answered question 1 and 193 2, was she addicted and addiction caused the disease, these findings, the engle findings, apply. so before you answer question 3, these findings apply. smoking cigarettes causes lung cancer including adenocarcinoma. that nicotine in cigarettes is addictive. vol 07 pm graham, earl it goes on. but the next topic i want to talk about is that the engle defendants concealed or omitted material information not otherwise known or available. i highlight that. not otherwise known or available. knowing that the material was false or misleading or failed to disclose a material fact concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes or both. the next finding says that they agreed to conceal. these are findings that had been made. the judge will instruct you you cannot question them. you have to accept them. and after you have answered the first two questions in the affirmative, they apply. so any other decision you make, you need to go back and read these findings and say, we have to accept these. these are the law. this is what it is. now, we would submit -- let us go to the timeline. this is when you go to the timeline. you are on the next group now. concealment and conspiracy. and we built this timeline here for you to see. 194 vol 07 pm graham, earl we did not have all the 60 million pages of documents that dr. cummings talked about. we could not show you all of them. we had time limits in this case. but he said, many times, there is a lot of examples of this type of document or that type of document. there are tons of these documents. we could only show you a few. but the conspiracy started back here at the plaza hotel where they agreed to create these entities, the tobacco industry research committee and the tirc, to lie about whether cigarettes cause cancer. oh, it is not true. the science is not there. you heard from the philip morris executive from the last video. science is not there. it is not true. it went on all the way to when faye graham died. and you can see these exhibits, you know, exhibit 166. in 1961, the cigarette scientists -- this is the document that they say there is these carcinogens and we cannot remove them. we cannot get them out. you heard dr. gentry and dr. jupe say we are trying -- it is not addiction. it is the carcinogens in the cigarette we are trying to get rid of. but they knew back vol 07 pm graham, earl then they cannot remove them. it is impossible. dr. jupe said it is impossible. they knew it in 1961. but what they will not work on is addiction. you go on. they started selling doubt as our 195 product. they said it in their own internal documents, and they continue. now, what did they do about making their product addictive? first, they lied about whether it causes disease and is injurious. what do they do about making their product addictive? all these. exhibit -- 1962, exhibit 77. we now possess a knowledge about how to -- about nicotine addiction and how it works. and by 1982 -- i'm sorry, 1982, they have this document where they talk about we can improve our share of the market by targeting our products to the crucial entry and exit groups. exit groups, addicted people trying to quit. nicorette gum coming out. these are the exit groups they are worried about. this is exhibit 72. we would submit that is a document worth reading. and then finally, exhibit 210, in 1984, because vol 07 pm graham, earl you are going to be asked this question in the concealment conspiracy claims: did she rely on things that happened after 1982? of course she did. the whole conspiracy started way back here and continued way past 1982. in 1984 -- can we bring up that document? in 1984 -- okay. if you can bring that up a little bit bigger. this document is a study that is being done internally in the cigarette industry, confidential, not out 196 there, where they are discussing all the ways they can manipulate and control the design of the cigarette. control the nicotine delivery to keep people addicted. and by the time you get to '84, they are laughing at their customers. they are laughing at their customers. they are poetic about it. a cigarette is the perfect type of perfect pleasure. it is exquisite and leaves one unsatisfied. what more can one want. they quote. and then it goes on to say, let us provide the exquisiteness and hope that they, our customers, continue to vol 07 pm graham, earl remain unsatisfied. well, they know they will because many of them are addicted. all we would want then is a larger bag to carry the money to the bank. okay. at the same time, 400,000 body bags -- ms. parker: objection. argument. the court: overruled. mr. geary: excuse me, your honor. additional objection as to the williams objection we talked about before. the court: overruled. mr. byrd: dr. gentry admitted 400,000 deaths a year. one in two smokers are going to get a disease. it was a little bit vague in his mind, and then he remembered 197 400,000 deaths a year. faye graham was one of them. now, you are going to get to a question, question number -- let me go to the comparative fault question. so we would submit to you, have we proved more vol 07 pm graham, earl likely right than wrong that they agreed -- that they concealed information? of course we did. because there was information that was not otherwise known or available as given to you by the engle findings once you find she is a member of the engle class. was it a conspiracy? you will be instructed on that. they did agree. you will be instructed on what a conspiracy is. one of the next questions -- ms. parker: objection as to the term that is used. it is an agreement. the court: overruled. mr. byrd: it is a conspiracy claim we have. agreement -- the jury will be instructed about what a conspiracy is. now, the next question you will be asked about was whether -- was the reliance a legal cause of faye graham's death in each of these questions? of course it was. you will go to the jury instruction again where they tell you what is legal cause. and legal cause does not 198 vol 07 pm graham, earl have to be the only reason. it has to be a reason. the concealment and omissions and lies that you see on this timeline just had to be a reason that contributed to her disease and death. and we submit that that is true. now, let us get to comparative fault. incidentally, barbara beaty came in here and she is about the only -- you know, only person that the defendants wanted to use for anything, and came in here and she said some pretty harsh charges about mr. earl graham. well, he beat my mom. now, let us say a couple of things about that. she never said anywhere in her deposition that was all day long -- she had an all-day deposition. ms. parker: objection, your honor. not in evidence. objection. the court: do you mean her testimony? mr. byrd: she was asked whether -- was not she -- in a deposition for how long it was, and she was asked whether she said anything like that. ms. parker: no, your honor. no evidence. the court: well, that is overruled. there was a question about her deposition. there was not any specific vol 07 pm graham, earl reference to anything in her deposition, but you did ask her about her deposition testimony. the jury will remember what her testimony was specifically. 199 mr. byrd: she was -- she came in here and she said -- mr. lantinberg asked her: you gave a deposition, a full-day deposition; is that right? 9:00 to 5:00 or something like that. yes, i did. and you did not say anything about this in that deposition? well, she said, well, i do not think i was asked. okay. a full-day deposition, i submit to you everything would be covered, and she had nothing to say about that. but what she did do is the day before she came in to testify, she talked to the cigarette companies' lawyers and then came in here and testified. now, what did she testify about? one incident -- vol 07 pm graham, earl did she describe any circumstances about what happened? did she describe any specifics about what happened? any of the facts surrounding it? exactly when, where, what the situation was? no. you did not hear that. you did hear from mr. earl graham, who came up and he acknowledged one incident they had when they first met, and he told the defendants about it in his deposition. this is how they knew. so mr. graham said nothing ever like that ever happened again. and so i would submit, no. 1, it did not happen. 200 nothing happened like that. there is all sorts of reasons why family members come in and have disputes and -- ms. parker: objection. no evidence. mr. byrd: -- you did not hear -- the court: i'll sustain that. mr. byrd: -- you did not hear any evidence. certainly not enough evidence to say likely right than wrong to say what she said was true. you heard evidence from mr. graham, too. regardless, what does it matter right now to your vol 07 pm graham, earl questions of addiction and to whether addiction caused her disease? is this a distraction? does this really matter to what you have to decide in this case? now, on the comparative fault issue, this is where you will be asked what percentage of fault should be attributed to faye graham and what comparative fault should be attributed to reynolds and philip morris. here's what we would submit to the jury here. this is the place where if you have a problem with whether -- you know, how hard she tried to quit, whether she should have known to quit earlier, or what she should have done in quitting, this is the place for you to put that in. we would submit to you that the first warnings were not until 1966. she started smoking in 1951. for 15 years there were no warnings on packages. okay. for the 201 rest of the years, there was a warning that said it may be hazardous. the surgeon general says it may be hazardous. it was not until 1985 when the surgeon general -- i mean, when the surgeon general demanded that a warning be on that said it causes lung cancer. it was the first time. vol 07 pm graham, earl so for seven or eight years, eight years of her smoking history, from '85 to 1993 when she died, that warning was on the package. mr. geary: excuse me, your honor. objection, preemption. the court: overruled. mr. byrd: that is twenty percent of her smoking history. what we would argue is that, look, they made the cigarettes. she smoked them. we would start at 50/50 for everybody. but if you take -- you know, take the twenty percent history that she had that knowledge of between 1958 and 1992 about lung cancer, take that twenty percent and split it 50/50. why? because of what they were doing. they did not even admit it until 1999 that it caused cancer. if you split it two ways, that is ten percent fault to mrs. graham. she has paid with her life already. that is ten percent fault to mrs. graham and ninety percent fault to r.j. reynolds and philip morris. and we would submit 202 vol 07 pm graham, earl equally. now, i will be back up here when i can, but i need to talk to you about -- well, as you consider that comparative fault, i want you to remember, you know, the cigarette companies had a hundred percent of the knowledge of what they were doing with their cigarettes in designing the product, and they worked as hard as they could to push her knowledge down to zero with what she had. they did everything they could with their advertising. they spent -- all the pink sheets in the world that the defendants put on this board, all the pink sheets in the world, okay -- we read you the ftc report. the cigarette companies spent in one day what the public health authorities spent in a year to warn people. now, think about that. all the pink sheets in the world cannot undo that. and there is a reason why they are sending this advertising out while these claims are coming out in newspapers. they are bombarding a hundred times. if we had played the advertisements here comparable to the psas that were out there, we would have been here for weeks. a hundred times vol 07 pm graham, earl the number of ads for one psa. so think about that. they had a hundred percent of the knowledge and worked so hard through advertising and other ways to push our knowledge down to zero. now, how do you judge the damages in this case? 203 you will get to the spot in the verdict form where you were asked to state the total amount of damages you find for earl graham's loss of support. and the judge will instruct you about how you are supposed to determine that. you are just supposed to look at the losses to be -- the full, just, and reasonable compensation. and we are not asking you for sympathy. we are not asking you -- the time for sympathy is gone. we want you to talk about just the losses that he suffered. here's a man, okay, who, by the way, should not be -- no one wants to be judged -- even if it is -- even if there is any remote truthfulness to anything that ms. beaty said, and there is not. no one wants to be judged by the worst day in their life. he had 20-some-odd years -- or about 20 years, vol 07 pm graham, earl from '74 to '93, with faye graham. love at first sight, and went on. and she was independent herself. she loved earl graham. they did things together. they drove an rv. they traveled around together. it was one of the last things they were able to do. she just wanted to get in the car and drive around with him. it was as if they were married since 1974. he had the watch that you saw. he had the rings that she gave him in 1974, and he is never taken them off. never remarried and never taken them off. she did everything for him. 204 she did one of the things that is probably the most embarrassing and hardest things to discuss with people you do not know. he could not read. she read for him since they knew each other. she did all of the stuff to deal around the house, even as much as reading his entire life. now he goes down the street to a friend with his mail. so, you know, if i were here asking you for -- if i were here asking you to compensate mr. graham because he loss somebody he loved for a week, maybe that would be something that i would ask in the thousands for. vol 07 pm graham, earl if i were here asking you to -- you know, mr. graham lost somebody for a few months because she is in the hospital and this is a tough recovery period, you know, maybe we would get in the tens of thousands. but you have to measure the level of harm here that was suffered. here we have somebody who lost, as you heard mr. lantinberg read the tables and that is why we did that, lost somebody who had a life expectancy of 25 years. she had another 25 years to live. she died in 1993. she would still be here with us today. how do you measure that? you have to do that. you have to measure that. but that is why we suggest a number of $6 million. 5.5 million puffs, that is about a dollar a puff. $6 million. you may choose to do more than that. you may choose to do a little bit less than that. that is in your 205 hands, but we suggest to you that that is the number. and then the final question that you are going to be asked is about punitive damages. the punitive damage question is whether their vol 07 pm graham, earl conduct -- it is very simple. the judge is going to instruct you. the standard is if you find that mr. graham has proved by clear and convincing evidence -- it is a higher standard than beyond more likely right than wrong. it is a little bit higher standard. everything else is on the more likely right than wrong. we have to show you by clear and convincing evidence that the defendant had -- the defendants had actual knowledge of the wrongfulness of their conduct and that there was a high probability of injury or damage to mrs. graham, and despite that knowledge, intentionally pursued that course of conduct resulting in mrs. graham's death. all we ask you to do is see this timeline. by the way, this is not evidence. this is not going to go back in the jury room with you. it is here right now for you to see. all we would submit to you, of course, this was intentional. they were designing the products intentionally for addiction. by the time you get to 1984, they are laughing about it. all we need is a bigger bag to go to the bank. 206 vol 07 pm graham, earl and today, dr. gentry and dr. jupe, you know, they cannot even admit addiction causes the disease. they cannot even admit addiction causes the disease. oh, it is addictive, and we admit smoking causes cancer and that smoking can be addictive. but you heard the attorney ask him, what about chain of causation? does not addiction, then, cause the disease? no, no, no, we would not say that. we cannot say that. and that is their current dispute. that is what they dispute now, because what they will say is anybody can quit. now i'm going to sit down. i thank you for your time. i will only have a few minutes to come back. i took more than i expected. i am only going to have a few minutes when i get back up here. but you will hear from the attorneys on the other side, and they are very good attorneys, and you will hear from them. and i will just ask a couple of things when you vol 07 pm graham, earl listen. one, remember this campaign of doubt, okay? remember they are going to come up here with arguments and say, oh, we do not know if it was lung cancer. maybe it was this. 207 ms. parker: objection, your honor. we have a right to defend ourselves. the court: i'll overrule that. mr. byrd: we do not know if this is lung cancer. we do not really know if she ever -- we do not know if she ever really saw any of our advertising. what is more likely right than wrong is what you have to look at. and i want you to think about that as you hear their arguments. every time -- she is going -- i believe they will talk to you about faye graham's choices that she made. and they are going to use the word "choice" over and over. every time they talk about faye graham's choices that she made, i want you to think about the exact same timeline of when they are talking about what choices they vol 07 pm graham, earl made. what choices faye did during that same time. finally, as they argue, we would submit that the argument in this case, really, from the tobacco companies is this -- and i want you to think about this in a common sense way. back to common sense. the argument from the tobacco companies is: faye graham, what were you doing? you were just dumb to buy our product and use it. why did you do that? think about that and where we are in this courtroom. what you are going to do is important. you are 208 the last stop for this -- for mr. graham's claims. the president, he is one branch of government. the congress is another branch -- ms. parker: objection. the court: i'll sustain that. it is not the last stop, necessarily. mr. byrd: okay. maybe appeal. the court: i'm sorry? mr. byrd: it may be appealed. vol 07 pm graham, earl the court: you understand the objection and you understand the ruling because we talked about it. mr. byrd: okay. you are the third branch of government for us. ms. parker: objection, your honor. the court: that is fine. but, mr. byrd, you need to make your point and move on. mr. byrd: okay. and we ask that you consider the evidence carefully. read the evidence and the documents we have put forward and that you will take back in the jury room with you. and return a verdict of -- what we would suggest is $6 million for mr. graham's losses and a yes on punitive damages. thank you very much. mr. byrd: so that is the argument. she should not -- she should have known better than to smoke the very products we wanted her to smoke and gave to her to smoke. now, you heard some arguments here from them that -- you know, you heard ms. parker say they want you to come back for more evidence. you can just check no, no, no, and then you can go home. you are better than that. mr. graham has asked for more than that. we want you to look at the evidence. take the time you need to look vol 07 pm graham, earl at the evidence and make a decision that you want. they mentioned the word "quit" over and over. the word "quit" is not in the verdict form. if anything, it goes into the comparative fault section. the percentage of fault. if their definition of "addiction" were true, guess what? then there is no addiction. we all agree that people can quit. any addict of any drug can quit. it does not mean that you were not addicted. and that is the question that you will face. 255 i heard them mention the 60 million people that have quit smoking. they did not tell you about the definition of how that was determined. you only had to have smoked a hundred cigarettes ever to have been a smoker. only a hundred. they did not talk to you about how many of those people relapsed. we did not hear about all the people that relapsed of the 60 million, which is what the experts say, chronic relapsing disease. the medical records -- let us go to the medical records. vol 07 pm graham, earl by the way, you heard the stipulations of fact. there is no stipulation of fact that r.j. reynolds is legally responsible for these companies you heard about, the american tobacco company, brown & williamson. those are the companies that -- they were the previous names, but they own them now, and they are legally responsible for them. there is no dispute about that whatsoever. that is the law. now, the medical records you talked about, they wrote -- in the first medical record, they wrote plus 30-year-pack history. they said there was nothing in the medical records about addiction. what do you think they wrote that for? of course, it relates to her lung cancer. they only talked to you about two medical records. in their exhibits, there are only two records. 256 we gave you all the medical records, exhibit 1365. of course, they pick the first ones when they are first starting to test. after they test, their doctors, her treating doctors, said lung cancer. adenocarcinoma. you have engle finding caused by smoking. adenocarcinoma of the lung, the treating doctors did say that. vol 07 pm graham, earl dr. feingold is not disagreeing with them. he went on to test it and prove it further. you heard nothing from the defendants to counter that. the last people who can blame faye graham for smoking cigarettes, surely, are the companies that gave them to her. you heard mr. heimann say, i would not blame a smoker for smoking one pack. i will not blame them for smoking two. but that is what they are doing to faye graham right now. now, you heard them talk about -- briefly about medical issues. oh, now it came from a different part of the body, the gi tract. but the medical records, when you look, you know that -- you remember dr. feingold said if it had come from down here, the stomach, or the gi tract, reproductive tract, it would have hit the liver first, but the liver was all clear. read the medical records. the liver was all clear. and that is why they were able to test and the 257 vol 07 pm graham, earl treating doctors said adenocarcinoma of the lung and that is why dr. feingold was able to seal it with testing. seal the deal a hundred percent, ttf-1, napsin a, no question. now, you heard the defendants talk about these documents that we brought up. oh, just a few documents. well, we did not have time to bring you all of them. of course not. and that would be wasting some time if we sat here forever. no witness from r.j. reynolds or philip morris came in here to tell you any different than what we showed you in those documents are what they meant. they brought no witness. and if there was a good explanation, they would have brought it. they read some documents, cherry picked things from the stuff they wrote and gave to people to mislead them. there is -- speaking of which, there is no evidence in here at all about why they talk about the e.u. made this decision about light and low tars. we have heard no evidence about what the circumstances were or what information they had, if they even made that decision. vol 07 pm graham, earl now, you heard no evidence at all from the defendants to contradict the videos you heard from their own executives. you know, if these pink sheets are so obvious that they put on there and mrs. graham should have known, 258 what were the cigarette executives doing? closing their eyes and ears? they did not hear it? mr. heimann and the philip morris executives, what were they doing? did they not read reader's digest? there was no evidence that faye graham ever read reader's digest. if it was so obvious, what were they doing? why were they marketing cigarettes saying that they are so good for you and that they are okay for you and they will not hurt you if they knew all these pink sheets were true? now, it is like this, an analogy -- cell phones. everybody uses cell phones today. okay. and let us say reports come out if you use your cell phone all the time, you might get brain cancer. you see it in newspapers sometimes. a few articles here and there. what if 30, 40 years down the road, we find out that lo and behold, the cell phone companies knew they had vol 07 pm graham, earl these documents that said it causes brain cancer and they hid them? they did not tell us. they waited while everybody kept using it, developing this stuff, and they did not say a word about it. and then we try to hold them accountable, and they go back and go, well, you knew. you knew. you heard it in newspapers it causes brain cancer. and you are trying to come back and trying to say, well, hold on, but everybody was using cell phones. nobody 259 really believed it. well, it is in the newspaper right here. here's an article. here's an article. here's an article. what were you doing using that cell phone? it changes everything. these documents change everything because now we know they knew. and all these pink sheets -- repackaging. repackaging. now, ms. parker says we are repacking. faye graham, earl graham. ed, bring up advertising. the court: two minutes, mr. byrd. vol 07 pm graham, earl mr. byrd: from the greatest -- this is exhibit 1060. you will have it back here. you will have all these print ads you can just flip through. if they knew that this stuff was hurting people and killing people, what were these ads doing? more doctors smoke camels. look through them, please, ed. keep going. oh, this will help your throat. no throat irritation. what were they doing advertising this? keep flipping through, ed. over and over. keep flipping through, because we do not have the time to go through all of them. if they knew that this stuff was bad, why were they doing this? $250 billion. they spent more in one day 260 than the public health authorities could spend in a year to warn people. you think -- i mean, the cell phone companies, more newspaper reports or more advertisements to buy cell phones? which one blankets? vol 07 pm graham, earl now, i appreciate your time. the last thing i'll say, the defendants argue that there is no reliance. there is no proof of reliance. there is no communication here that she relied on. reliance? 5.5 million puffs. the communication from the cigarette company after 1982? after they said the exit gates are open. oh, no, december 1982, look at exhibit 72 about this. exhibit 72, read it. it is a great document. the connection? every time she opened one of these and puffed them. every time. there is the communication. every time she opened one of these and puffed on it. a new reliance on their product. just like when you open a bottle of water and you assume that what is in it is what they have told you about. that is the reliance. the cigarettes that she smoked. the court: time, mr. byrd. mr. byrd: we appreciate your time, and we request a verdict in our favor for mr. graham, as we said. thank you. thank you for your time.