5 ms. parker: may it please the court? mr. graham, and counsel, and ladies and gentlemen of the jury, hello again. i'm so appreciative. and i want to join mr. byrd in thanking you for your service as jurors. my whole team wants to thank you. you-all have been here for over a week now. and we know you have been paying attention. and i hope at the end of all this that you will believe that you have enjoyed your service. it was a real sacrifice, we know, for you to be here, and we appreciate it very much. now, when i started last monday -- and remember that was the other time that i had a chance to talk directly with you. and when we started last monday, i asked you then, i said, this case is only about one smoker. remember i said that? i said throughout the trial, please try to keep your attention just on this one smoker. that is what we are here about. we are only about one smoker, and that is mrs. graham. now, what did you hear at trial about mrs. graham? what did her family members say? 210 vol 07 pm graham, earl remember her daughter said, i knew mama was going to do what mama wanted to do about smoking. and remember that when mr. graham told her about quitting, mrs. graham, according to him, just looked at him and laughed. remember mr. graham said, nobody forced the cigarettes on her. the testimony was unequivocal that she liked to smoke. she enjoyed smoking. and when people told her -- when her family members told her that smoking had health risks and that she should quit, she told them to mind their own business. she called her cigarettes cancer sticks. and even after she got sick with cancer, she never blamed, she was never angry with the tobacco companies. some people like to smoke cigarettes, and they have that right to do it here in the united states. some people just enjoy smoking. some people like to smoke. they can quit if they want to, but they do not want to quit because they enjoy it. vol 07 pm graham, earl and mrs. graham had the right here in the united states to make that decision for herself. now, most of the testimony that you heard during the trial -- in fact, they put up one witness, dr. cummings, who did not talk about mrs. graham at all. most of the 211 testimony that you heard from them at trial had absolutely nothing to do with mrs. graham. it is distraction testimony, to keep you from being focused on the facts of mrs. graham. but this case is only about her. and every question on the verdict form asks about mrs. graham, whether she was aware of the health risks of smoking, her life, what she wanted to do with her life. and so to decide the questions on the verdict form, i would like to respectfully suggest that what you need to do is to focus on mrs. graham and the facts of her life. ladies and gentlemen, our witnesses in this trial are the facts. all those facts that are in the medical records, that her daughter admitted, that mr. graham vol 07 pm graham, earl admitted, the facts are our witnesses. if anybody -- mr. byrd said something about our not calling witnesses. if anybody goes back in the jury room and anybody has a concern about that, judge treadwell himself is going to tell you -- and this is a jury instruction that you are going to hear from the court when the court gives you the jury instructions. the number of witnesses testifying concerning any particular dispute is not controlling. now, throughout this whole trial, what is been happening is they have been telling this story that does not 212 fit the facts of mrs. graham's life. and you-all have heard a lot since you have been here last monday, but what i have tried to do for you this afternoon is to boil all that down so that you will have -- i can go over with you and you will have with you when you go back to deliberate the information that you need to be able to answer those questions on the verdict form. after everything you have heard in this trial, i would like to respectfully submit that it all boils down to vol 07 pm graham, earl five simple truths about mrs. graham that i would like to go over with you. here is truth no. 1: mrs. graham knew the risks of smoking. this is a woman who was intelligent. she kept up with current affairs. there is no doubt whatsoever that she knew that smoking was dangerous. but what they have tried to do in their efforts to get $6 million is to come in here and repackage her in a way that does not fit the facts about her life. now, she passed away in 1993. and, of course, that was 20 years ago. mr. graham testified he had -- when i asked him here, he said it again in court, that even though warnings were on every package she smoked, starting in 1966, mr. graham said, right there on the witness stand, that 213 mrs. graham did not really know about the health risks of smoking. okay. what are the facts, our witnesses, what are the facts about that? vol 07 pm graham, earl mr. byrd: objection. disclosure. i believe the rule is clear. the court: you are talking about the demonstrative? mr. byrd: right. ms. parker: we have had no requirement about exchanging any kind of demonstratives. i've got nothing from them. we had no discussion about that at all. mr. byrd: exactly. we have not seen anything. we have used exhibits was all -- we were going to use the verdict form and jury instruction. we did not get any disclosure of this, i do not believe. there are certainly local rules about -- i would just like to see them. ms. parker: i'm happy to give him a copy now. the court: well, give him a copy. proceed. ms. parker: let us go over the facts that you have in this case about mrs. graham and her awareness of health risks. well, she was born into a world where the risks of smoking were already known. remember back in 1899, the state 214 vol 07 pm graham, earl of florida enacted a law. we showed you that law during trial, a law that prohibits the sale of cigarettes because of the dangers of smoking. now, of course, that was later changed because the state of florida decided that adults could have the choice to smoke. and then we know -- and i showed you this during trial -- in 1906, remember, there was the official document from the state of florida health department, and that official document from the state of florida referred to cigarettes as an addiction. and another one -- there it is. another one that we showed you from 1912 referred to it as coffin nails. and then remember reader's digest. you saw the reader's digest articles at trial. they started publishing articles about the health risks of smoking starting in 1924, and they continued to publish dozens and dozens of articles about the health risks of smoking. and, in fact, ninety percent of all americans in 1954, vol 07 pm graham, earl ninety percent from this poll that you were shown, june 1954, said that they had heard or read that cigarette smoking may be a cause of lung cancer. and then remember the 1964 report came out. that was front-page news. everywhere in the united states, including here in jacksonville. remember, we showed you 215 these newspaper articles. and that same year, the american medical association -- mr. byrd: your honor, this slide i object to under orders in the motion in limine about actual knowledge. there is no -- can we discuss this? i've just never seen these. the court: i do not have it either. mr. byrd: can you take it down? the court: yes, take it down. [#deleted sidebar#] ms. parker: let me go back to where we were before we took the break. we were talking about the 1964 surgeon general's report. remember when that came out, it was front-page news. all across the country. including -- remember, you saw these newspaper articles during trial during the actual -- will you pull those up. the newspaper articles. during the trial, you saw these newspaper articles. back. there you go. remember those? this was front-page news here in vol 07 pm graham, earl jacksonville, as well as all around the united states. and these were the newspapers, of course, that mrs. graham herself read according to her family members. that same year, the american medical association, you heard this at trial, as well, said that the hazards of cigarette smoking were common knowledge. 223 and we know about the television news reports on it, and the public service announcements, like the ones you saw from larry hagman. and then remember you saw this slide when we cross-examined dr. cummings. this is from daniel horn. remember, daniel horn was the head of the federal government's national clearinghouse on smoking and health. and he said, back in 1968, you should stand on a rooftop and shout smoking is dangerous at the top of your lungs and you would not be telling anyone anything they did not already know. now, in addition to this evidence, what have you heard in this trial about mrs. graham? and, remember, no amount of money that somebody spends on ads compares to what you learn in your own life and with your own family members. vol 07 pm graham, earl what did she learn in her own life about the health risks of smoking? well, remember the key testimony of her daughter, barbara beaty, the one who knew her the best. remember, ms. beaty came in here yesterday and she made it clear over and over that her mother knew about the health risks of smoking. and mrs. graham called her cigarettes cancer sticks. remember the testimony was she would go over to the table and she would see her package of cigarettes and she would say, let me light one of these cancer sticks. and remember mrs. graham called her smoker's cough 224 a damn smoker's cough. remember that evidence? that is another warning to her from her own body that smoking was causing her to have a cough, and she acknowledged that. she blamed that on smoking. and remember her mother. remember the testimony about her mother who was diagnosed with emphysema. as soon as she was diagnosed with emphysema, she quit smoking, and she put a sign on her front door that said "no smoking." vol 07 pm graham, earl that is another warning to mrs. graham about the health risks of smoking from her own mother who told her and her brothers and sisters that they should not smoke. and then when her brother, charles herrin, took the stand -- he was the very first witness for the plaintiff. and mr. walker examined him. when mr. walker cross-examined him, he admitted, plain as can be, she knew. he said that as clear as day sitting right here on the witness stand. and then mr. graham, yesterday, admitted that when he quit smoking himself, he felt a whole lot better. he said he felt healthier, and he said he told mrs. graham that. again, more information to mrs. graham. mr. graham told her that smoking could cause lung cancer. you heard that yesterday. you heard yesterday that mrs. graham warned her children that they should not smoke and that smoking was a very bad habit and they should not start. 225 you heard that mrs. graham read newspapers throughout her life, cover to cover. she read magazines, and she watched the news on tv almost every night. you heard vol 07 pm graham, earl mr. graham admit that, and her daughter said the same, when they were living together. and mrs. graham was exposed to these warning labels every time she started smoking. remember the three warning labels that you saw at trial. now, after all of that mountain of information there, you are going to have to decide if it is credible to believe that mrs. graham did not know about the health risks of smoking, which is what her husband, mr. graham, the one who is here asking for money, that is what he said yesterday up on the stand. the real mrs. graham, the facts of the real mrs. graham, was well aware of the risks of smoking, and there was nothing that reynolds or philip morris did that changed that. now, the plaintiff has spent a lot of time in this case trying to convince you that the public did not know about the health risks of smoking because of something the tobacco companies did. well, let us talk about that for a minute. you know, you do not need to know the minute details and all the vol 07 pm graham, earl scientific information that are in some of the documents you 226 were seeing to know what is really important, and that is that smoking causes health problems, smoking can cause you to have cancer, smoking can result in your death. and one of the things that you can do in this case when you are back in the jury room is to use your common sense. so let me give you an example -- again, just use your common sense when you think about that. we all know that if you drink alcoholic beverages, if you drink beer and go out and drink liquor, you do not know those scientific minute technical parts of drinking, what is in alcohol. you do not know exactly what the chemicals are in beer or in liquor. you do not know exactly how beer or liquor affects your brain. you know, you do not know all that information. but if you use your common sense, every one of us knows what is important, and that is if you drink too much, you can get drunk, and if you drink too much and you drive, you can cause a wreck and you can kill somebody. that is what is important. vol 07 pm graham, earl and it is the same thing with cigarettes. mrs. graham knew what all the rest of the american public knew, and that is what is important, and that is that smoking had health risks. you did not need to know the specific technical aspects of how that worked to know the risks that were 227 associated with using that product. at the end of the day, the simple truth is that mrs. graham was fully aware of the health risks of smoking and their efforts to repackage her as somebody who did not know because of the tobacco companies is just not correct. now, let us go to the second simple truth in this case, and that is that mrs. graham was able to quit smoking. now, mr. graham is required to prove that mrs. graham was addicted to cigarettes, and -- and that the legal cause of her cancer was an addiction to cigarettes. those are two different things. those are questions 1 and 2 on the verdict form. your answer to both of those should be no. vol 07 pm graham, earl what was the evidence? what evidence did you hear? well, was the evidence that nicotine addiction controlled mrs. graham and left her no choice, no matter how much she tried, but just to keep on smoking until she passed away? was that the evidence? or was the evidence that faye graham liked to smoke? she enjoyed smoking. she did not seriously try to quit, and she had the ability to quit at any time. now, this case is not about the general issue about whether or not cigarettes can be addictive, because they can be. and this case is not about other people or someone else you may know who is addicted. that is not what 228 we are here about. we are only here about mrs. graham. mrs. graham did not fit the profile of somebody who was an addict. what were the facts of mrs. graham? well, she was not someone who hated smoking. remember the testimony from both her daughter and her husband was that she liked to smoke. she enjoyed smoking. remember her routine was that she had a cigarette with a cup of coffee. her daughter said that cigarettes and vol 07 pm graham, earl coffee went together for her mother. she is not someone who sincerely tried everything she could to quit but she just could not. that is not her. she was not someone who was unable to quit because she was an addict, a person who lost free will about smoking. she is not somebody who was tormented by her smoking. as a matter of fact, the evidence was she was never angry at a tobacco company even after she got sick. the profile that they are describing does not fit the facts of this case. and the true picture, the true facts of mrs. graham are just the opposite. she is a lady who enjoyed smoking, who knew the risks, and who wanted to smoke. now, you heard at trial there are a lot of different labels for smoking. sometimes people call it a habit. sometimes people call it an addiction. there have been different definitions of addiction. 229 remember our federal government said that there was a classic definition of addiction, and that definition required intoxication. and smoking is not intoxicating. vol 07 pm graham, earl and then that definition has changed by the federal government at a later time. so there have been different labels. whatever you call it, though, the question is and what is important is, can the smoker quit? can smokers quit? and the answer is yes. all smokers can quit. even addicted smokers. of course, it may be more difficult for some smokers than for others, but with sufficient motivation and effort, all smokers can quit. and that is why there are over 60 million, 60 million former smokers, alive today in the united states. 3,000 people quit smoking every day. now, to get around the facts of mrs. graham, they keep talking about this brain disease. okay. that is their theory of their case, is that mrs. graham had a brain disease and, therefore, she was not able to quit. let us talk about that. that story just does not fit the facts of mrs. graham. here's what the evidence shows about mrs. graham. nicotine does not permanently change your brain. nicotine leaves your body after two to three days. vol 07 pm graham, earl nicotine does not prevent smokers from understanding the 230 risks of smoking. nicotine does not prevent smokers from quitting. so let us talk for a few minutes about the witnesses. what was the evidence about the witnesses that the plaintiff brought you on the issue of addiction? well, there was dr. cummings. remember, dr. cummings has this traveling show. he goes around from courtroom to courtroom testifying. this is his 11th trial just this year. remember this chart that i showed to dr. cummings when he was here? this is just the amount of time he spent the last six weeks testifying. sixty percent of his income comes from testifying. he is made over a million dollars. and i asked him when i cross-examined him, and he agreed, he is not an independent witness. he admits he is biased. he said he was rooting for mr. graham to win. and he gave no opinions that are specific to mrs. graham. he talked for, what, over two days just in general. he has this one-size-fits-all presentation, and he vol 07 pm graham, earl goes from courtroom to courtroom to courtroom and puts it on. and outside of the courtroom when he is not being paid, he has a smoking clinic where he tells people to come to his clinic, you can quit. he never tells anybody, hey, leave, i do not want you to come. you cannot quit. remember, i showed you this brochure when he cross-examined him. this is his own brochure that he wrote 231 and it says, if you answer those questions, you can stop smoking. so even their witness, dr. cummings, admits smokers can quit. who was their other witness on addiction? dr. feingold. another professional witness. almost all he does is come to court, also. remember, he said he made almost $40 million testifying. much of it with mr. lantinberg's law partner, mr. wilner. he and mr. wilner have been working together for over 30 years. and dr. feingold did not even know anything about mrs. graham's children. the only deposition he had read in the entire case was the deposition of the plaintiff, of mr. graham, the person who is here asking for money. vol 07 pm graham, earl again, the facts are our witnesses. no medical record says that mrs. graham was addicted. no treating doctor of mrs. graham said that mrs. graham was addicted. but dr. feingold is coming to court, disagreeing with the medical records. he was hired and he was paid to come into court for one reason, and that is to take the stand and to say what he needed to say so they could answer the legal requirements that they have to make to meet their burden of proof. but even dr. feingold, even he admitted two things: mrs. graham was not a robot. and, of course, mrs. graham could have quit smoking at any time. 232 it is still the responsibility of the smoker, mrs. graham, to make that effort to quit. so what is the evidence about mrs. graham's effort to quit? well, you have to want to quit for yourself. mrs. graham had to want to quit for herself. it does not work if somebody else wants you to quit but you do not. you have to be motivated for yourself. mrs. graham is the person who was in charge of her vol 07 pm graham, earl decisions about smoking. she never made a serious effort to quit because she did not want to. she wanted to smoke. she liked to smoke. that is how she decided she wanted to live her life. remember, you heard every single witness agree, she never made an effort to quit that lasted more than 24 hours. her daughter, barbara, who testified yesterday, who knew her better than anyone else, said she only tried to quit one time in her entire life. and that happened when she went to hypnosis, and that was after 1985. just think about that. from when she first started smoking all the way until sometime after 1985, her daughter, who lived with her, most of the time, she only tried to quit one time, and that is when she went to hypnosis. what happened? when she went to hypnosis, mr. graham went with her. mr. graham says when she got back 233 in the car -- as soon as she got back in the car, she started smoking again. now, that is not a serious effort to quit. vol 07 pm graham, earl she never threw out her cigarettes. that is absolutely undisputed here. she enjoyed smoking. and smoking does not take away personal responsibility. the smoker has control of her own behavior. addiction does not mean that you cannot quit. addiction does not relieve a smoker of responsibility for her own behavior. and you know there is nothing wrong with the decisions that mrs. graham made. it is legal to smoke. that is how she wanted to lead her life. and we are not second -- we ask that you not second-guess the decisions that she made for her own life. now, question 2 on the verdict form asks specifically about legal cause. well, the answer to that question on the verdict form should be no, because addiction did not prevent her from quitting. she never made a serious effort to quit. that is going to be undisputed when you go back to the jury room. no witness told you otherwise. mrs. graham knew smoking had health risks, and she vol 07 pm graham, earl never made a serious effort to quit. which brings us to truth no. 3, which is that 234 mr. graham did not prove his medical case. the plaintiff has to prove to your satisfaction that mrs. graham had lung cancer, and that it was caused by smoking. and that is question 3 on the verdict form. again, it was 1993 when mrs. graham passed away. and you are going to have to decide if they have met their burden of proof to prove to you that her cancer actually started in her lung. those very first cancer cells started in her lung, and that her cancer was caused by smoking. they had the burden of proof on that. well, ladies and gentlemen, let me just respectfully suggest to you that that question, answering that question is going to come down to who do you believe, her doctors or dr. feingold? now, dr. feingold was their witness that they brought in. remember all that evidence on his background? he is the 40-million-dollar machine. he did not treat mrs. graham. he never talked to her doctors. he is not a vol 07 pm graham, earl pathologist. compare that to the treaters. remember, this is back in 1992 and 1993 when those medical records were created. there was no lawsuit back then. nobody was trying to get money back then. that is mrs. graham going to her doctor trying to get well, trying to get better, and all her doctors were doing was trying to treat her as a patient. she 235 was their patient. and here's what these -- the facts, our witnesses, the facts, here's what these medical records say. well, there is no medical record that said her cancer was caused by smoking. not a one. those are in evidence. and you can look through all of them. there is not a place in there that says it. her treating doctors, not a one of them said her cancer was caused by smoking. and the death certificate, mr. byrd showed you the death certificate when he was talking with you. her death certificate does not say anywhere on there that her cancer was caused by smoking. and that is something they have to vol 07 pm graham, earl prove. remember about the clear chest x-ray? remember this medical record that mr. walker cross-examined dr. feingold on? it says down there, chest x-ray negative. dr. feingold says he disagrees with the treaters. remember, he said, well, this was an error. he said, it was late at night -- and this was a neurosurgeon, for gosh sakes. he says, this is an error. her lung was never biopsied. there was never any tissue taken from her lung. they only biopsied her brain. she had surgery on her brain, not on her lung. and her doctor said -- remember this medical 236 record that possible primary sites, that means where it could have started, include the female reproductive tract, the gi tract, breast, and lung. and then remember about the signet ring cells. that is really important. her doctor, her own pathologist, again, not involved in any litigation back in 1992, he looked at her actual tissue and he said in his report that there was vol 07 pm graham, earl areas of signet ring differentiation. dr. feingold says that is another mistake by her treaters. he says he disagrees with that. and this is really important, dr. feingold admitted that he may not have seen all the slides that her doctors saw. there was -- again, there was never a biopsy from her lung. well, why is this important? why is this so important -- mr. byrd: objection, your honor. the order. the court: overruled. ms. parker: why is this so important about the signet ring cells? it is because dr. feingold himself admitted if you have signet ring cells present, it is more likely that your cancer started in your gi tract. and they never did any test of her gi tract. and even when signet ring cells arrive in the lung, dr. feingold admitted it has not been shown that those 237 cancers are caused by smoking. that is why it is so important for him to come in here and say there were no cigarette ring vol 07 pm graham, earl cells, because if there were, they cannot meet their burden of proof. so, again, who are you going to believe? dr. feingold, who looked at this tissue, says he -- cannot even say he looked at all of it, 20 years later, or her treaters who are independent. again, the facts are our witnesses. but it is not enough for them just to prove this issue about the medicine. there are a lot of other things they have to prove in the case, and so i need to go over those issues with you, as well. and that brings us to truth no. 4, which is mr. graham cannot establish something called legal cause. that is on the verdict form. their claims require an established link or a tie between mrs. graham and something that reynolds or philip morris did. it cannot be guesswork. it cannot be speculation. it has to be proof, not doubt. they have to prove it. and without that, there is no legal cause, and that is required on the verdict form. vol 07 pm graham, earl well, they spent during the trial most of their time talking about tobacco companies just in general. but 238 do not let that throw you off the fact of mrs. graham. dr. cummings said there were 16 million documents out there that he had looked at. remember that? well, they have cherry-picked a few phrases and a few sentences from some of the documents to come in here and to make us look bad. that is all that they are trying to do. they are trying to get you mad and upset so you will not think about mrs. graham. but in the end, you are going to see none of those things that they talked about has anything to do with her, and you are only here to decide issues about her. for example, they do not -- they have only given you half of the story, and they do not want you to hear the rest of it. even that chart that mr. byrd showed you, that big chart he had here, the timeline, remember all of those pink notes that i put on there about the rest of it, other things that happened, he took those off. he does not want you to vol 07 pm graham, earl know that. he does not want you to think about that. mr. byrd: objection. i did not take those off. the court: i'll sustain that. mr. byrd: move to strike that. the court: no. just move on. ms. parker: for example, you were shown this document by dr. cummings from 1959. remember, they showed 239 you this document with dr. cummings. and he said, oh, this is proof that we knew something that the public did not from november 1959. and this is about some chemicals that were known to produce cancer. and when i cross-examined him, i'm the one who had to bring out that very same year, the very same month in reader's digest is the same information. and then remember about the congressional hearings. they showed you a tiny, little snippet for about ten seconds where they went down the line and they asked the ceos about addiction. and remember the ceo of reynolds was cut off. he was trying to answer and he was cut off. and vol 07 pm graham, earl the congressman who was conducting the hearings said, i'll take that as a no. and then i had to come back and play the rest of it, where he explained that when he said cigarettes were not addicting, that is true under the classic definition, which requires intoxication. and i asked dr. cummings and he admitted that what mr. johnston said on that video that you were shown was true. cigarettes are not addictive under that classic definition. again, they showed you a tiny, little snippet, not the whole story, to try to make you mad at us. mr. lantinberg said in his opening last monday, he said, you know, we need to take you back in time. remember, 240 he said you need to go back in time, back in time. well, that is true for the defendants as well. reynolds and philip morris need to be judged by what they knew and what was going on back then, not years and years later when, you know, monday morning quarterbacking and when you have hindsight, things might have been done differently. vol 07 pm graham, earl i want to talk about what the evidence was about this charge that they keep making that we manipulated cigarettes. well, that is not correct. dr. cummings admitted when i cross-examined him that cigarettes today are no more addictive than cigarettes in the 1950s. think about that. everything from the 1950s forward that they claim we did, which i'm going to address in a minute, he says notwithstanding all of that, cigarettes today are no more addictive. again, it is just some phrases that they want to use, like rigging cigarettes and all, to get you mad at us. for example, about these light cigarettes, and mr. byrd talked about those. all of these people, all of these organizations, told us that we should research this issue of lowering -- lowering the tar-to-nicotine ratio as a way to try to develop a safer cigarette. that is why we were doing this research. because the surgeon general -- three reports said we should do the research, and advocated this. 241 the national cancer institute -- remember that tobacco working group, we were a member of it. the vol 07 pm graham, earl department of agriculture folks were a member. they investigated this as well -- as well as all these other people listed up here. remember the jar i showed you of the reconstituted tobacco. and i asked dr. cummings, and he finally agreed, that process that he talked about is a way of manipulating nicotine. in that process, the nicotine is taken off, less nicotine is put back on. that process actually results in tobacco that has less nicotine than when it started, and he agreed with that. ladies and gentlemen, there is a point about these light cigarettes and the low-tar issue that i want to spend a few minutes and talk to you about. you heard it this morning, and i want to take some time and explain what it means. this morning you saw a video of dr. jupe. remember, he was the philip morris witness -- it was the first one they played this morning. dr. jupe said on the video that in the e.u., that is the european union, of course, in europe, that these light cigarettes are the only ones that are allowed to be sold. think about that. vol 07 pm graham, earl if you travel to france or to europe or any other country in europe today, these cigarettes that they claim 242 that we did all these bad things about, that is the only kind of cigarettes you can buy, because in europe, they are officially considered safer. there is a good faith basis for reynolds and philip morris to have done this research and to make the claims that they made, which are the same claims that were being made by the surgeon general, the national cancer institute, and all these other people. and dr. cummings never tied any of the claims he made, any of those allegations he made up on the stand, to mrs. graham. now, they showed you some cigarette advertising. advertising had nothing to do with mrs. graham's life. there is no evidence at all that she started to smoke because she saw an ad and ran out to buy a pack of cigarettes. there is no evidence that she made any decision about smoking because of ads. vol 07 pm graham, earl i asked her daughter that. her daughter said no. i asked mr. graham that, and mr. graham said no. again, no legal cause. anything that she really did see is fair game, but all of this other stuff that they keep talking about is not fair game. there is no legal cause. there is no tie. there is no link to mrs. graham. here's what mr. graham and the daughter, barbara, 243 both agreed to. they both agreed on the witness stand that mrs. graham never saw and never heard any kind of statement from a tobacco company, never said anything a tobacco company did caused her to start smoking or continue smoking. she never had any communications with reynolds or any other tobacco company. again, no legal cause. which brings us to truth no. 5, which is the last one, and that is that cigarettes are legal. cigarettes are both dangerous and legal. now, there is nothing that you have heard in this case, none of those documents, none of that testimony, there is nothing that you have heard in this case that is not vol 07 pm graham, earl already known by the federal government, by the surgeon general, by the state of florida, by the national cancer institute. those documents are and they have been public. they are available on a website. this is not some special secret something that only you have seen. that was not correct. our government, the state of florida, and the federal government knowing about the health risks of smoking -- you know this number he keeps talking about, 400,000 people die every year from smoking, that is an official federal government number. our federal government knows that. 244 but our government, our society, has said, notwithstanding that, people know about the health risks of smoking and cigarettes should be a legal product. mr. byrd: objection, your honor. the order. the court: overruled. ms. parker: in fact, in terms of what was known in 19 -- the surgeon general said it was known back in 1920 vol 07 pm graham, earl that nicotine was in tobacco in cigarettes. it is no secret. and this is really important. reynolds cannot be held liable merely for selling cigarettes or advertising cigarettes. there has to be more. and the court is going to give you those instructions at the end of the case. mr. byrd: same objection. the court: overruled. ms. parker: i want to take a few minutes and talk to you about the engle findings from the other jury that mr. byrd talked about. those findings do not decide the questions that you have here. just remember that other jury did not hear anything about mrs. graham. they did not hear about her life. they did not hear her name. they did not know what kind of cigarettes she smoked. they did not know about the illness. they did not know anything about her at all. and that other jury did not decide the questions about mrs. graham. and 245 those are the questions that are here on the verdict form for vol 07 pm graham, earl you. that brings us back to the law and the verdict form. two important instructions you are going to get from the court, one is that the plaintiff has the burden of proof. there are two parts to that. burden and proof. they have the burden. i do not have to bring a witness. i do not have to do anything. they have the burden on every one of their claims, and they have to prove -- that is the other part. they have to prove to you every single part of every one of the claims they are making in this case. you are also going to see that there is an instruction that the court will read to you about sympathy, that you should not decide this case based on sympathy or prejudice against any party. it should be decided based on the facts. so if you could pull up those five. those five simple truths will answer every one of the questions on the verdict form. when you review the evidence in the case, you will see that the answer to the first three questions about addiction and what caused her lung cancer, was it addiction vol 07 pm graham, earl or was it her choice to smoke? and the medical part of the case. those should all be answered no. now, i want to talk about comparative fault very 246 briefly. when you get to that -- we say you should not even get to that part of the verdict form, but if you do, a hundred percent of the fault should be the person who made the decisions. who made the decisions in her life about smoking? who made all the decisions about whether to smoke, whether to smoke when there are warnings? a hundred percent of that should be on mrs. graham. now, i'm not blaming mrs. graham by saying that. we did not file this lawsuit. but the person who made those decisions about smoking is the person who has responsibility for those. finally, in addition to damages they are asking for -- damages here, they are asking for $6 million. that is pulled out of thin air. totally pulled out of thin air. and under the law you should consider their relationship in that part of the case. this is a case where no damages should be awarded. vol 07 pm graham, earl but on top of that, on top of the $6 million, they are asking for punitive damages. they want to come back here for another part of the trial. they want to put on more evidence, and they want to try to ask for more money than that. there is no tie to any of these documents to mrs. graham. your answer to that should be no as well. now, i'm going to conclude now and sit down. and 247 mr. geary has a few comments he is going to make to you as well. but just in closing, i want to thank you for listening to me this afternoon. and i want to just remind you that mr. graham said nobody forced her to smoke. you know, the cigarette did not light itself and just jump into her mouth. she is the one who made those decisions. so, again, thank you so much for your attention this afternoon. thank you, your honor. mr. geary: good afternoon. vol 07 pm graham, earl you are just about finished. you have worked hard. you have listened to the evidence, and we all thank you for that. you have heard the words of ms. parker. i agree with everything that she said. i'm just going to talk to you about some of the evidence and some of the claims. i want to talk to you about question 2, first. we will get that one up there. question 2 involves the question: did the plaintiff prove that mrs. graham's addiction legally caused her death? that is really two questions. did addiction cause her death? and did smoking cause her death? 248 i think the answer to that is no for different reasons. and you do not have to agree on what the reason is. some might say it was not proved by reliable evidence her cancer was caused by smoking. that would be like saying dr. feingold was not reliable. or you could say it is more likely her cancer was signet ring cancer. that is vol 07 pm graham, earl what the pathologist said. or you could say addiction was not a direct cause of her death. not for someone who is as capable and determined as mrs. graham. so there are different ways you can decide that, and the answer is no for any combination of those. let us talk a little bit more about question 2. we will go to the next one, matt. the question here is: did the plaintiff prove addiction directly caused her death? remember what dr. koop said. he said cigarette smoke is addictive. but the individual must decide whether to quit or not. what he is saying there is addiction does not cause disease because each person has a choice. mrs. graham was intelligent, determined, capable. she could have quit. dr. feingold said that. and it is because of that that addiction does not directly cause death. not in this case. and direct -- direct is a part of legal cause. to be a legal cause, it must be direct. so the answer to that question is no. 249 question no. 3 relates to brands. and the vol 07 pm graham, earl question there is whether smoking cigarettes made by that defendant was a legal cause of death. well, here there is no evidence specific to the companies. the plaintiff must prove that philip morris brands caused her death. that is something you cannot guess about. what dr. feingold said was that 15 years of pack-year smoking could cause death. he talked about smoking generally over a 20-year period of time, but he did not talk about philip morris brands. there is only three in this case: benson & hedges, virginia slims, and marlboro. benson & hedges, maybe a few years, maybe less, said barbara. virginia slims, a few cigarettes, said barbara. mr. graham did not quantify it. the same with marlboro. mr. graham did not say how much, and barbara said that she did not even smoke marlboro. so barbara said, no virginia slims, no marlboro. on that basis, the answer to question no. 3 is no, because there is no evidence about that, and you cannot guess about it. vol 07 pm graham, earl question no. 4, this is the concealment claim. and you heard at the beginning of this case, this case is about concealment. there has got to be reliance. did 250 mrs. graham rely on the companies for information about smoking? was she waiting on philip morris to say something? no. you heard it from the witnesses. she did not rely on anything they said. she did not hear statements. she was not waiting on them. there was no reliance. nothing philip morris or reynolds said impacted her. the answer to this question is no, and that applies to reynolds as well. question no. 5: did reliance legally cause her death? well, the issue there is would more information have made a difference, because that is the question. well, you heard the evidence. she knew cigarettes were dangerous. she was familiar with the packs. she heard they were cancer sticks. her family warned her. more information would not have made a difference to mrs. graham. that is why the answer to that is no. vol 07 pm graham, earl she said cigarettes were cancer sticks. what would have made a difference? the answer to that is no. and the same thing for reynolds. question 6 and 7, conspiracy to conceal. that is like the concealment claim, we just talked about that. they are the same issues. reliance, would more information have made a difference. 251 the answer to that question is no, for the same reasons we just talked about. no reliance or more information would have made a difference. again, the same thing for reynolds. the answer is no. no. 8, the percentage of responsibility. if the answer to 1 or 2 is no, you do not get to this question. you do not start balancing if 1 or 2 is no. if you do, ask this question: who could have caused mrs. graham to stop smoking? there is only one person, and that is mrs. graham, vol 07 pm graham, earl and that is why it is one hundred percent for her. now, let us go to question 10. the punitive damages claim. and the question here is: did the plaintiff prove by evidence that is clear and convincing that punitive damages are warranted against the companies? okay. well, the question here is this: punitive damages award money beyond what is necessary to compensate. the question is, is this a case for that? the punitive damage claim under the instructions is derivative of the concealment claim. the issues are the same. here the evidence must be by clear and convincing evidence. was there reliance? no. would more information have made a difference? no. it is the same analysis. so the answer to this question is no. 252 i think that you will see when you look at the evidence, this is not a case for awarding extra damages to the plaintiff. the same analysis applies to reynolds. just about finished. i want to talk to you about cigarette design. you just heard about this. dr. cummings, vol 07 pm graham, earl their expert, who wanted you to think, and spent a lot of time on this issue, that the companies design cigarettes to make them more addictive. you heard a lot about that, and this is what he said. cigarettes today are not more addictive than they were in the '50s. and that is their witness, dr. cummings. and that answers a lot of issues in this case. now, i'm just about finished. i know that is the case. all right. i'm just about finished. but the plaintiff is going to get one last chance to talk to you. and that is fine, because the plaintiff has the burden of proof. when the plaintiff gets up here and talks to you, i want you to think about the evidence we have talked about. the fact that mrs. graham was a very determined, capable, intelligent person. the fact that she was not motivated to quit. she did not want to. barbara told you that. and who knew her better than her? nobody. that is who. we know that mrs. graham was definitely aware of 253 the health risks of smoking. her husband warned her. he vol 07 pm graham, earl asked her to quit. he quit in 1980, and then he started asking her to quit, and she wanted no part of it. she wanted no part of it. she said, let us light up some of those cancer sticks. i want to say this: i'm not here to criticize her choices. that is not what this is about. but this case is about whether she knew about the health risks of smoking. she knew what was on the warnings. she knew that cigarettes were cancer sticks, and more information would not have made a difference, and that is what this case is all about. the concealment, the conspiracy claim, the punitive damage claim is about that. would more information have made a difference? and the answer is no. when you hear about design, think about what dr. cummings said. because that answers a lot of the questions in this case. now, when they talk to you, i want you to think about this: think about that evidence and think about what ms. parker would say, think about mr. walker's cross-examination of dr. feingold and what you learned from vol 07 pm graham, earl that. you might think about what i might say about it as well, and look at the court's instructions. 254 now, i know it is almost time to finish. under the evidence, the claims are not proof. these facts do not fit the claims, and because of that, the answer to all the questions before you is no. thank you very much.