mr. geise: yes, your honor. may it please the court, miss london, mr. spragens, mrs. gray. good morning, ladies and gentlemen. once again, it is the bottom of an inning. and, once again, i want to start, as i have 99 throughout this whole process, by thanking you, thanking you for your service. the lawyers, we have to be here. we choose to do this for a living. mrs. gray, she is here because she chose to file a lawsuit. but you all did not choose to be here. we drafted you to be part of this. now, there are a range of ways that people can contribute in this country. some who serve in the military and serve in our armed forces make a great sacrifice. all of us that take part in voting when election day rolls around, that is a small part of the participation. in a couple months, we will pay our taxes. that is part of it. serving on a jury is a big part of that as well. so whatever you decide, whatever your verdict is, you can go back to your family, to your friends, to your co-workers, and you can tell them that you contributed to making this country what it is, because you have. and once again, on behalf of myself, my team, and my client, we sincerely appreciate your service. so thank you. last week, when we started this, i told you that this case was not about other smokers. it was only about henry gray and the choices that he made. 100 as this case now comes to a close, that is what this case is still about. last week i told you that you would hear an avalanche of information that had nothing to do with henry gray, and you did. and you heard about some of that again already this morning. you saw hours of testimony from dr. grunberg, dr. proctor, dr. feingold that tried to prove things that did not need to be proven, things that already had been resolved in that other case, and things that i told you, in my opening statement, were not an issue here. what do i mean? dr. proctor and dr. feingold spent a lot of time telling you that smoking causes diseases. you heard that from me on day one of this trial. it was not an issue then, and it is not an issue now. dr. grunberg and dr. feingold took a lot of time telling you that cigarettes and nicotine are addictive. you heard that from me on day one of this trial. it was not an issue then, and it is not an issue now. another thing this case is not about, and never has been about, is whether cigarettes should be or are legal. they are. they are legal to make, legal to advertise, legal to sell; all legal acts. now, dr. proctor kept talking about butter yellows 101 that had been banned by the fda. do you recall that? but you heard a different story about cigarettes. you heard that cigarettes were banned here in florida over 100 years ago. and the state of florida, knowing that they were dangerous and knowing that they were addictive, decided that cigarettes should be legal once again. and they have been ever since. so maybe butter yellows are not legal, but cigarettes are. i also told you that the plaintiff would only tell you half the story and you would probably have to wait for cross-examination, or the bottom of the inning, to hear the whole story. and the plaintiff did just that. how many times did we have to show the rest of the story with a witness during cross-examination? the plaintiff would plant a nugget with you on direct examination, leave it out there, and see if we ever came back to it and addressed it. now, when we did come back to it and we did address it, you might remember what dr. grunberg told me. he is like, "mr. geise, you are cherry-picking." remember that? well, let us see what we found in that bowl of cherries that we picked throughout this trial. i'm going to start with dr. teague, 1953. this was one of the first documents they showed you. and they told you that dr. teague did a research project and he found all this 102 information about cigarettes and that reynolds did not make that research memo public. but, on cross, you heard that that memo had 78 cites at the back of it, cites to publicly available literature. now, it may be true that some of those articles were more difficult to find than others, but i do not think we should criticize dr. teague for doing a good job. and that was not the only half-story they had that involved dr. teague. you remember dr. grunberg showed you a 1972 document from dr. teague that said nicotine was the sine qua non, or the essential element, or the primary reason. do you remember that document? and he made it sound like that concept was unknown to scientists. so what did we have to do on cross? can i see number 1, please? on cross, i had to show you this lewin article, originally from 1931, that was cited in the 1964 surgeon general's report, that stated the decisive factor in the effects of tobacco, desired or undesired, is nicotine. in the lancet article in 1942, smoking tobacco is essentially a means of administering nicotine. and this, from the reader's digest in 1950: "nicotine is the essential ingredient of tobacco. it is what makes tobacco, tobacco, and not just another weed," 30 years 103 before, 20 years before, 8 years before what dr. teague wrote in 1972. dr. grunberg did not tell you any of that. we had to. another example of only telling you half the story was the internal company research about nicotine. dr. grunberg suggested that the research was done to find a level of nicotine that would keep smokers addicted, or he suggested that cigarettes were rigged, or he suggested that the ph levels were finely adjusted in a way to drive market share. but on cross of dr. grunberg, you heard the other side of the story. you heard that that research was done at the urging of the public health authorities. you heard that the national cancer institute suggested research into things like vent holes, and reconstituted tobacco, and different kinds of filters. and you heard that the nci recommended adjusting the ph to change the nicotine delivery, and also utilize free nicotine. they suggested that you look at a high nicotine tobacco yield. they suggested adjusting the tar-to-nicotine ratio. the idea is, let us get tar down because that is where the carcinogens are, but let us keep nicotine up because that is why people are smoking. and it was all done in a program to explore a way to make a less hazardous cigarette. can we see the next dem, please? we showed you this document. we showed you the meeting minutes from the national cancer institute's tobacco 104 working group program. we showed you that it was a meeting with the national cancer institute, the department of agriculture, and r.j. reynolds. we showed you that. and the exhibit number, if you want to look at that, is 484, if you are interested while you are deliberating. now, throughout this, miss london and dr. grunberg said this was nicotine manipulation. but the nci called it progress toward a safer cigarette. i mentioned that dr. grunberg talked about this 1970s reynolds document about ph and sales level. can we see the next dem? and you can see, in 1974, that is the document they referred to. but the document we had to show you, a document that dr. grunberg knows about, but did not tell you about, is from 1996, where reynolds looked back over the two decades of information and said, "there is no evidence from the historical data review that the smoke ph of rjr brands was purposely increased to enhance sales." and you will have this document back there in evidence, document 428. and if they try to tell you that the ph levels were purposely set to drive sales, here's a chart you are going to see in that exhibit. and you can see how the ph levels go all over the place. does that look like it is directed to drive sales? no. dr. grunberg knew that, but he did not tell that 105 you. they showed you a lot of memos from a lot of scientists at reynolds, but there was one memo that dr. grunberg and dr. proctor did not show you. and that was this one, from the president of reynolds to the head of r&d. can we see number 4, please? from 1968, "areas of special emphasis," and this is dx391. "in cooperation with others, you should push the work concerning tobacco and health. you should prepare a plan to foster any relationship with government personnel in the quest for mutual understanding of facts, ultimately to gain their cooperation in proper research of the subject. "if there is a safer cigarette, let us continue and increase our efforts in this program. please prepare a plan to carry it out." this memo was not prepared to be a trial exhibit. it was a directive to continue, which means that work was ongoing, and it was directed to "increase our efforts" to develop a safer cigarette. dr. proctor knew about that document, but he did not include that in what he wanted to tell you. dr. grunberg pointed to random phrases from internal records and told you the industry did not mention addiction to the public, the public had no idea. but we had to show you otherwise. we had to show you this article. can we see the next dem, please? 106 do you recall this? 1963, in the american journal of psychiatry. this was a study that was co-sponsored by the american cancer society and the tobacco industry research committee. and what did it conclude? it said, "nicotine appears to have certain addictive qualities. considerable evidence suggests that true physical dependence may develop to tobacco." and the summary and conclusions: "heavy cigarette smokers thus appear to be true addicts." that is in evidence. that is exhibit dx122. and dr. grunberg says we are cherry-picking. why did not he show you that? one final example, the testimony before congress in 1994. they showed it to you a couple of different times. they put it on their board, wherever the board is. now, first of all, that has no connection to mr. gray. you know, by 1994, that he had quit smoking. and no one suggested that he ever saw that testimony in any form. and beyond that, miss london asked dr. grunberg and dr. proctor about it, put it on her board, and you heard yesterday about it again, when woody wilner, dr. feingold's friend, was asking dr. gentry those questions on the videotape? but you know who mr. wilner should have asked the question of? dr. feingold. why? because when i asked dr. feingold, over the 107 last couple days, he told you the same exact thing that the reynolds representative did before congress. dr. feingold told you, back in 1988, back in 1992, in the '90s, he did not think smoking met the classical definition of addiction either. and i asked him specifically, and he told you, in 1992, he said nicotine was not addictive. so they did not put that on the board, but it should have read this. can we have dem 43, please? 1992, their expert, dr. feingold, says, "smoking is not addictive." and then i asked him again, i'm like, "but wait a minute, by 1992, was not nicotine addictive in the mainstream science?" say?" he said, "absolutely it was." i said, "but what did you think in 1994; what did you and this is what he said: in 1994, again, he said smoking was not addictive, and he said that surgeon general koop was dead wrong. ladies and gentlemen, i submit that this is a pretty important other side of the story, what their own expert said in '92 and '94. but they did not tell you that. we had to. so why did you have to wait until cross-examination to get the full side of the story? why did you have to wait to 108 get the side the plaintiff did not want to tell you? why? the answer is simple: to get you mad. dr. grunberg and dr. proctor were not here to offer a single opinion about mr. gray. in fact, they could not. neither one of them knew anything about the facts of mr. gray. they were here as professional witnesses, to get you mad so that you would decide this case on emotion instead of the facts of mr. gray. now, when speaking about professional witnesses, you heard from the judge this morning this instruction. can we have number 6, please? "when a witness has been or will be paid for reviewing and testifying concerning the evidence, you may consider the possibility of bias and should view with caution the testimony of such witness where court testimony is given with regularity and represents a significant portion of the witness's income." that is instruction number 5 in the instructions you will get. "view with caution." now, make no mistake, you saw some professional witnesses. dr. grunberg, you heard, last year made over a hundred thousand dollars testifying in cases for miss london's firm. now, when i asked him about it, and compared it to, i think, about the same amount he made as a professor, he tried 109 to tell me, "it is not a significant portion of my income because my wife makes a ton of money." do you remember that? and while he has studied thousands of smokers, he never studied the only smoker who matters in this case, henry gray. dr. proctor, another professional witness, $2.5 million and counting. and you recall, he kept hinting that organizations like the ama were on the take because they received funding from the tobacco industry? do you remember those suggestions? well, "view with caution." judge benitez pressed dr. proctor on that issue, "where is the document that says that?" he never produced it. not at all. and while dr. proctor studied cancer and gemstones, germans and ignorance, just like dr. grunberg, he did not study mr. gray. one more professional witness, dr. feingold, the 40-million-dollar man. and he makes millions of dollars each year testifying, not treating patients. and when he is not doing that, you see he is writing books and papers with plaintiffs' attorneys, and he is giving secret lectures to attorneys at conferences where they talk about how to bring these lawsuits. but dr. feingold is not an advocate, is he. of course not, just ask him. he denied that how many times? closing argument by mr. geise 110 the plaintiff's case was designed to get you mad, so you would not focus on the one person who matters in this case, henry gray. now, mr. gray was an afterthought to the plaintiff's case. and i think a perfect example of that was today, again, with their giant board. throughout the trial, they put up facts up there that they thought were important for you, but through the trial they never put a single fact on that board about henry gray. and then, lo and behold, you come in today, they put up a board, and they got some green things on there about henry gray. it is an afterthought. it was not part of their presentation. they waited until today. another thing, all the evidence you saw about philip morris? that is also a distraction at this point. they are not here. now, if you focus -- ms. london: i object to that. the court: well, they are not here. so, ladies and gentlemen, i told you that you are not to speculate, or think about, or . . . try to figure out why philip morris is not here today. do not. go ahead. mr. geise: thank you, your honor. because, ladies and gentlemen, if you focus on henry 111 gray, unlike dr. grunberg, or dr. proctor, the plaintiff loses. the plaintiff loses because henry gray was not an out-of-control addict. he maintained control over his smoking choices, and he smoked because it was a choice he made. the plaintiff loses, because if mr. gray was addicted, it was not the legal and substantial cause of his injuries. instead, his choice to start smoking, his choice to continue smoking, in decades and decades of warnings, and his choice to resume smoking after months or years of quitting, at a time when their own expert said he was not addicted, were the legal cause of his actions and their consequences. and finally, the plaintiff loses because she cannot prove a link, or build that bridge, between anything reynolds said or did not say and any smoking decision made by mr. gray. now, i've already spent more time this morning than i wanted to, talking about things that have nothing to do with henry gray, so let us get into what this case is really about. you heard a lot about mr. gray and what motivated him to succeed in life. he was smart, he was educated. he succeeded in undergrad, in law school, graduated with honors, law review, built a successful law practice. he was a doer, he was an achiever. he made his own decisions, including the decision to smoke. and when you focus on henry gray and his decisions, the plaintiff loses. can we see dem 7, please? 112 now, as in opening statement, the plaintiff has the burden of proof. and these are really the first two questions. and i'm going to walk through the verdict form like miss london did, and you are probably not going to be shocked to see that i check a different box than she did. but let us get up front what the first two questions are going to be: addiction and addiction causation. plaintiff has the burden of proving these things. now, one thing, when you go through the verdict form and you go through the jury instructions, you are not going to get any questions on the rules that miss london keeps telling you about. that might be relevant in some other case, but those are not the questions you need to answer in this case. so the first question on your verdict form is going to be whether you find, from a preponderance of the evidence, whether henry gray was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine. now, you will need to define what addiction means in this case. the court is not going to define it for you in your instructions. and you heard, when i crossed dr. grunberg, that he said the surgeon general has recognized that there is no consensus on a definition. and you have learned that the definitions for addiction have changed over time. you saw a definition from miss london today. we heard evidence on that. you heard about other definitions that 113 look to whether there was intoxication or deviant behavior, other definitions look to see whether there was a loss of control, and others look to see if the smoker became significantly impaired or distressed. now, you heard from a number of witnesses that mr. gray was addicted. but they basically boiled it all down to, if you smoke for a long time, you are addicted. remember dr. feingold's chart he used, the fagerstrom test? whether you are a zero or a ten, you are addicted. now, a couple points to consider. although dr. grunberg criticized the american psychiatric association's book, the diagnostic and statistical manual, he did admit that the book reports that about fifty percent of daily smokers are addicted. so that means fifty percent of daily smokers are not addicted. so the mere fact that you smoke, and smoke daily, and smoke a lot, it does not mean you are addicted. you need something more. you need to experience a loss of control. you need to smoke compulsively. you need to become impaired and distressed. ladies and gentlemen, choosing to do something you want to do, or enjoy doing, is not a sign of impairment or distress. doing what you want to do is not a disorder, it is a decision. and mr. gray had the choice and the control to make a different decision if he wanted to. now, for a very long time, he did not make a 114 different decision. why? you heard it from dr. slaton. can we see the next slide? what did mr. gray tell him? the timing was not right. the reason that mr. gray smoked for as long as he did is because the timing was not right for him to choose to quit. he was not going to quit until he was ready to, until he was motivated to. and dr. slaton told you that people need to have an internal motivation. it cannot come from a loved one telling you to quit. it cannot come from a doctor telling you to quit. it had as to come from within. and mr. gray chose to smoke until he was motivated, that fear factor dr. slaton talked about. and when it was time, when the time was right and when he was ready, he quit. deciding you are not going to quit until the timing is right is an example of controlling your smoking. it is proof that smoking did not control mr. gray, but mr. gray controlled his smoking. and also consider dr. feingold's testimony. he said, after you quit for a month or two months, and certainly after a year, you are no longer addicted. we will talk about it in a minute, but what does that mean? what does that mean for whether mr. gray was addicted? certainly, when he stopped for a couple of months in the 1970s, it is beyond that time period, and definitely when he 115 stopped for a couple of years in the 1990s. even dr. feingold said he was not addicted then, not addicted the rest of his life, and importantly, not addicted at the time of his death. because mr. gray never experienced a loss of control over his decisions, because he never lost the ability to quit, because he was never significantly impaired or distressed, i submit he was not addicted. so if i could have the elmo for one second? so with respect to this first question, was henry gray addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, i submit, based on what you heard, the answer to that is . . . no. the court: do you see what i said earlier, ladies and gentlemen? we all make mistakes. mr. geise: and that is important. because even if you check yes, it does not really matter for purposes of this case. and that is because of the second question. if you answer no to question 1, the case is over. but, even if you answer yes to question 1, i would argue that you have to answer no to question number 2. and question 2 asks whether an addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine was a legal cause of mr. gray's injuries. and this is how the court's instruction will define it. can we switch back over, please? and this is instruction number 10 that you will receive. 116 it says, "in order to prove that addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine was a legal cause of mr. gray's injuries, plaintiff must prove by a preponderance of the evidence that such addiction directly and in natural and continuous sequence, produced or contributed substantially to producing such injuries, so it can reasonably be said that, but for the addiction, his injuries would not have occurred." the evidence proves that addiction is not the but-for reason for any of mr. gray's smoking behaviors, and not the but-for reason for the cause of his injuries. the but-for cause of his smoking was his choice, his decision to smoke for as long as he did, because that is what he wanted to do, despite his knowledge of the risks that he was taking, and the timing was not right for him to do otherwise. so ask yourself this question. can we see number 18? if mr. gray was not addicted, would he have continued to smoke? but for his addiction, would he have continued to smoke? the answer is of course he would -- bless you. juror 6: thank you. mr. geise: the answer is, of course he would have. we know that he did. for this reason alone addiction cannot be the legal cause of his injuries, because it was far from the 117 substantial cause of his smoking. if his smoking behavior would have been the same whether he was addicted or not, then addiction cannot be a substantial cause because it did not make a difference. mr. gray was smart enough and educated enough to know the risks of smoking. but for years he was not motivated to want to stop until the timing was right. so even if you decide mr. gray was addicted, that addiction was not a legal cause. now, here's another way to break down what is in that instruction to see what is legal cause. and the addiction has to cause the injury. and legal cause, it must directly cause it, naturally cause it, continuously cause it, and substantially cause it. and you saw that mr. gray's choices were the direct, the natural, the continuous, and the substantial causes of his injuries. let us look at the next slide, please. so in between here, where there needs to be legal cause, what do we have in between there? we have mr. gray's choices: his choice to begin smoking, which nobody suggests has anything to do with addiction; his choice to continue smoking despite the health warnings from his family; his choice to ignore the warnings and continue smoking. and you heard from mrs. gray yesterday that there were times where he just refused to try to quit. his choices 118 also include the choice to stop smoking when the time was right and also to choose to start smoking again at a time when he was not addicted. those are the choices that led to his injuries, not addiction. i told you during my opening statement that you would learn some facts about nicotine and addiction, and you did. nicotine addiction does not permanently change your brain receptors. it does not interfere with the smoker's ability to understand the dangers of smoking. and it does not interfere with a smoker's ability to make a choice to quit or continue smoking. and nicotine does not prevent a smoker from quitting for good. every witness agreed -- dr. grunberg, dr. feingold, and dr. slaton -- any smoker can quit. and dr. grunberg admitted that over 60 million smokers, including millions of addicted smokers, have stopped smoking for good. can we have number 13? and dr. grunberg told you that those smokers had the same brain changes that were going on, he told you those smokers had the same dopamine release that was going on, those smokers had the same exposure to ads and whatever else was out there, and those smokers were smoking the same cigarette, the same kind of cigarettes. despite that, they all quit. between 1964 and 1979 alone, you heard that 30 million smokers quit, 119 1.3 million per year, or 3,000 people a day. now, i talked to dr. grunberg about those statistics, and you remember what he said? he said there are lies, damn lies, and statistics. well, these are not my statistics. these are numbers from the surgeon general and the cdc. and these are not lies or damn lies. these are cold, hard facts. now, dr. grunberg told you that it takes motivation, determination, and persistence to stop smoking. and you heard that mr. gray's quit attempts were not motivated, were not determined, were not persistent. what did his friend and doctor, dr. slaton, tell you? he told you that mr. gray would make what he would call periodic attempts to quit, but not what he would call a sustained effort to quit. dr. slaton testified that he told mr. gray repeatedly to quit smoking, and offered him a list of health reasons why. mr. gray's response? he said the timing was not right, he was not ready, he was not motivated. he never said, "i cannot." he never said, "i tried and failed." he never said, "i'm hopelessly addicted." he said the timing was not right. now, despite his knowledge of the risks of smoking, we will talk about those in a moment, mr. gray did not make any attempt to stop smoking in the 1950s or the 1960s. in those 120 decades he chose to continue to smoke, and did not choose to even try to quit. the timing was not right. after his wife quit in 1959 or '60, after the 1964 surgeon general's report, and after the warning labels in 1966, you saw how many people quit. can we see the next slide, please? 14, please. okay. warnings were on the packs in '66. you heard about the other people, 13 million americans quit there. mr. gray never tried to quit. why? the timing was not right. now, miss london did not really talk about this in her closing argument, but you heard conflicting evidence about nicotine gum and patches. dr. slaton, mr. gray's golfing buddy and doctor, he could not recall that mr. gray ever used the gum or the patches. and if he used the patches or the gum during that time, dr. slaton was his doctor, he would have been the one who would have had to prescribe it. he had no recollection of it, and you saw there were no medical records that indicated a prescription for it. now, mrs. gray said he might have used them, he might have used the gum or the patches, but she does not know if he did, how far or how long. either way, if he used the patches or the gum, he continued to smoke while he was using them. now, you know that doing that is against the instructions for the use of those 121 products if you are trying to quit. and so did mrs. gray. she knew that, and she told her husband he was foolish for doing that. so even if dr. slaton is wrong, and whether mr. gray used the gum or patch, dr. slaton was right to say it was not a serious or sustained attempt to quit. now, dr. grunberg and dr. feingold told you that, to be considered a serious quit attempt, you have to do what? you have to stop smoking for 24 hours. so any of these gum or patches attempts, they were not a serious quit attempt because there was not a 24-hour effort. but -- you can take that one down. but what is as important is, when mr. gray made a serious attempt to quit smoking, he succeeded. when he did abstain from smoking for 24 hours, he went a lot longer. when the timing was right, he quit. you heard that mr. gray quit for a couple of months in the late 1970s. you heard that he had stopped; they went out of town to a football game; he ran into a friend of his there, who offered him a cigarette; he took the cigarette; and he started smoking. now, when he did that, he knew full well that smoking was bad for him. he knew full well. and there is no evidence on that occasion that he was experiencing any withdrawal 122 symptoms. miss london talked about withdrawal symptoms in closing. but one thing to remember about withdrawal symptoms, what did dr. feingold tell you yesterday, their expert on mr. gray's addiction? he told you he never saw any evidence of withdrawal symptoms. that was their expert. so in 1977, there is no withdrawal symptoms, he starts smoking again. he did not resume smoking because he was compelled to by an addiction. he did not resume smoking because he had these uncontrollable cravings. he did not start smoking to put an end to his withdrawal symptoms. he made the choice to start smoking because his friend offered him a cigarette and he wanted one. and you know that mr. gray stopped smoking for years following his lung cancer diagnosis. you know the story. dr. slaton told you. the fear factor. once he was diagnosed, he stopped, and he did not smoke for a couple of years. then, when his wife was out of town, he went out with the boys and he started smoking again. now, there is no dispute that mr. gray quit smoking for at least two years. dr. slaton said so. dr. feingold said so. and miss london said in her closing that dr. feingold said anyone could quit. well, dr. feingold said, mr. gray did quit. and mr. gray's medical records say the same thing. can we see number 15, please? 123 you have seen these records, they are in evidence. "patient's wife went out of town last week. after three years of not smoking, he smoked three packs of cigarettes over a three-day period." and dr. feingold told you, "i think the doctor is wrong there, it is not three years, it should be two years." fine, it is two years. and then dr. slaton wrote, "i last saw henry in the office on february 9. at that time, henry was not smoking, not complaining of shortness of breath. apparently, a week ago he became increasingly despondent and went out with the boys. he since that time has been smoking two to three packs of cigarettes per day." now, miss london stated that mr. gray was still smoking. but you heard from dr. slaton about this bond that golfers have. dr. slaton told you that he was with mr. gray every week, at least twice a week, for at least four hours a time while they played golf. and he told you, during that time for those two years, there is no evidence that mr. gray was smoking, he did not smell it on him, nothing. and dr. slaton told you that you share everything with your golf buddies, even things you do not tell your wife. so if mr. gray was still smoking, his golf buddies and dr. slaton would have known. but he was not because there is no evidence of that. 124 now, again, when mr. gray started smoking when he was despondent and went out on the town, he did not start smoking because he was compelled to by an addiction, he did not resume smoking to put his cravings to an end, he did not resume smoking because he was having any withdrawal effects. dr. slaton told you, when mr. gray started smoking again, when his wife went out of town, he went out on the town with the boys. and beyond that, dr. slaton said he did not know what triggered it. and it was something he thought back about for the last few years. but he told you what did not trigger it, and that is addiction. dr. slaton told you that mr. gray, at that time, had been quit for years and was not experiencing any withdrawal symptoms: no irritability, no fidgeting, no difficulty concentrating. i asked him all of those questions. and he said, "mr. gray just made the choice to start smoking again." and he said, with everything else that was going on with mr. gray's life at that time, he thinks he just said, and this was his quote, "the hell with it," and decided to smoke. and there is one more thing, an important thing that i think seals the deal on this second question about addiction causation. and that is dr. feingold. dr. feingold admitted that mr. gray was not addicted when he stopped smoking in the '90s. not addicted. after quitting for more than a year, dr. feingold said, he is no 125 longer addicted, not then nor when he died. ladies and gentlemen, the undisputed evidence from mr. gray's golf buddy and doctor and their expert on mr. gray's addiction, dr. feingold, is that addiction played no role in mr. gray's choice to start smoking again, none. now, if you are not addicted when you do something, addiction cannot be the legal cause of your results. if you are not addicted when you do something, addiction cannot be a cause at all, not the legal cause. now, for mr. gray, when he made a serious attempt to quit smoking and the timing was right, he succeeded in stopping. addiction had no impact on that choice. but he went back to smoking because he was with a buddy at a football game or he had a boy's night out or he just said, "the hell with it." these episodes are proof that his smoking decisions were based on what he wanted to do and not based on addiction. people make unhealthy choices, choices that they are not compelled to make, but choices they make with the knowledge of the consequences. smoking was such a choice for mr. gray, but it was not the only one. you saw and heard from dr. slaton that he had uncontrolled hypertension. now, mrs. gray said she had no idea that her husband had uncontrolled hypertension. but dr. slaton told you he had 126 strokes and peripheral vascular disease that he told henry about and told him that is a reason why he needed to take his anti-hypertension medication. mr. gray did not take it. he knew the risks, and he chose to take the risk to his health instead of choosing to take his medicine. it was an unhealthy decision caused by choice not by any addiction. and the surgeon general has repeatedly said, when it comes to smoking, that the choice lies with the individual. can we see number 16, please. you saw these during the testimony. 1977 surgeon general's report, 1986. the surgeon general says that cigarette smoking is a personal choice health behavior; and even though it is an addictive behavior, the individual smoker must decide whether to continue that behavior or not. mr. gray chose to start smoking; he chose to ignore decades of warnings; and he chose to start again after months or even years of quitting. those choices had nothing to do with addiction. now, in this trial, it does not matter whether you think the choices mr. gray made to smoke were good choices or bad choices. what matters is that they were his choices, and we should not second-guess them. but now, almost 20 years after his death, the plaintiff does not want you to respect mr. gray's choices. in closing argument by mr. geise 127 this lawsuit, to get money, they tell you that his decisions were not his own, that he lost control, and that he only smoked because of addiction. but dr. koop reported who is in control. can we see number 17? you remember this. i used it with dr. grunberg. "ultimately, you are the one that has control over your behavior. the cigarette is not going to light itself and jump into your mouth, nor are you going to go into a brain-induced hypnotic trance and light the cigarette. no matter how much you have smoked or how much you like to smoke, the choice to light up is always yours." the cigarette never jumped into mr. gray's mouth. he made each and every choice, despite the knowledge of the harm that it could do to him. whatever choice he made, that was his decision. dr. feingold said, "you do not become a robot." and dr. feingold said, "smokers always have free choice." and when mr. gray made that choice to smoke, his choice was the legal cause of any consequences. as a result, any disease or death brought on by mr. gray's smoking was not legally caused by addiction. instead, the substantial cause of his smoking and disease was his decision to smoke. can i have the elmo, please? so if you would look at question 2 on the verdict form, 128 "was an addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine a legal cause of henry gray's injury?" the answer to that question has to be no. and if the question to that is no, you sign this form and you are done and this trial is over. i want to talk for just a minute on the medical case, and part of it is that both sides -- we do not have a lot of the medical records. so it is hard to say much about it. and miss london is absolutely right. we did not call a medical witness to talk about anything. but question 3 asks whether smoking is the legal cause of mr. gray's death. i just want to make a few points. first of all, on copd and emphysema, dr. feingold told you that if a person stops smoking by the age of 35, they are unlikely to develop emphysema, chronic bronchitis, or copd. so to put that in context, mr. gray turned 35 in 1966. if he stopped when his wife did in 1960 or the surgeon general's report in '64 or the warning labels in '66, dr. feingold said he would never have developed copd or emphysema. on lung cancer, dr. slaton told you that they treated mr. gray's lung cancer and treated it well. he told you they got it. mr. gray was lucky. and his lung cancer never recurred. dr. feingold disagreed with dr. slaton. 129 but either way, you saw there is no dispute that lung cancer is not listed on mr. gray's death certificate as a cause of death. and interestingly, cigarette smoking or addiction is not listed there either. one other thing about mr. gray's final months. you heard and saw the records that he was doing pretty well when he saw dr. slaton in february of 1995. dr. slaton said he is not smoking; there is no shortness of breath; he is doing all right. then you heard something changed. mr. gray became despondent. he went out with the boys. he started smoking again. he decided not to take his blood pressure medicine. and his condition after that point spiraled. dr. slaton told you there were a mix of things going on at the time of mr. gray's death. one of them was his uncontrolled hypertension that had earlier been -- he had been told could cause his strokes and his peripheral vascular disease. and dr. slaton also told you at the time of his death he could not rule out a heart attack that could be brought on by stress or by hypertension. and that is about all we know about the medical case here. so that is about all i can say about the evidence you saw. i want to turn to the next questions you will need to answer on the verdict form. and these are questions 4 and 7. and i think we have them, right? do we have 130 number 19? can we switch over, please. thank you. questions 4 and 6, i guess is what i said. and the questions are 4, 5, 6, and 7 that are related to the claims of concealment and conspiracy to conceal. and miss london walked through these, and i tend to agree with her that she read them correctly. and you see that whether henry gray relied, to his detriment, on statements made by reynolds that concealed or omitted material information concerning the health effects and/or addictive nature of cigarette smoking, and then a similar question in number 6 with regard to an agreement to conceal. now, there are essentially two parts to these two questions. first, the material fact questions. you need to determine if material information about the health risks and addictive nature of smoking were a secret to mr. gray. and if so, you will need to determine if he relied on any statement to his detriment. and here, the information was not a secret to mr. gray. and he did not rely on anything that reynolds said. so let us look at number 20, please. were the dangers of smoking a secret? ask yourself, were the material facts about the health risks and addictive nature of smoking known to mr. gray? did he know the material facts that he would have used in making a decision? 131 now, the other side of the story showed that the public knew about the risks of smoking and the addictive nature. and, more importantly, so did mr. gray. dr. grunberg said people who are more educated are exposed to more information about the health hazards. and that was certainly true of mr. gray. it was drummed into him over and over by his wife, his cousin, his children, and his doctor. now, i wanted to make a board and put my own post-its on it. but as you have noticed throughout the course of trial, i make a lot of notes on these yellow post-its, and i make a mess of them. so miss mckinniss was kind enough to recommend that i do not try to get creative and i just go with something that we have made up so i do not have to create them. so what we did is we put down all the evidence you heard through this trial about information about the health risks of smoking and the addictive nature of smoking. the blue is what was out there for the public that we talked about. the green were specific instances and evidence that you heard about henry gray. now, i'm not going to go through every one of these squares one by one. i'm not going to do that. but i am going to stress a few of them. now, this story about knowledge of the health risks of smoking starts before mr. gray was born. i mentioned it a few minutes ago in florida. 132 can we see number 21, please. the florida health notes in 1906. the state of florida official bulletin said, "today, the cigarette is looked upon by all smokers as the very worst form of tobacco addiction." this is long before mr. gray was even born. you saw the coverage in the newspapers and the magazines. i'm not going to go through every one of them. look at the reader's digest in the 1950s. these are all in evidence. we talked about them with dr. proctor and some with dr. grunberg. let us look at number 23, life magazine. you heard about these studies about the painting of the mice's backs and it produced tumors. and it was covered in life. and you heard that henry gray read time all time. and time covered these risks. can we see number 24. three different articles in evidence, dx59, 76, and 367. and i've pointed out the ones just from 1953, where it reported "beyond any doubt" -- and you look down and it said, "this shows conclusively that there is something in cigarette smoke which can produce cancer. this is no longer merely a possibility. our experiments have proved it beyond any doubt." now, not surprisingly, the public health officials in the 1950s recognized this widespread dissemination of information. you saw the program "see it now" from, i think it 133 was 1955, where dr. hammond, one of the pioneers in this research, he took to the tv. and what he did he say? he said people should be warned of the dangers and they are being warned. he is one of the guys who is making history in the 1950s, not somebody like dr. proctor who is studying it 60 years later. and dr. hammond said people should be warned and they are being warned. not only did the public know, but henry gray knew. miss london asked in her closing, "would it have made a difference to him? what would have made a difference?" well, you know all the things that did not make a difference to henry gray. and let us talk about those. first, mrs. gray. they were married in 1957. 1959 or '60, she read an article that smoking was bad for your health and decided to quit. it made sense to her that it was unhealthy, so she stopped. and she told mr. gray he should do the same thing. despite his wife's warning, mr. gray chose to continue to smoke. he knew the risks, but the timing was not right. miss london said we all want to protect ourselves. mr. gray did not want to protect himself there. mrs. gray continued to tell mr. gray about the health risks in the 1960s. and you also heard about henry gray's cousin betty williams. every time he picked up a pack of cigarettes, she told him he should quit because it was bad for 134 him. and his response? he ignored her. he knew the risks, but the timing was not right. he did not want to do anything to protect himself. he ignored her. you heard that in addition to time, mr. gray regularly read two newspaper, the gainesville paper and the jacksonville paper. those sources covered the risks of smoking for years. you heard about the 1964 surgeon general's report. it linked smoking with lung cancer. and it was front-page news across the country, including in the papers henry gray read. can we see 26, please. january 12th, 1964, both the florida times-union and the gainesville sun, big print, above the fold, lead story about the 1964 surgeon general's report. you heard that mr. gray's morning routine was cigarette, cup of coffee, and read both of those papers. that morning, he had in his hands two papers that told him about the '64 surgeon general's report. you saw the coverage in time on that. this is, again, 1964 report. that was included. you saw the coverage in life, "verdict on cigarets: guilty as charged." you do not need to be columbo to figure that one out. it is right there in the title. it was on the evening news on 135 all three stations. go to the next step. 1966, the warning label goes on packs of cigarettes. and you heard that millions of people quit smoking after that. and mr. gray could have too. but he did not even try. the message was being communicated to americans in towns large and small across the country. remember this quote from daniel horn? number 30, please. "you could stand on the rooftop and shout, 'smoking is dangerous' at the top of your lungs, and you would not be telling anyone anything they did not already know." it was communicated under mr. gray's rooftop too. when mr. and mrs. gray's children were growing up in the '70s and the '80s, they encouraged him to stop smoking. and he gave them the same response he gave his cousin betty. he ignored them. he chose to continue to smoke. he knew the risks, but the timing was not right. and mr. gray also saw family members die of smoking-related diseases. you recall the evidence that his mother died of lung cancer. despite her death, he knew the risks, but the timing was not right. and the warnings kept coming. you saw that the warnings changed. can we see 31, please. 136 1970, 1985, with the rotating warnings. you saw the public service announcement with yul brynner. mrs. gray told you she remembers watching that and seeing that with mr. gray. outside of his family, mr. gray's law partners and his golf buddies were on him to quit smoking. you heard about slang terms for cigarettes, "cancer sticks" and "coffin nails." you heard that mr. gray himself used the term "coffin nail" to refer to his cigarettes. you heard about songs, "smoke! smoke! smoke! (that cigarette)," that mrs. gray remembered when she was a teenager. now, i talked about coffin nails. let us talk about coughing. mr. gray had a smoker's cough for years before dr. slaton started treating him. and dr. slaton said he told henry that it was caused by his smoking, and henry knew it was. dr. slaton told him it might go away if he quit smoking. every cough was another warning to mr. gray, a reminder that what he was doing was hazardous to his health. he knew the risks, but the timing was not right. and finally, dr. slaton. he told you what he told henry, that smoking was bad for him, that smoking could kill him, that smoking would lead to premature death, to lung cancer, to copd, to emphysema, to peripheral vascular disease, everything. dr. slaton told mr. gray. the material facts about the health hazards of smoking were communicated directly 137 to mr. gray. there was no doubt in dr. slaton's mind that the risks of smoking were not a secret to henry gray. and the instruction that you heard will tell you that it cannot be a legal cause if the falsity was obvious. well, mr. gray knew the truth about the health risks and addictive nature of smoking. there is no way you can look at this evidence, both what was in the public and what was communicated directly to him, and say otherwise. he had the material facts. and those material facts did not make a difference to him. did mr. gray ever respond to his loved ones or his doctor and say that the risks were unknown? no. did he ever say he doubted the risks? no. did he ever say he needed some more information to help him make a decision? no. so on this first prong for questions 4 and 6, the plaintiff cannot prove that the material information about the health risks or addictive nature were secrets from mr. gray. they assuredly were not. so for this reason alone, this first prong alone, your answer to the claims on number 4 and number 6 must fail. and your answer must be no. but there is another reason that those answers have to be no. and that reason goes back to something i said in opening statements. remember the bridge analogy i used? and i said there is lots of bridges around fort myers, the edison bridge, the sky bridge? to prevail on questions 4 and 6, the plaintiff 138 needs to build a henry gray bridge in this courtroom. and the bridge they need to build is between some statement, something that was said or not said by reynolds, and some action that mr. gray took or failed to take because of that. now, for purposes of the verdict form, you will find out this bridge is called "legal cause." it is called "reliance." and when you see this jury instructions again, they will say that henry gray must rely, he must rely to his detriment, he must build a bridge. the plaintiff has to prove that reynolds' conduct caused mr. gray, not some other smoker, to take some action, to rely on something that was or was not said and get a disease caused by smoking that he otherwise would have avoided. and if the plaintiff cannot guilt that bridge, then they fail to meet their burden of proof. ladies and gentlemen, the evidence you heard never let the plaintiff lay the first brick in building that bridge. this is what the evidence concluded. can we see 32. mr. gray did not rely on any statement by any tobacco company. now, miss london talked about it again today in her closing argument. she talked about marketing. she talked about the amount of money spent on ads. she brought it up. she shows you ads. 139 but you remember before dr. proctor testified, judge benitez gave you an instruction. you were getting ready to see ad after ad after ad. and you were instructed this: "there is no indication or evidence that mr. gray ever saw or relied on these advertisements in deciding to take up smoking or continuing to smoke." now, that was the instruction at the time. as you know now at the end of this trial, that is still the case. and that is why we did not need to put on a witness to talk about advertising, because advertising had no connection to henry gray. dr. proctor could not link any ad or statement to mr. gray, because he did not know anything about mr. gray. the only witness you heard from who knew mr. gray -- two of them, dr. slaton and mrs. gray -- did either one of them mention anything about advertising? no. did either one of them say, "oh, mr. gray saw these ads. he liked ads for that product. he watched this television show and saw ads on it"? no. there is no evidence at all linking mr. gray to any advertisement. now, miss london talked about, oh, you know, people started when they were young and they were affected by these advertisements. well, let us look at the evidence about mr. gray. you heard that mrs. gray knew him when he was in high 140 school but has no idea if he started smoking when he was in high school. the first evidence they gave you of mr. gray smoking was, after his high school graduation, he takes a trip down to mexico, and you saw he is sitting there and he and another guy with a couple of women, and there is a cigarette pack on their table. that is after he is out of high school. so all this talk about youth marketing, first of all, you know there is no connection between marketing and mr. gray. and you know that he was out of high school before there was any evidence that he smoked. now, dr. proctor and dr. grunberg spent hours telling you about statements that the industry representatives made. and whether they were based in science or not at the time, or whether some of those positions were clung to for far too long, they may be relevant in some other smoker's case, but they are not relevant in mr. gray's case. for these claims, claims 4 and 6, the plaintiff has to build a bridge between something reynolds said or did or did not say or do and mr. gray. she did not do that. her testimony proved she could not. can we see 33. these are questions i asked mrs. gray yesterday. can she identify any statement that mr. gray ever heard, read, saw from any tobacco company, from any organization, from anybody? did he ever talk about the frank statement? 141 the answer to every one of those questions was no. that is the evidence you have. across the board, unequivocal proof of no reliance. now, miss london argued that even though there is no evidence about henry gray hearing, reading, seeing, or relying on anything. you know, you can just assume it happened. infer it. well, ladies and gentlemen, assumptions are not facts. someone who has proof does not need to rely on an inference or an assumption. and miss london may talk about filters and menthol and low tar, but the best she can do is make some vague reference that mr. gray maybe thought those cigarettes may have had less bad stuff in them. i submit those things have nothing do with this case for a few reasons. she cannot make that connection. she cannot build the bridge. first of all, you heard a lot of testimony about lights. and miss london even slipped into it and talked about lights in her closing a little bit. mrs. gray said she does not recall her husband ever smoking a light cigarette. lights have nothing to do with henry gray. second, mrs. gray told you yesterday she does not know why mr. gray smoked a menthol cigarette. and, finally, with regard to filters, you remember i asked mrs. gray specifically, "do you have any idea where henry 142 gray got that idea?" and she said, "no." to prevail in this case against reynolds, they need proof about reynolds. and they do not have it. beyond that, you heard from dr. proctor. he admitted that he is not aware of any statement from reynolds that filters or menthol cigarettes were safe or safer. so if mr. gray thought it, dr. proctor told you reynolds did not say that. but you saw who did, the public health community, the surgeon general's reports. can we see number 34. dr. proctor went through and he talked about how the public health community said the use of filter cigarettes may decrease lung cancer mortality. and they talked about filter tips and lower tar and nicotine. as dr. proctor admitted to a question judge benitez asked him, the scientific community was pitching these ideas. since they did, and if mr. gray came to some understanding based on what they said, it cannot be a basis of liability against reynolds in this case. and even so, even so, dr. slaton cleared this all up. he said he made sure mr. gray understood. he told him that light, menthol, filter, low-tar cigarettes were just as dangerous for him and they were not safer. he told him if they had less tar and nicotine, he might just smoke more of them and make it worse. and mr. gray did not disagree. he did not doubt 143 it. he did not say he saw something different on "face the nation." he did not rely. so use your common sense and focus on the facts about henry gray. when the plaintiff cannot produce a single witness to say mr. gray heard, read, saw, and, most importantly, relied on anything reynolds said or did not say, do not infer otherwise. can we see number 35. so the question, "did concealment of information cause mr. gray's death?" the answer has to be no. there was no suggestion that mr. gray was just waiting for reynolds to say something. he had all the information he ever needed to make his decisions. but for years, the timing was not right. and if there was any evidence in this case that mr. gray relied on any statement of reynolds, do not you think they would have given that information to dr. proctor or dr. grunberg? of course they would have. but they did not because it does not exist. dr. slaton gave you all the proof you need. he told you of all the health risks he discussed with mr. gray for years. he told you mr. gray listened to him and heard everything. he knew that smoking was dangerous for him. he had no doubts. he listened and he was grateful. he never doubted the risks. he never said more research was necessary. he never said there was a controversy. and ladies and gentlemen, this case is only about 144 mr. gray. and there is no evidence at all that he heard or relied on any statement from r.j. reynolds. and no matter what some other smoker may have done some other place, the plaintiff has to prove what mr. gray did. she did not do that here. she did not build the bridge. there is no proof of reliance. now, turn back to the verdict form here. can i have the elmo, please. questions 4 and 6 are the two we are talking about on whether he relied to his detriment -- relied to his detriment. because mr. gray knew the material facts about the health risks of smoking and the addictive nature, the answer to these two questions has to be no. because there is no bridge, there is no reliance, there is no legal cause on anything reynolds said or did not say, it is another reason why the answer to these two questions has to be no. now, i'm going to touch for 15 seconds on questions 5 and 7. miss london talked about legal reasons for before 1982 or after 1982. the fact of the matter is there is no evidence that mr. gray relied on anything, not before 1982, not after 1982. so when you check "no" on those boxes, there is no need to answer the questions on 5 and 7. can i have number 18, please. i promise i'm only going to make you switch one or two more times. will, can we have 145 18. comparative fault. now, if you get to this question on the verdict form, you will have already decided that mr. gray was addicted, that addiction was a legal cause of his injuries, that reynolds' conduct was a legal cause. and if you get that far, you will have to allocate responsibility between reynolds and mr. gray. now, miss london kept talking about whether i'm going to say that mr. gray acted unreasonably. and i looked through judge benitez's instructions, and i do not think there is anything you will be instructed about having to say mr. gray acted unreasonably. i'm not going to say he made any unreasonable decisions. now, a couple points to keep in mind with respect to comparative fault. comparative fault is not a global comparison of conduct. it is not what did henry gray do versus the global conduct of the tobacco industry over all time. it is a comparison of actions of henry gray and reynolds that were the legal cause of his injuries. it is a very narrow inquiry. now, you may have seen things that reynolds said in public or wrote internally that you do not like. but the issue in this case is whether they affected henry gray and caused his injury. if you find something reynolds did was wrong or you do not like it but it is not connected to henry gray, it cannot be 146 considered for part of your analysis for comparative fault. now, miss london said in opening and said again today that they accept some responsibility for henry gray. they said they wanted to be clear and upfront about it. but you never heard that from mrs. gray on the witness stand. it is only been something you have heard from miss london. but if they accept responsibility, let me ask you a couple questions. responsibility for what? responsibility for the choice to start smoking? responsibility for the choice to continue smoking? for the choice to continue smoking knowing it is bad for you without stopping, when millions of americans, including your wife, chose to stop? is it responsibility for successfully quitting smoking but starting again at a time when you are not addicted and you are out with your friends? is it responsibility for ignoring the warnings you received from your family and friends? is it responsibility for refusing to even try to stop? if we learned anything about mr. gray in this trial, we learned that he was a man who was responsible and in control. because ultimately you are the one who has control over your behavior. you cannot control your behavior to ten percent or fifty percent; you control it one hundred percent. and nobody made mr. gray's decisions for him. nobody could decide for him to choose to smoke. and nobody could choose for him to stop smoking. only mr. gray could make those 147 choices. he had the control. he had the power. he had the responsibility. in fact, you never heard that mr. gray blamed anyone else for his injuries. he was a successful attorney. and he knew his injuries were related to smoking. and dr. slaton told him that for years. yet he never blamed the tobacco companies or said that he wanted to sue them. so if you get to this point on the verdict form, i ask you to give him one hundred percent responsibility for his conduct, because ultimately he was the one with responsibility for and control over his behavior. if you find everything that i've said this morning and this afternoon unpersuasive and decide to return a verdict for mrs. gray, you will have to decide on an amount of damages. that is in questions 9 and 10. and this is hard. you cannot put a value on a human life. and we all feel compassion. and we all wish mrs. gray the best. but compassion and good wishes are not reasons to exceed common sense and good judgment. your instruction will tell you that any such award should be fair and just. and it needs to be just and reasonable. it cannot be a number that miss london pulls out of the air. there needs to be an evidentiary basis for it. and, as anticipated, miss london asked for millions of dollars. it is not a question of whether reynolds is a big 148 company or not. if you find reynolds liable, it is a question about what damages mrs. gray has as a result of her husband's death. you consider what little evidence you heard on that during the trial and compare it to the size of the award that miss london asked for. so if you get to this point and you make an award and decide to compensate mrs. gray, please compensate her based on the evidence you heard. finally -- and it really is finally for me because this is the last time i get to speak to you -- if you get all the way through the verdict form, you have to decide whether punitive damages are warranted. that is question 11. and if you get that far, you will have already fully compensated, mrs. gray for her husband's death. now, punitive damages are not about compensation or making someone whole. punitive damages are about more money. can we see number 36, please. they are damages in addition to damages that fully compensate the plaintiff. they can be awarded only for the conduct that it was the legal cause of the harms suffered by the plaintiff. and importantly, punitive damages cannot be based on the findings that you have heard so much about. so you cannot consider them as a basis for your punitive damages. you have heard from miss london, punitive damages not only is about more money; it is about more trial. it would be another phase with more witnesses. 149 now, punitive damages are designed to punish and deter. and the plaintiff must meet a higher level of proof, called clear and convincing evidence. can we see number 37. and this is from instruction number 19. it spells out your instructions here. i'm not going to read the whole thing. you have heard that it needs to be by clear and convincing evidence. "as i've already instructed you, a preponderance of the evidence means" -- let me start at the beginning again. "plaintiff bears the burden of proving that punitive damages are warranted by clear and convincing evidence. "here is the exception to the burden of proof that i mentioned earlier. as i have already instructed you, preponderance of the evidence means an amount of evidence that is enough to persuade you that a claim or contention is more likely true than not true. "in contrast, clear and convincing evidence is evidence that is more compelling and persuasive. it is evidence that is precise, explicit, lacking in confusion, and of such weight that it produces a firm belief or conviction without hesitation about the matter in issue." here, a hunch or a suggestion that mr. gray may have thought something based on some unidentified source does not meet this higher burden of proof. it is evidence that is not 150 precise, not explicit, and nothing but confusing. evidence here must be reynolds' conduct that clear and convincingly is linked to mr. gray. again, there needs to be a connection. and when you consider whether to punish reynolds, consider the testimony you heard about their efforts to develop tobacco products that may reduce risk. can we see number 4 again. dr. proctor. he told you that reynolds hired dr. rodgman in the 1950s, and he went to work identifying the constituents in tobacco. and dr. proctor credited dr. rodgman and reynolds with identifying a lot of those constituents and publishing on the methods they used to do so. he told you dr. rodgman was an excellent scientist. and you heard about his speech to the american chemical society, talking about the cancer-causing pahs, or polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, that he identified in cigarette smoke. and he even drew the compounds. and the 1964 surgeon general's report relied on dr. rodgman's disclosed research on carcinogens. dr. proctor told you that reynolds made what he called a huge effort to take out the carcinogens. when people identified candidates that might be causing the harm, he told you reynolds tried to take them out. he said reynolds spent a fortune trying to do so, and they lowered benzo(a)pyrene, which dr. feingold talked about, and other pahs. 151 later on, when reynolds discovered that tobacco-specific nitrosamines could be reduced by changing the way the tobacco barns cured the tobacco, they shared the discovery with the public and paid to redesign the barns to cut down on those things. can we see number 41, please. larson, haag, silvette called that the green monster. in 1964, general used it -- surgeon general used it, thanked the companies for it, and referred to it repeatedly. dr. grunberg told you it is a comprehensive account of the world literature. it summarized thousands of articles, articles both pro and con on the issues, and it was relied upon by the surgeon general's report. and dr. grunberg told you that his mentor ordered him to read it, and he still uses it today. can we see number 42, please. in the 1960s -- you have already seen the meeting minutes from the nci. but in the 1960s, reynolds provided the information to the surgeon general's committee and started working with the national cancer institute on their tobacco working group. in the 1970s, they continued that work and looked into things we looked at before: the tar-to-nicotine ratio, the other things that the public health community and folks like dr. russell were proposing. 152 in the 1980s, you saw reynolds' efforts continued with this focus on a cigarette that heated, instead of burned, tobacco. it is called premiere and later eclipse. dr. proctor told you that reynolds spent a billion dollars trying to develop that. and you saw the notes there that the public health community did not even take the time to see whether it did reduce those carcinogens or not. it just panned it anyway, out of hand. and no matter what miss london says now, during the time mr. gray was alive, the public health community was encouraging reynolds to make lower-tar and nicotine cigarettes. i want to mention a couple things about ctr. dr. proctor told you that ctr funded research that produced over 7,000 peer-reviewed articles in prestigious journals, told you the research had substantial influence on the public health community. he told you the grantees were cited repeatedly, over 600 times, in surgeon general reports. he told you that research led to ten nobel laureates. ladies and gentlemen, this is not a record of wanton conduct and disregard for human life. this is a record of trying to lower the risks of an inherently risky, but always lawful, product. this is a record of a contribution to science that was recognized by the public health community. there were some successes and some failures, but 153 reynolds tried. and trying to lower the risks of an inherently risky, but always legal, product should not be punished or deterred. and you also heard how things have changed. dr. proctor talked about previously secret documents. they are secrets no more. he told you there are over 80 million pages available online and on the public website. you can take that down, will. when this trial is over and the judge does not give you your admonition and you can go on bing or google or bling, or whatever you want to, if you want to, you can go online and look at all of these internal documents. if the company position on smoking and health and addiction throughout the years angers you, you heard that that position has now changed. over a decade ago, reynolds finally admitted that smoking caused cancer and was addictive. and you saw dr. gentry yesterday. and it is dr. gentry. and i tried to be respectful of every one of their witnesses and called them "doctor" if they were doctor. it is dr. gentry. dr. gentry said that he did not disagree that smoking caused disease or that smoking was addictive. in fact, over and over and over and over again, he answered the question the same way. he told mr. wilner, "yes, cigarettes are addictive, 154 and we are trying to get the harmful constituents down in smoke. we know it is risky." he mentioned that cigarettes are now under fda regulation, and he said he would hope to develop a better relationship with those regulators. looking at all this evidence, there is no need to punish or deter reynolds for changes that took place over a decade ago. so if you get to this point on the verdict form -- one more switch, glenn; sorry -- in question number 11, you cannot find by clear and convincing evidence that punitive damages are warranted. ladies and gentlemen, mr. gray made choices throughout his entire life. he chose his profession, he chose his lifestyle, he chose his golf partners, and he chose to smoke. and just as we should respect mr. gray for his successes in his life, we should respect his choice to smoke. and we should respect that he made that choice to continue smoking for a number of years. he made that choice in the face of news reports about the risks, in the face of warnings from his wife, his cousin, his children, and his doctor. he ignored requests that he stop until the timing was right. and when the timing was right, he did quit. but then he made a choice to start smoking again, after months or years 155 of quitting, when he wanted to, when he was out with his friends at a football game or just for the hell of it. we should respect those choices as well. mr. gray was not a victim. he lived his life the way he wanted to, and he enjoyed his life. he did what he wanted when he wanted, how he wanted. do not reward the plaintiff by making mr. gray a victim in this lawsuit because of his choices. now, this is the only chance i get to speak with you. i do not know if miss london saved any of her time for rebuttal, but because i cannot respond to her, i ask you to keep in mind how we have responded throughout this trial to give you the other half of the story. and as you deliberate, i ask you to keep the full story in mind and answer miss london and any questions you have as you think we would. i told you i would do this at every step of the way. i'm going to conclude how i began, and that is by thanking you. i thank you for your time and attention over the past two weeks and especially for your time and attention to my remarks today. thank you.