4 mr. kaczynski: thank you, your honor, counsel, mrs. gray. ladies and gentleman of the jury, we have come a long way together. it is been a very interesting trial, i would imagine. i see we are finally winding down and as we do, let me sort of start here where i started the first time around, and that is to thank you for the attention you have paid. thank you for your service. you know, in our country there is a scale or a range of ways you can serve your country or your state or your county. it could be as simple as paying your taxes, ranging all the way up to the ultimate sacrifice. you folks are on the upper end of that scale with your jury service because as i said before, we literally could not do this without you and your willingness to 21 serve. i'm sure i speak for everyone, we are grateful for it. thank you. in my opening i told you that this case was about charles gray and the choices he made. since then we have seen a lot of paper put up on the screen, a lot of witnesses in the witness chair. you have heard from m.d.s, and ph.d.s, a psychiatrist, mr. gray's family and friends, either live or by deposition. but even after all that, this case is still about charles gray and the choices he made, the choice to smoke, the choice to continue to smoke, and ultimately the choice to accept personal responsibility for his actions. in this case as you are the finders of fact, it is up to you and only you to look at the testimony, to look at the witnesses; and in this case you have actually had a witness who came out and said he was rooting for the plaintiffs to win. you can employ your god-given common sense to the testimony of the witnesses that you have heard to decide that first question you were shown a moment ago, and that is whether mr. gray's death was caused by an addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine or whether mr. gray's death was on account of the choices he made. you are also going to have to decide whether the plaintiffs built that bridge i talked about in opening, that bridge between mr. gray and r.j. reynolds. you see out here going over the bay, the bridge over the bay is built with concrete and steel. the bridges in this courtroom have to be built with evidence and proof. evidence and proof that charles gray relied upon something that r.j. reynolds did. evidence and proof, not guesswork, not to use dr. cummings' word of wallpaper. evidence and proof. now, what is the evidence and proof? well, you cannot look at the evidence and proof until you look where it came from. and on the subject of addiction, the first issue you are going to have to deal with, the plaintiffs called three doctors, dr. cummings, dr. burns and dr. benowitz. let me just start out by saying that in their respective fields and what they do when they deal with patients, these men have all made great contributions to society. dr. benowitz, he is a cardiologist, and he is done a lot of nicotine research, particularly in heart-related issues. dr. burns, an author or coauthor or editor of several surgeon general reports, a pulmonologist or lung doctor. dr. cummings, although he is not a medical doctor or a psychiatrist or a psychologist or board certified in anything, to the extent the clinic he runs helps people quit smoking, he is performing a valuable service. 6 but when they step away from their professions and they step into a courtroom, as they have many, many, many times, when they decide to help lawyers rather than people, they become the plaintiff's dream team. you do not see a team like this very often. look at the number of trials, smoking and health trials, not trials overall, 20, 20, 40. 70 depositions, over 100. lectured to lawyers, recruit other witnesses, and there is their billing rate. this is not the portrait of a dispassionate group of experts who come in here to share their expertise. you heard from each of them, they help the plaintiffs formulate their case, pick the evidence, rehearse their case before mock jurors and recruit others to the cause. and dr. cummings called it a cause. dr. cummings called it the war against cigarettes. dr. cummings compared it to the war against terrorism, and he accepted the title of general in that war. these are the things you consider when you weigh the testimony they gave you. now, what did they tell you? dr. benowitz did not say anything about mr. gray. dr. cummings called mr. gray highly addictive. dr. keefe, who is the only psychiatrist you heard from, the only person who is trained specifically in evaluating people for their mental condition, he said there is no such term known to medical science, there is no medical meaning. dr. cummings took it a step further. he said he could reach that conclusion that mr. gray was highly addictive on the basis of one question. when did he have his first cigarette in the morning? does that sound like science to you? dr. burns looked at more factors than that and he came out and called mr. gray powerfully addicted. you also heard from dr. keefe that that is another term with no medical significance whatsoever. and dr. burns reviewed only five depositions -- only five of the 15 witnesses who had been deposed in this case. he missed some of mr. gray's siblings. he missed some of mr. gray's children, and he missed some of mr. gray's close friends. even for this team, what was their bottom line? dr. benowitz said heavy smokers can quit. dr. benowitz said, would you agree there is nothing about cigarettes that causes a smoker to lose the ability to be responsible for their own action; that is correct, is not it? answer, yes. dr. benowitz says that the nicotine receptors in the brain are not permanent unlike what dr. cummings said. as far as we know they go back to normal within a few weeks. so after a smoker quits smoking, the nicotine receptors do come back to normal within two full weeks, right? 17 yes. dr. burns, he says it is possible to quit smoking, even for someone, as he said, who was powerfully addicted. he does not imply that it is impossible to stop. and like dr. benowitz, dr. burns says, just because someone is addicted to nicotine does not relieve that person of responsibility for their own behavior. even an addicted behavior, they have to decide to try to quit and then make a decision to quit. they have to make an effort to quit. smokers are responsible for their choices. even dr. cummings, the anchor of the plaintiff's case, he says -- even he says that that is right, it was not impossible for mr. gray to quit at any point in his life. dr. burns told you about the benefits of quitting smoking and it is a long quote that basically says, it has immediate benefits for people of all ages and a person who quits smoking before the age of 50 would have half the risk of dying in 15 years as compared to continuing smokers. the risk goes down and goes down dramatically. but the best evidence we had of quitting smoking was a gentleman who sat in that chair about a week ago, john gray, mr. gray's older brother. he told you the story of how he was given a diagnosis that was not too favorable and he said he quit to save his life, and he did. he did quit and he did save his life and he was here to tell you that. as i said, dr. cummings was the key to the plaintiff's case, the anchor of their case, all aspects of their case. you got a good look at him. he testified here for seven hours on direct examination. i cross-examined him for over four. he admits that testifying has become like a second job to him that takes him away from his first job, the job where he helps people rather than helping lawyers. this was his third trial in pensacola. he will be back next month for his fourth, such that almost like testifying has become his second job, pensacola has become his second home. he is the guy that told you in his view a just verdict is a plaintiff's verdict. in this case you are rooting for mrs. gray to win, right? well i -- yes. ladies and gentlemen, you can sit on a jury every week of your life for the rest of your life and you will never hear an answer like that. mr. loehr: objection, your honor. that is inappropriate. the court: sustained. mr. kaczynski: dr. cummings, you will learn, received training on how to avoid answering questions. you saw that on display here. sixteen times i asked the court to strike part of his answer as nonresponsive. sixteen 2 times the court granted that and struck part of his answer as nonresponsive. dr. cummings received training on how to create controversies. you saw a little about that on display here too. he created a controversy by using school children to write letters to the tobacco companies. my client had the courtesy to respond, but not to the kids, to the principal and the principal did not -- the principal shared it with the school nurse. the school nurse shared it with dr. cummings and now dr. cummings shares it as a trial exhibit all across the country. he created a controversy. he learned well. now, you saw the materials he uses when he is counseling smokers. when he is dealing with people instead of lawyers, you see the things are motivational, they are positive in nature. they warn about withdrawal and how to get over it. they warn about relapses and tell you to hang in there and start again. you heard when he testified in a cigarette trial ten years ago, that he tells his patients, the people who come into his clinic, that the success rate for truly motivated smokers is one hundred percent. on that witness stand he called it a joke. now that he is here helping lawyers, he said people called it a joke. he also came up with a phrase "constrained choice." you want to talk about phrases with no medical meaning, that is a phrase that not only has no medical meaning, but has been adopted by nobody, not the surgeon general, not the dsm, nobody. that is dr. cummings' own term that he uses in courtrooms like this one. you will not see that term anywhere in his smart move booklet. now that he is in a courtroom helping lawyers instead of people, he paints a very bleak picture for anyone who smokes a pack or more a day of cigarettes. you get the sense from his testimony that smokers of that level almost lose their freewill, that their smoking is almost involuntary, that there is not a person standing between addiction and disease. remember what the surgeon general said. the surgeon general said cigarette smoking represents a category of health problems that can be called personal choice behavior. again, cigarette smoking is an addictive behavior and the individual must decide whether or not to continue that behavior. the individual can decide whether or not to continue that behavior. you saw some instances when dr. cummings tried a little hard to help the lawyers. for example here, he talked about how one of mr. gray's grandsons said, well, he got rid of all the cigarettes in the house. i showed you the transcript. you saw no such thing. he suggested that the daughter angela's testimony said that mr. gray used a patch about the same time of his bladder cancer diagnosis. 13 that is not just false. that is impossible. the patch, we know, did not come out until 1993. the bladder cancer and relapses were all in the 1980s. there were other instances where he talked about the patch without indicating exactly when it was used. he cited one grandson to say he lighted one cigarette after the other. well, in so doing, he did not tell you about the fact that his son mickey, another grandson, his sister betty said they never saw that happen. he ignored the testimony that mr. gray did not smoke while he was hunting. he ignored the testimony of gene allen jones who said when mr. gray would go hunting, he would be out there for a period of time, half day, hours, a half day, depending on how long a hunt would last, when he would not smoke. so what he cobbled together for his chart did not seem to include anything to suggest that mr. gray could control his smoking. but we saw there was plenty of evidence that mr. gray could control his smoking. he did not smoke during short periods like church and the movies. he did not smoke when he was out hunting, as we heard, up to a half day. he did not smoke in the restaurant kitchen, did not smoke in the kitchen of his home and did not smoke in the country and western shows he went to with his brother. dr. cummings talked about withdrawal. more restless, more at night. he is trying to suggest that mr. gray was getting up in the middle of the night to have a cigarette. it was on cross-examination that we found out that him getting up at night probably had nothing to do with his cigarettes and everything to do with his changing work patterns, changing from the fishing job where he was up before the crack of dawn to the restaurant job where he went in in the afternoon and stayed until perhaps as late as one in the morning. and then they opened the restaurant early for lunch and so his sleeping patterns changed again. it was on cross-examination that dr. cummings told us, no, he could not say that the reason mr. gray was getting up was to smoke, but he certainly suggested it there. now, there was one monumentally huge fact that you did not hear. you did not hear it from dr. burns. you did not see it on any of dr. cummings' slides. you did not even hear it on the direct examination of mrs. gray, and that monumentally huge fact is that we know mr. gray could quit smoking because mr. gray did quit smoking. we heard in the cross-examination of mrs. gray that mr. gray quit smoking for around a year. that is a huge fact that neither dr. cummings, nor dr. burns saw fit to share with you. if this case is supposed to be about concealment, that is a huge thing to conceal from 24 the jury. here is what mrs. gray said. and at one point your husband decided he was going to try to quit smoking? yes. you think he quit for about a year? almost a year? um-hum. and when he quit, by the way, did you observe any personality changes? well, he chewed the gum. no, roughly no. so there was no withdrawal. he quit smoking for a year with no withdrawal. you did not hear that either. ladies and gentlemen, when you go back to smoking after you have quit for a year, we are not talking about days or weeks here, a year. it is because you choose to. you heard a lot of talk about relapse in this courtroom. this is a year we are talking about. when you go back to smoking after a year, all the nicotine is out of your blood in 72 hours. as you saw from dr. benowitz, whatever changes there were with nicotine receptors in the brain are back to normal in a couple of weeks. if you have withdrawal, which apparently he did not, that is long since gone. if you go back to smoking after a year, it is because you want to. it is because you choose to. and it does not really matter whether he chose to because he enjoyed smoking. it does not really matter if he chose to because the scare of the bladder cancer had worn off, as dr. keefe suggested the kind of thing he is seen in his patients. it does not matter the pressure of opening a new business, opening mesquite charlie's. and it really does not matter if it was a social aspect of smoking with your employees which was the situation when mrs. gray caught him. it does not matter what the reason is. it was his reason. it was his choice and that is a choice that you really should not second guess. when he went back to smoking about 1985, there is been a lot of testimony from a lot of people that he wanted to quit and he was trying to quit. i do not for a moment doubt the sincerity of any of those people who came into the courtroom or you heard by deposition. he probably convinced them of that. from everything we heard, mr. gray was a gregarious guy, a sociable guy. you have to look behind his words to his acts. look at what he did and look at what he did not do. and then apply your common sense as to whether these were real. between the time he quit in 1985 and the time he quit in 1993, the second time, what was going on in there? was he really trying to quit? were these serious quit efforts? in this you are aided by the advice that dr. cummings and dr. benowitz give the people they are dealing with who are trying to quit, when they are dealing with people rather than coming into courtrooms and 9 helping lawyers. they say to throw out your cigarettes. did mr. gray? no. they say to throw out your ashtrays. did mr. gray? no. they say to throw out lighters. no. not buy cigarettes. no. tell others not to buy cigarettes. no. change your routine. no. go to a smoking cessation clinic. no. he did chew nicotine gum, but we heard he was chewing that gum while he was still smoking, and you heard that even mrs. gray observed that and remarked to him, i see you chewing gum and i see you smoking, i do not think you are serious. she was right. it is common sense. now, you heard from dr. keefe, this is a man who diagnoses people every day, who is trained to do it, who teaches people to do it. he is the chief of psychiatry at tampa general hospital, the boss. he teaches at usf. he makes competency determinations. he is asked by judges to make those determinations. this is what he does. now, he is not as polished or practiced a witness as dr. cummings. this is his first cigarette case, not his 20th or his 50th. he diagnoses people like mr. gray. he deals with people, not a word processor. no, he is not published peer-reviewed stuff. but he is dealt with patients and he does it every day. and what he told you is something you ought to think hard about. he said addiction is not like aids. it is not like a germ. it is not like a virus. it does not cause your death. it is a label for clusters of behaviors that are determined by consulting the dsm. but standing between addiction and injury is a person, a you, a me, a mr. gray. a person with freewill, a person with ability to make their own decisions, and even in this age of victimhood, smoking is a voluntary act as the surgeon general said. personal choice behavior. addiction is a label for that behavior. but the responsibility for that behavior rests with the person who acts, not a little, not fifty percent, not twenty percent, but totally. the evidence in this trial more than shows that mr. gray was perfectly capable of exercising that freewill. perfectly capable of changing that behavior because he did. and then he chose not to refrain from smoking anymore. this was a man who knew how to accomplish something when he really wanted to. not a little bit, but totally. in every business venture he embarked on, he planned, he organized, he executed and he was successful. trucking, fishing, electronics, restaurant, planned, organized, executed successfully. and on smoking, he did the same thing for a year. he planned, he organized, he executed successfully. do you see a plan here for the time period between 1985 and 1993? planning, execution, 20 organization or do you see half-heartedness, lack of commitment and lack of that word we heard bandied about a lot the last couple of weeks, motivation, or is it simply a choice to continue to smoke? you have got to want to quit for yourself. you have got to insert yourself between the addiction and the potential disease. you have got to make your own decision. you have got to make your own choices, for yourself not for somebody else. mrs. gray wanted him to quit. his son mickey wanted him to quit. his brother john wanted him to quit and dr. martin wanted him to quit. but can you really look at this chart and conclude that in the period between '85 and '93 mr. gray wanted to quit? that he had the same commitment that he did when he did quit? that he could have honestly checked yes to the boxes in dr. cummings' booklet? do i have what it takes to quit smoking? if you look at the facts rather than the words, common sense dictates the answer. the answer is no. he could quit smoking. he proved it. he did it. but then he chose to continue to smoke, not for the nicotine which was gone, not because of brain receptors which were back to normal, not because of withdrawal because he never had anyway, not because of a relapse, but because of choice, an exercise of freewill for whatever reasons that were good and sufficient for him. mr. gray accepted responsibility for that choice to continue to smoke. you did not hear any evidence in this case, any testimony in this case that this was the kind of guy who would seek to blame somebody else for things that happen to him. in fact, every word we heard suggested the opposite. this was a stand-up guy. this was not a person who thought themselves a victim. this lawsuit is trying to turn him into a victim. he absolutely knew he had lung cancer and he absolutely knew it was caused by his cigarettes, and he absolutely knew who manufactured those cigarettes, but he never sued them. i asked mrs. gray on the stand, he did not file a suit, he did not talk about filing a suit. this was not mr. gray's idea. he accepted personal responsibility for his actions. you are being asked to say he made his choices, his choices were wrong and somebody else should pay money for those choices. do not second guess charles gray. he made his choices and those choices resulted in his injuries and death, not his addiction. had he chosen to stay off those cigarettes, he would have realized the benefits that dr. burns talked about. he did not, and he did not relapse either. he chose to continue to smoke. he chose to accept personal responsibility. so when you get to that first question on the 5 verdict form, i would ask you to check no. now, the second point i talked to you about in opening statement was the plaintiffs had to build a bridge between mr. gray and r.j. reynolds, that something reynolds did or did not do caused mr. gray to do something. he had to rely on some action of what reynolds did. the question here is, did they build that bridge by proof and by evidence between r.j. reynolds and mr. gray? and the first point to be made, i guess, is it is r.j. reynolds that is in this courtroom today. you saw a lot of documents, you saw a lot of people who work for philip morris. you saw a lot of documents that were internal to philip morris. the judge will instruct you under the circumstances that you can consider those documents and for what purposes. dr. cummings spent a lot of time talking about philip morris and the words philip morris used. he used the term psychological crutch. he showed you the document on psychological crutch, but that was not a term used by reynolds. as we saw, it was coming from an internal philip morris document, and dr. cummings admitted it. it was from a philip morris employee to a philip morris employee in philip morris files. those are philip morris words. not r.j. reynolds words. he showed you a document, and in fact, you saw it with mr. loehr in his closing, about the best program for ctr. once again, a memo from a philip morris employee to a philip morris employee with a copy to a philip morris employee, a document only found in philip morris files. not reynolds words. the mere fact that one of these authors may have also held a job in the tobacco institute or the tobacco institute research committee, that does not turn philip morris files into reynolds files or philip morris words into reynolds words. mr. loehr: your honor, i object. that is contrary to the jury instruction in this case. the court: sustained. mr. kaczynski: you saw some tv footage of mr. bowling, a philip morris executive, on a documentary about philip morris business. you will be instructed the circumstances in which you can consider this, but just bear in mind those were not reynolds people. so focusing on reynolds. how do they try to build that bridge? two ways. advertising and what dr. cummings called the 50 year cover-up. we are going to take a look at both and oddly enough dr. cummings is right there in the middle of both. when he switched to advertising, he took off his addiction counselor cap and put on his marketing and advertising cap. of course, he did this without ever having a degree in marketing or advertising, without having marketed anything apart from advertising for the new york state quit line. and what did he do? well, he showed 16 you a lot of pictures, some ads. he said that cigarette ads during world war ii had military themes, just like other products. he showed you they used celebrities, just like other products. around christmas they used santa claus, just like other products. in fact, you saw some in that life magazine article from the issue in 1953 that came out just before christmas. that proves nothing. they showed you some pictures of ads from doctors in the 1950s, but what he did not tell you about is what the surgeon general's report in 1994 said about those ads. "with greater public concern about cancer, however, these continuing health claims, although intended to reassure consumers, were very likely increasing consumer awareness of the suspected risks of smoking." they said articles of fortune was so riddled with warnings, it appeals to fear that the cigarette industry could think that it was an inside job. those ads scared people. those ads reminded people of the smoking and health issue. he showed you the flintstones, but he did not tell you until cross-examination that it was supposed to be an adult comedy like the family guy today. he did not tell you it was on at night rather than on a saturday morning and he did not tell you it ran in 1960 when mr. gray was already 25 years old. what does that have to do with mr. gray? nothing. he showed you two r.j. reynolds memos a research and development scientist wrote to marketing people. one was from claude teague. one was from frank colby. but he had to admit that in neither case did anything happen. you can find no evidence that this was followed up on in any way? no. unless you buy the idea that was suggested yesterday that reynolds sat on this idea for 30 years when they came out with camel crush, unless you buy that, nothing happened and it proves nothing. he showed you some demographic information from the national opinion organization. then he had to admit it was collected for the company, not specifically for the marketing department. he admitted the company could not need information like that for all variety of purposes other than marketing, like knowing -- like for forecasting purposes, like to know how much tobacco to buy, what types of tobacco to buy, what types of menthol or other flavorants to buy. having that survey information proves nothing. the fundamental point that he was trying to make was that you have got to get a cigarette smoker young because they are so brand loyal that if you do not get them when they are young, you are not going to get them at all. but the very document that he was using undermined that proposition. 3088 1 now, if you remember, he used only selected pages from one particular reynolds document. when i crossed him, i used the whole thing. and in the whole thing, not the portion he had, it talks about loyalty rates from the 1993 sds percentage of smokers who smoke marlboro at age 18 still do. it shows that marlboro loses about 28 percent of its 18 years olds by age 20, and another 14 percent by age 24. a total loss of 42 percent over that six-year period. they lose almost half their smokers. that is not brand loyalty. so there is plenty of switching going on here. at the end of the day all this marketing stuff comes back to the question i asked you to ask yourself right in the beginning. what does any of that stuff have to do with charles gray? and the answer is nothing. to claim he was exposed to an ad, the wallpaper theory you heard from dr. cummings, is not to say he relied on it or he chose to smoke or not to smoke based on it. there were no ads for the roll your owns that he started smoking with his brother and their friends. if you want to blame somebody for him starting smoking, blame the hayes boys. they are the ones that john gray said gave them the roll your own materials back when they were young. and there is no testimony whatsoever, no testimony whatsoever about why after that he chose the brands he chose. none. in fact, the only testimony about mr. gray and advertising is that he was not likely to be influenced by it. this is from his former son-in-law who knew him very well. he was smart. there were a lot of ads out there and mr. gray probably saw some. so what? so what? they needed to prove reliance and they did not. they needed proof and they did not have it. and dr. cummings' wallpaper theory will not make up for that. so did advertising have anything to do with charles gray? it did not. it is one of those bridges to nowhere. last we come to the so-called 50 year cover-up that dr. cummings talked about and, of course, dr. cummings was the heart of this testimony too. the first question we should ask him, exactly what it is that was covered up, and he says it was what was known about the health risks of smoking and the addictive nature of cigarettes. those are the primary things that were covered up. the question you have to ask yourself is whether there was something that reynolds knew that mr. gray did not or could not that would have made a difference to him. and common sense is going to be the simplest answer to this question. you heard testimony that every time mrs. gray talked to mr. gray about his smoking or telling him that he ought to quit, did he ever 12 argue with her? did he ever say, no, the tobacco industry research committee says it is okay; no, the tobacco institute says it is okay; no, r.j. reynolds says it is okay. take a look at the first one. when you told him he should quit smoking, he never argued with you saying smoking was harmless or smoking was safe? no. he never told you he heard something from, say, the tobacco institute that said smoking was safe, right? no. then there is a question, the next one. mrs. gray remembered when the surgeon general's report came out in 1964 and she remembers when the warning labels came out. and she pointed out the warning labels to her husband. you remember calling your husband's attention to the warning labels on cigarette packs? yes. and he did not argue and say this is meaningless or anything like that, did he? i do not remember any response he made. now, if he had reacted as his brother john did that this is a lot of bull, do not you think you would have heard about it? finally, and this is the best one. while you were on the road, you suspected he was smoking, he was driving all hours of the day and night. it is boring out on the road, he might have been smoking, right? yes. and at some point you said to him, i do not think you ought to be smoking, right? i probably did, yes. and his response was, i know. i know. he did not argue because he knew. and then when you had the instance with his son mickey, what about addiction with his son mickey. this, again, is the best evidence of all. his son mickey was caught with candy cigarettes. he told mickey not to smoke. he told him that if he did smoke, he would not be able to stop, and he must have made a strong impression because mickey never became a smoker. now, should not that be the end of the inquiry? i mean, does not this prove they have not built that bridge? the evidence was undisputed that mr. gray was intelligent, that he read the newspaper, that he watched the evening news, and he never argued with mrs. gray about his smoking because he was aware of the risks of smoking. he took those candy cigarettes away from his son saying if you start, it would be tough to stop. he may not have understood the term addiction, but he certainly understood the concept way back in 1963. this is the only proof in the case, not dr. cummings' wallpaper. there is no evidence, and dr. cummings admitted he does not have any either, that mr. gray relied on anything that the cigarette industry did. there is none. no direct evidence. but we have this evidence that when confronted with his behavior, he did not assert 23 as a defense, well, i know, regardless of the source, he did not say, well, i know this is not harmful, i do not believe this is harmful. he said, i know. this is the only evidence in the case on this issue, and i would suggest that this is the evidence you should rest your verdict on on this issue. there is no evidence that mr. gray relied on anything that anybody in the cigarette industry said. he told his wife he knew. they have not built that bridge. okay. so what was covered up? let us take a look at the health risks of smoking. let us start by seeing what was known and this is going to be kind of a lightning round through the '30s, '40s, '50s and '60s. next one, time magazine coffin nails in 1938. smoking associated with longevity. reader's digest articles throughout the '30s and '40s. next, chain smoker for years. coffin nail. reader's digest, 1954. reader's digest on smoking and health throughout the 1950s. smoking and cancer in time magazine from 1952 to 1959. next, pensacola journal coverage of the lung cancer studies in 1954 and 1957. next, reader's digest kicked off the 1950s with this article. january 1950, how harmful are cigarettes? was anybody paying attention to this stuff? they reran the article, saying the subject of this article in january aroused more discussion and approval than any recent magazine feature. next, smoking and cancer in time in 1953, epidemiological studies. beyond any doubt, skin painting in 1953 in time magazine. in life magazine. you saw the actual magazine. of course, broadcast into people's living rooms on see it now. next, hammond and horn, the 1954 studies in magazines. in the columbus ledger, columbus being the area where mr. gray grew up and the paper they took. were people paying attention? george gallup says yes. george gallup, as you heard from the polling expert, dr. geer, they would not be polling on an issue. they had limited resources. polling was in its infancy in these days. they only had the resources to poll on issues of major public interest. this was one. have you heard or read anything recently to the effect that cigarette smoking may be a cause of cancer of the lung? ninety percent said yes. now there was some suggestion to say, oh, they are reacting to the frank statement because that was out in january. june 1954 is when the first american cancer society results came out. do not think it is a coincidence. next, 1955 see it now. you saw clips from two half-hour shows consecutive weeks. the experts began to get together and compare notes 8 in 1957 and those results were published all over the country. 1957 hammond and horn report came out in this time magazine coverage of it. were people paying attention to that? we know they were. 77 percent had heard about that very specific study. not something by the tobacco institute, but that very specific study. next, smoking and cancer continue. this is the first government study. they studied what was referred to as the veteran study. they studied the insurance records of world war i veterans and they found as the others did that smokers got lung cancer more often than nonsmokers. next, the question then becomes were people paying attention? was the information out there? was it widespread or was it some special need to go above and beyond the publicity to get the message out? dr. hammond said, no. in my opinion, people should be warned of the danger and they are being warned of the danger. next, the surgeon general of the united states 1957. "our position is that we have informed the public through the excellent coverage of the press, radio and tv." and the director of the national cancer institute, "newspapers, radio, tv and the other media have done an excellent job covering this problem and a very objective job. this is an exceedingly valuable way of informing the public." and the american medical association, "the health hazards of excessive smoking have been well-publicized for more than ten years and are common knowledge. labeling will not alert even the young cigarette smoker to any risks of which he is not already aware." okay. back to the coverage. the 1960s, reader's digest. lung cancer and cigarettes, what are the latest findings. royal college of physicians in britain is covered in reader's digest and is covered in the pensacola journal, which also covered it for the appointment, as you see in the title, on the surgeon general's committee on smoking and health. that was 1962 and then a year and a half later in 1964 the surgeon general's report came out. when it did, it was front page news in pensacola. it was reported in magazines across the nation. a special report was broadcast on nbc, abc and cbs. that was watched by mrs. gray. and then we had warning labels. the 1966 label, the 1970 label and the rotating warnings in 1985. warnings that dr. burns called clear -- clear warnings, concise message and a frequent message. it is a message that -- this is the message that mrs. gray pointed out to her husband. warnings that were covered in the pensacola paper. warnings that were on every single pack of cigarettes he smoked from 1966 forward. cover-up? consider what dr. daniel horn 19 said. dr. horn along with dr. hammond were in charge of those studies that were released by the cancer society in 1954 and 1957. he became the head of the federal government's national clearinghouse on smoking and health. he said in 1968, "you could stand on a rooftop and shout smoking is dangerous at the top of your lungs, and you would not be telling anyone anything they did not already know." so what was covered up? well, let us go back to claude teague's memo. of course, this has been pointed out. this is not original research. this was stuff in the library. the majority of these or a large part of these being by dr. raffo from argentina written just before or during world war ii. this stuff was on library shelves, but nowhere in this memo does he conclude that smoking causes cancer. what else? well, dr. cummings said the meetings with hill & knowlton in 1953 and the formation of tirc, later tcr, were part of the cover-up because they were done in secret, that the companies really believed smoking caused lung cancer and this was a humongous fraud, the frank statement was a lie, the frank statement reassured smokers. let us take those one at a time. secret: he did not tell you on direct examination, but on cross-examination, it turned out that the government was informed of the formation of tirc. the government was informed that hill & knowlton had been employed as a public relations agency and the government was informed that legal counsel were involved in guiding the tirc. the formation of it was no secret. did they really believe that smoking caused lung cancer? here is a document that dr. cummings concealed from you. this is another hill & knowlton document i showed him on cross-examination. the hill & knowlton person said, they point out that the national cancer institute of the u.s. public health administration, which is a government agency and supported by congressional appropriations, has officially refuted the tie-up between cigarette smoking and cancer. that is the report they were referring to. what did they conclude? "the association between cigarette smoking and lung cancer seems real. the significance remains unestablished." the other conclusions, "the etiological significance of these associations remains unestablished." he did not tell you about that until cross-examination. was the frank statement a lie? first paragraph talks about the reports on the mouse skin painting with wide publicity. he said, well, that is true. next, "although conducted by doctors of professional standing, these experiments are not regarded as conclusive in the 4 field of cancer research." at that point dr. hammond agreed with that, dr. mayo of the mayo clinic agreed with that, and dr. heller, the director of the national cancer institute agreed with that, that they were not conclusive. next, "however, we do not believe that any serious medical research, even though its results are inconclusive, should be disregarded or lightly dismissed." he called that a responsible statement. that is the frank statement. now, he says that tirc and ctr was a fraud, a gimmick. well, let us look at some facts. tirc funded the green monster, the key research source for the 1964 surgeon general's report. they have funded seven nobel prize winners. they have funded thousands of research grants, including many grants to universities right here in the state of florida, resulting in thousands of articles published in peer-reviewed journals. they resulted in studies that were cited like 600 times in surgeon general's reports. not related to smoking and health? let us take a look. this is an article in the journal of psychiatry from 1963 on addiction and nicotine that was cited in the 1988 surgeon general's report on nicotine addiction. it seems pretty related to smoking and health. dr. cummings did not show you that either. another thing that you heard was a secret that reynolds kept, benzopyrene was in cigarette smoke or there were carcinogens in cigarette smoke. was it a cover-up? it was in reader's digest in 1950 that benzopyrene was in cigarette smoke. did reynolds know something the public did not about constituents? november 1959, reynolds internal, eight of the polycyclic hydrocarbons isolated from the smoke are known to produce cancer in mice. this is private. public, the coming chemistry discusses, last sentence, eight carcinogenic polycyclics in tobacco smoke and they are on the trail of others. same thing. he showed you an incomplete draft of a memo by dr. rodgman. the version he showed you actually ended in midsentence. it was six pages long and ended in midsentence. what he did not show you but i did on cross-examination was the complete version that was 24 pages, and he distorted it a bit by what was in the memo. in his version, there is one sentence in the paragraph. that is it. in this version, look at the size of the paragraph that follows it. he left a lot out that qualifies what he read to you. you know, there is more than this. i think this kind of makes the point. you saw and you can read in the jury room all the newspaper articles, all the magazine articles. you can watch see it now. you can watch like mrs. gray did on the reports of the '64 surgeon general's report. 15 the notion that these isolated appearances by tobacco institute personnel on some random news shows or in front of congress, which might not have even been covered, somehow negated this barrage of publicity we just ran through, that is just against common sense. again, remember when mrs. gray confronted mr. gray about his smoking, he did not argue. he said i know. now we can see how he knew. he got the message. did mr. gray rely on anything that r.j. reynolds said? no. that is another bridge to nowhere. addiction: dr. cummings says the addictive nature of smoking was covered up. you saw quite a different story. dr. benowitz, nicotine occurs naturally in the tobacco plant. it is been known for over 100 years that nicotine is in tobacco. it is been known for 100 years that nicotine has a pharmacological effect on the human body. people have known for hundreds of years that using tobacco could be difficult to quit. you saw that even before cigarettes were popular the notion that tobacco was addictive was well known. john quincy adams knew it in 1845, even uses the word addicted. the state of florida knew it and publicized it in 1906. you see the term addiction referring to cigarettes. this is even before r.j. reynolds was even formed. surgeon general reports reported the scientists were comparing nicotine to hard drugs as long ago as the 1920s and 1930s. and then we run through reader's digest 1935 -- back up, 1935. you say you were a slave to this drug. next, wrestling with an addiction, 1938. next, 1941, comparing the lift you get from a cigarette to the reaction you get from cocaine, heroin or marijuana. next, 1950, nicotine is the essential ingredient of tobacco. it is what makes tobacco tobacco and not just another weed. next, it talks about the original urge is purely psychological. soon the psychological urge is reinforced by a pharmacological urge, the true physical craving for tobacco. 1952, long before the surgeon general's report on nicotine. newsweek, smoking is a serious sort of drug addiction with a real psychological basis. 1964, the surgeon general's report summed it up. "it has psychological and social drives, reinforced, perpetuated by the pharmacological acts of nicotine on the central nervous system." you saw the newspaper coverage on the great america smoke-out. pensacola, you saw ads for noncharlatan smoking cessation clinics in hospitals. all this was known. dr. benowitz says it is been known for over 100 years. what exactly was concealed that mr. gray could not know about in the concept of addiction? 3105 well, they showed you over and over again that 1994 clip of the ceos in front of congress when they refused to use the word addiction. in particular you saw the reynolds ceo was cut off when he started talking about the 1964 definition. even dr. cummings conceded that that is what happened. mr. johnston, using the '64 definition, cigarette smoking is not addiction, it is a habit, right? they called it a habit. the last word out of mr. johnston's mouth was intoxication. he was talking about the '64 surgeon general's definition of addiction. a difference of opinion over a definition is hardly a cover-up. but the heart of this cover-up, the most cynical part of this case is the argument that reynolds was trying to figure out how much nicotine a smoker wants in order to keep them addicted. cynical and it is false. let me bring you back to the war against tar i talked about in opening. tar was the culprit. something in tar causes cancer. tar was the target. tar had to be lowered. and it was lowered by something like sixty percent. but those low tar cigarettes did not have much of a market. smokers would not smoke them. so scientists from both sides of the atlantic, dr. michael russell, dr. richard sir doll, dr. gio gori of the national cancer institute, they advocated lowering tar as much as possible while maintaining an acceptable level of nicotine. you heard about that from dr. figlar and even dr. cummings admitted that that happened and that was the theory for why that happened. the challenge for the companies was to figure out what was that level of nicotine. it was discussed in surgeon general's reports. a threshold value for acceptability of the consumer, 1981 surgeon general's report. next, it is important to determine the lowest ratios that still produce a satisfying cigarette. that is not coming from claude teague. that is not coming from a r.j. reynolds internal document. that is coming from the surgeon general of the united states. and that is what dr. teague was doing in the 1970s with those memos. next, please. i'm sorry, go back. find a level of nicotine where they would not smoke more, not switch to a higher tar cigarette in the same year that dr. russell and others, including the surgeon general we saw here, were advocating such a thing. the challenge was to find that level of nicotine, not to hook people, but to follow these recommendations, to determine the lowest ratios that still produced the satisfying cigarette as the surgeon general said. his words, not reynolds. a less harmful cigarette that smokers would actually smoke. 11 you heard from dr. figlar that whole effort did not work. in the end the war against tar became the war against nicotine and documents like claude teague's became trial exhibits all over the country. and i will concede that dr. teague used some stupid language on occasion. and it is the stupidity of that language that makes the document so attractive as trial exhibits. but the bottom line is all that effort was trying to do with the surgeon general and prominent scientists were suggesting, lower the exposure of smokers to harmful substances not to keep them addicted. even dr. benowitz agrees that he would not criticize a company for pursuing research like that. in the end all of this is a side show. what reynolds was doing or not doing had nothing to do with charles gray. there is no evidence he heard any of it. even if you buy dr. cummings' wallpaper theory that somehow, somewhere at some time and some place mr. gray somehow heard something that someone from the tobacco institute or any other industry organization said, there is no evidence that he relied on it. none, zero. and nothing that came out of dr. cummings' mouth filled that gap. he cannot create reliance where it does not exist. to the contrary the evidence here is that when he was confronted with his smoking behavior by the person closest to him, he never, ever, ever defended his smoking behavior by saying, well, it is really not that bad; it is not going to hurt me; it has not been proven it causes cancer; any such thing. never, not once. what did he say? he said, i know. and he did know. he knew and he did not rely. there is no proof, no evidence, no building materials for a bridge in this courtroom. no proof that he had relied on it and you have to check no on question four on the verdict form. there are five questions on the verdict form and i'm arguing here you should never get to question five because question five deals with punitive damages. if you get to question five, you will have already on the form fully compensated mrs. gray for her loss. question five is not about compensation for loss. question five is about more money. if you check question five, you will come back on monday to see how much more money you will be giving mrs. gray. punitive damages, damages designed to punish, damages for conduct that is tantamount to reckless disregard for human life, and you have to meet a higher standard of proof, the judge will tell you about it, clear and convincing evidence. obviously we are here arguing they have proven no such thing. punish reynolds? well, you heard that reynolds engaged in a 50 year effort to make 22 safer cigarettes through all those various forms. and they did reduce tar and nicotine in mr. gray's winston. yesterday mr. loehr asked dr. figlar several times, do you have an addiction reduction program? have you ever had a nicotine reduction program? well, here it is. the bottom line. when tar comes down, nicotine comes down. there is some isolated years, and you heard about it from dr. cummings where nicotine might have went up, but the overall picture for mr. gray's smoking history is it is gone down. it is gone down and when tar goes down, nicotine goes down. there is your nicotine reduction program. reynolds cooperated with the federal government in the tobacco working group. they worked to develop a less hazardous cigarette, and the important part is it was not just they cooperated. the cooperation was directed by the president of the company. take a look. if there is a safer cigarette -- they never wrote anything about health, they never wrote anything about people's health -- if there is a safer cigarette, this is the president, let us continue and increase our efforts in the program. please prepare a plan to carry it out. and the interesting thing is this memo went to dr. murray senkus. yesterday you heard a lot of quotes from a speech of dr. senkus saying, we were not interested in helping people's health. we did it for health reasons. we did it because of market share. well, the president of the company told him to do it and he told him to do it to get a safer cigarette. this is not the kind of document that is not written, intended to be a trial exhibit. the president of the company did not write this in 1968 thinking it would be a trial exhibit in the year 2010. this is what he directed his subordinates to do, to cooperate to try to do a safer cigarette. about a safer cigarette, not about market share. reynolds scientists published articles. they attended conferences. they gave talks about reynolds product development efforts. you heard that from dr. figlar yesterday. they made a revolutionary break-through in the '80s with premier. incredible reductions. we have been hearing about benzo(a)pyrene for weeks now, 99 percent reduction. tobacco specific nitrosamines, ninety percent and above reduction. benzene, 92 percent of reduction. this was not done -- this was done specifically to try to get down the harmful constituents in cigarette smoke. it was heated instead of burned tobacco. it was endorsed, as you saw yesterday, by dr. michael russell of great britain. he had a long-standing interest in premier. he thought it 7 had tremendous potential for low risk long-term nicotine use. the response to it in this country was political and irrational. he writes because it would be very sad if reynolds were to abandon further development of such a valuable product. well, reynolds did not let dr. russell down because next came eclipse. it is on the market today. again, tremendous reductions, not as deep as premier, but tremendous reductions in nitrosamines, benzene and any number of the suspect compounds that are in cigarette smoke. on the market today. is this reckless disregard for human life? well, dr. benowitz does not think so. he is testified here there was some research conference at duke to look at eclipse as a harm reduction strategy with smoking, right? sponsored by reynolds and duke? i guess so. and following the conference, am i correct that it was your opinion that most participants at the conference agreed that a eclipse is less likely to be harmful than smoking regular cigarettes with respect to cancer and lung disease, although there may be no impact on risk of heart disease? yes, less harmful than smoking regular cigarettes with respect to cancer and lung disease. dr. benowitz having good things to say about eclipse. this is not a reckless disregard for human life. and finally something you also heard from dr. benowitz. targacept. reynolds developed and refreshed and spun off a company that did work and is doing work on pharmaceuticals using nicotine in treating alzheimer's and parkinson's disease. this is not a reckless disregard for human life. dr. benowitz agrees. would you agree with the bottom line point, dr. benowitz, that using the nicotine related research that reynolds did to try to develop therapeutic products that are interactive nicotine receptors, is that good research to be done? i think it could be valuable, yes. ladies and gentlemen, this is not a record that indicates indifference to human life. it is not a record that warrants an award of punitive damages. so when you get to question five on the verdict form, i'm asking you to check no. wrapping up. by all accounts, ladies and gentlemen, mr. gray was a smart and decent and honorable man. he made choices throughout his life. he accepted the consequences for them. some of those choices related to smoking. he chose to smoke with his brother with roll your own that he got from the hayes boys. we should respect that choice. he chose to continue to smoke. he made that choice every day, every time he opened a package of cigarettes, a choice he made for the last 28 years of his life staring at a warning label in his face, a warning label that dr. burns 18 called clear, concise and frequent. he made that choice to continue to smoke after quitting for a year. and we know that that choice was not made because of nicotine, because the nicotine was out of his system, because of brain receptors, because they were back to normal, and because of withdrawal, because he actually had no withdrawal; and if he had had it, the symptoms would long since be gone. this was a choice that dr. keefe says was the cause of his death, his choice. we should also respect his choice to accept personal responsibility. he did not file a lawsuit. we should respect that choice as well. charles gray was not a victim during his life. you should not make him a victim in his death. this is the only chance i get to speak to you. mr. loehr, representing the plaintiff, with the burden of proof, will get an opportunity for rebuttal. i would ask, however, since i cannot respond to what he is going to say, that one of you serve as my advocate in the jury room and perhaps for discussion sake answer him as you think i would. again, i thank you for your service. i thank you for your attention. and once again we just could not do it without you. thank you very much.