7 mr. loehr: may it please the court, counsel, and ladies and gentlemen of the jury. we have been together for several weeks now and it is been a real pleasure, and i hope you have appreciated the way this case has been tried by both sides. it is quite obvious here that the stakes are very high. closing argument is a time when we get a little bit more adversarial than we have been in the past. i'm sure i speak for mr. kaczynski when i say nothing i say here this morning is meant as any sort of a slight to the defense counsel in this case. they have all been extremely -- they are extremely talented, competent, and they have done an excellent job of presenting their case. that being said, it is now your job as jurors to decide right from wrong in this case, to take a look at all the evidence that you have seen. you have got to decide truth from lies, sense from nonsense, reality from illusion. you have heard a lot that goes into all those categories in the last several weeks. you will actually reach your decision with a verdict form that i'm going to show you in a minute. the verdict form simply asks you a number of questions. you will go back into a room, quiet by yourselves, nobody knows what goes on, no court reporter, and you will do justice as jurors have been doing for over 1,200 years in our system, for 1,000 years over in new england before we brought the system here with us. the case really boils down to some simple issues. we walked into the courtroom and actually when we filed our complaint, carolyn gray admitted that her husband made choices, that those choices contributed to his death and that he is responsible for those choices. there will be a place on the verdict form for you to address that. but r.j. reynolds in this case claims they are blameless. they claim that you should put a zero next to the spot on the verdict form for them. it is very important as we go through this 3019 1 that we understand what the law is regarding what caused charles gray's death because it is very, very different from what you heard from dr. keefe on behalf of the defendants. in fact, the first question on the verdict form, if i can have the elmo. the first question is, was addiction to r.j. reynolds tobacco company cigarettes a legal cause of the death of charles gray? so you have to ask yourself, number one, what does legal cause mean and how does it play into a case like this? you will be instructed, you will be given specific instructions by the court on that issue. we talked about this at the very beginning in jury selection. i gave you an example that i'm going to repeat here in just a moment. "addiction is a legal cause of death if it directly and in a natural and continuous sequence produces or contributes substantially to producing such death, so that it can reasonably be said that but for the addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine, the death would not have occurred." if it directly and in a natural and continuous sequence produces or contributes substantially to producing the death. but that is not the end of the instruction. "in order to be regarded as a legal cause of death, addiction need not be the only cause. addiction may be a legal cause of death even though it operates in combination with the act of another or some other cause, if such other cause occurs at the same time as the addiction and the addiction contributes substantially to producing such death." i will talk about that more in a few minutes, but it is very important to keep that in mind because addiction combined with charles gray's choices did cause his death. the two of them combined together. he never would have gotten there without both of them. we will talk about that more in a few minutes. but that is the way our law has evolved. we talked in jury selection about the fact that we used to have a law in florida that says if a drunk driver was careening down the road in a residential neighborhood doing 60 miles an hour, someone came from a side street, a horrendous accident occurred and the person coming from the side street was killed, everybody recognized that the drunk driver should be held legally responsible. but our old law in florida said if that person rolled through a stop sign, if that person did anything wrong, one percent wrong, then the drunk driver got off scot-free. it was called contributory negligence, any contributory negligence and it absolved the other person of any responsibility. our law has done away with that now. we have changed entirely to a comparative 12 negligence analysis that was just shown to you that says it recognizes real life. it recognizes reality. it recognizes that life is difficult. it is messy, it is sloppy. and sometimes it is wonderful, sometimes it is not, and most of the time things are complicated. they happen for various reasons. they are not black and white. they are not cut and dried. it is not simple cause and effect. things combine together to bring about results, and our law says the question that you have to answer is whether addiction was a substantial contributing factor to the death of charles gray. would he ever have died of lung cancer if he had not been addicted to cigarettes? and we will go through that in more detail as we go along. you will be instructed by the court there are several findings that help you answer that first question. one finding is that charles gray was, in fact, addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine and that his smoking of cigarettes was the medical cause of his death. those are not issues here. nobody is claiming he died of anything else. believe it or not nobody is claiming he died of bladder cancer or that the bladder cancer would have done anything to shorten his life in any way, shape or form. those are not even issues in this case. to begin to look at this case, you have to do something that is very difficult and that is you have to envision america as it existed way back in the '30s, '40s, '50s, times when i certainly was not here, times when things were different. then you have to take yourself into a little rural town called smith station, alabama just outside the bigger town of phenix city, alabama to a place where charles gray was born and grew up. if we could see gra521.28. you have seen the photograph of the kind of humble beginnings of charles gray with his family back in alabama. they had some animals, lived in a very rural setting. his life was simpler, but in some ways it was very, very different than it is now. eighty percent of the people born in the era of charles gray, nearly eighty percent, dr. burns said 79 percent of them became regular cigarette smokers. far different than it is now. the vast majority of them started very young, just like charles gray did. it is a different place. we would be smoking in the courtroom right now. doctors smoked in their offices. there were no nonsmoking areas anywhere. women were not smoking as heavily then as now. they took up the habit a little bit later. but in order to envision the choices that charles gray made, it is only fair to look at him in the context that he grew up. to assist you in answering that first question whether addiction was a legal cause of charles gray's loss, we brought into the 23 courtroom what you would have to conclude were the most qualified men anywhere, the most qualified doctors, both medical doctors and a ph.d. on public health to tell you what they have told physician's groups all over the world, to give you the same kind of information that they lecture about routinely, to give you the same kind of information that they have written about in scientific studies. dr. benowitz was the first witness, a full professor at the university of california in san francisco. he is authored over 350 peer-reviewed articles, vast majority of them dealing with the issues of nicotine addiction. over 70 book chapters. he was the editor of the 1988 surgeon general's report on addiction. he is lectured all over the world. i read a long list of them, throughout europe. i think he lectured in china. i'm not sure even how you do that, but he did. he is consulted with the world health organization, national cancer institute, national institutes of health. he took the stand and he gave and showed you the very same things that he tells anyone, the patients that he treated and the doctors that he teaches, the public health officials that he teaches. dr. cummings took the stand. a ph.d. in public health. he runs one of the largest cessation clinics around up in new york. the attorney general of the state of new york chose him to be the recipient of all the documents that came from the tobacco institute, the group that was formed years ago to carry out the wishes of the tobacco industry and serve as their public relations arm. dr. cummings has written over 250 peer-reviewed articles. he, too, has contributed to multiple surgeon general reports. then david burns took the stand, professor of medicine, now in emeritus status at the university of california at san diego. dr. burns has authored over 150 peer-reviewed articles. he is written the two articles on nicotine addiction and its effects in the leading internal medicine textbooks that are used in virtually every medical school in the united states. he studied from them when he was a medical student at harvard, and now medical students at harvard read his words on nicotine addiction and its effects. not surprisingly, these men are often called upon to provide testimony to juries just like you. who else would you have us bring? is there anyone else that you have seen or heard in any of this trial that would be more prepared to tell you -- and what did they each tell you? a consistent story. dr. benowitz did not give an opinion about mr. gray individually. he just taught us 8 generally about addiction. both dr. cummings and dr. burns told you with no hesitation, no doubt whatsoever that addiction was not only a contributing cause of charles gray's death, but addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine was the overwhelming cause of his death. they used words like it drove his smoking. they used words like it clearly was a heavy contributing factor. he would not have died without it. and it all makes sense when you think about it, and when you look at what they told you and what we all knew anyway before we even came in about addiction. if we could see visual number two, please. it is common sense, but each of these witnesses who have spent their life studying it agreed that this is what happens. you start out with experimentation of a drug that has an addictive quality. as you move further and further along, you get to where you are using it regularly. then you finally get to a point where you are using it every day. every step along that way you are beginning to lose some of the control that you have. now, let me make it clear from the outset. no witness for the plaintiff's side, and it never came out of my mouth, told you it is impossible to quit smoking. that is sort of something that the defense has built up so that they can knock it down and act like they won on an issue. we never told you it was impossible to quit smoking. none of our witnesses said it was impossible to quit smoking. if it was, we would not have admitted that charles gray shares in the blame for his death. but your control is affected. you start losing some of your control. it is no longer a free choice and your chance of relapse goes up and up and up. these are not my words. they are words of men who have written over 800 peer-reviewed articles on these very issues. if we could go to number three, please, ryan. they explained to you why, especially dr. benowitz, took a lot of time explaining the brain changes that go on with nicotine addiction, just like any other drug, anything that causes dependence, that causes addiction sets off things in the brain. it sets off the release of brain hormones in the reward centers of the brain. those brain hormones after you do it time and time and time and time and time and time again, the brain starts trying to regulate itself. it turns down the release of those hormones striving for normality which causes tolerance. there is another part of your brain that wants that feeling. that is why they are addictive. that is why it works. so you start smoking more or you start using more heroin or you start drinking more. what that brings about is when you try to stop, when you try to stop the 19 drug, the brain does not return to normal, especially if you have done it over and over again for years and years and years. the brain returns to a lower level of those brain hormones, which sets off withdrawal symptoms, which brings about cravings, which brings about the compulsion to smoke. anyone who enters this process, it is different. it is different for everyone. dr. benowitz told you some of it is genetic, some people have no control over it. i think the picture is very clear that charles gray was heavily and strongly addicted. with nicotine it comes about -- see number 22, please -- it comes about in different ways with different forms of nicotine. leaf tobacco, which is used in pipes and cigars is not inhaled. it is not designed to be inhaled. it is not engineered to be inhaled. so people take it into their mouth, a little bit into the windpipe. it causes very slow delivery through the mucous membranes up to the brain. it brings in very few receptors. you have very low amounts that get to the brain and obviously there is no lung involvement. cigarettes have been designed from the very beginning -- number 20 is up next -- cigarettes on the other hand were designed from the beginning all the additives that they use, all the treatments that they use, all the flavorants that they use, careful blending of the cigarettes, they are designed to be deeply inhaled into the lungs. the lungs are a vascular organ. they have tons of blood running through them. you heard that the nicotine gets to the brain in a matter of seconds when it goes through the lung. it gets to the brain in much higher concentrations and it sets off far more of these nicotinic receptors and that sets off hormonal brain changes that are a hallmark of addiction to nicotine. you saw with dr. benowitz the slides that he showed comparing the brain of a smoker with the brain of a nonsmoker. it had all of that yellow lit up, all the nicotinic receptors the smoker's brain had and nonsmoker's did not have. it causes physical changes in the brain. some of them are short-term. those yellow things you saw on the slide that were so lit up in the smoker and not in the nonsmoker, they go back to normal after a while. but dr. benowitz told you about neuroplasticity. the memory circuitry that becomes built into the brain that does not go away. it is permanent. dr. keefe even told you, he said he had not seen it on pet scans, but he read studies that you could see on pet scans that that is what causes cravings for people years after they stop smoking. they walk by someplace that reminds them of a cigarette and if you happen to have a 4 pet scan handy, you will see the brain start to light up. the actual brain changes never go away, and again this is not me saying it. it is the world renowned experts who testified to you. number 30, please. they also told you that there is a range of levels of addiction and that cannot be a surprise to anybody. it seemed to be a surprise to dr. keefe, but certainly some people have a much more difficult time dealing with addictions than others. and there is a whole body of literature, some of it written by the men you saw, some of it written by others, that deal with looking at what factors go into making one person more heavily addicted than another person. how can we predict it and what does it mean? they look at things like if you are older when you start, you are generally going to be less heavily addicted. if you are a lighter smoker, you are going to be less heavily addicted. if you do not smoke for very long, that is a sign of less heavy addiction; and if you do not crave a cigarette first thing in the morning, which is a sign of withdrawal because you have been all night without it, you are likely to be a less addictive smoker. on the other hand, people who start very young, people who smoke more for a longer duration are likely to have those withdrawal signs that cause them to go for a cigarette very quickly in the morning. when you look at that and ask yourself where does charles gray fit on that scale, why did dr. cummings and dr. burns, who have spent their life studying this issue, tell you that he was very heavily addicted? because he started very young, nearly 15 years before the first warnings ever went on cigarettes. he was a heavy smoker. he smoked for a long time. it showed itself through the fact that first thing in the morning when he got up, he would grab a cigarette. you heard that he smoked in bed sometimes. you heard that sometimes he woke up in the middle of the night to smoke. whatever the factors are that cause someone to be heavily addicted, they were all there with charles gray. if we can see the next slide. so what did that mean? what does it matter whether he is strongly addicted or not? you heard numerous times that addiction, cigarette addiction is a chronic relapsing disease, a chronic relapsing disease. well, does the strength of addiction have anything to do with that? you know, all of this was common sense, was not it? it would not be very difficult to do all of these things without 800 peer-reviewed articles, surgeon general reports. dr. burns has been involved in every one since 1975, the surgeon general reports on smoking. the more strongly addicted you are, the more likely you are to relapse. we saw that with 15 charles gray. it makes common sense. it is difficult to deny. it just happens. you see it with alcoholics. you see it with drug addicts. it is a common factor in addictions to anything. you are likely to have more and stronger cravings. it shows up with more compulsion with heavier smoking. you have more marked brain changes, especially when you start smoking when you are a teenager, a young teenager back in the late '40s when cigarettes had three times as much nicotine as they have now. have you asked yourself why does it seem like this is a generational disease? why does it seem like so many people who are older have such a hard time stopping smoking? nearly ninety percent of them started before their 18th birthday. unfortunately, that is still true today. but they started smoking cigarettes that had three times as much nicotine. all of the things that go on in the brain that dr. benowitz talked about were supercharged back in the '40s, back in the '50s. all of those things with charles gray pointed to the fact that his addiction played a very powerful role in his smoking. now, his choices did too. there is no doubt about that. his choices played a role. they function together with his powerful addiction, the two of them combined, to cause his death. you will hear that he was not motivated. he did not do anything to try to quit, he did not do this or he did not do that. the evidence shows that he used the only two smoking cessation aids available to him at the time. he used nicorette gum. he was chewing it at the restaurant. he was chewing it during the year that he stopped smoking. he was chewing it later. he used patches after his lung cancer diagnosis. that was it. that is what was there. he is been criticized for not going to a stop smoking clinic. that is fine. he should have gone. you are doggone right. he should have been stronger. he should not have been so human. he should not have been so weak. we admit it. we admitted it from the onset. but to say that addiction did not play any role in it, the only way you can do that is if you do what dr. keefe did on that witness stand. come up with some odd form of definition of causation that was not contained in the dsm-iv. it was not contained in any of the books that he had, any of his reliance materials. every time i asked him, it says here addiction causes disease, it says here that nicotine kills more people than all the other drugs of abuse combined. the dsm-iv says that. it is your book, dr. keefe, from the american psychiatric association. he says, oh, no addiction does not kill people and nicotine does not kill people. it is the smoke that kills people. he disagrees with everything on his reliance list. he could not point to one thing, one peer-reviewed article, 3036 one surgeon general's report, anything that backs him up. that is the only way you can reach the conclusion that they are going to ask you to reach. dr. keefe, who has never written anything on the subject matter. he is never studied it to any extent. he took his reliance list from the lawyers at shook, hardy and bacon who served on the board of directors of the tobacco institute, the very organization that sponsored the video clips that you have seen, and you will see again in a moment. dr. keefe, who told you addiction to heroin has never killed anybody, addiction to alcohol has never killed anybody. he says addiction is a construct. it is a group of symptoms put together in the dsm-iv. how could that kill someone? well, that is not the law. that is not the science. that is not medicine. i'm not sure what to call it. but he sure as heck would not write it down anywhere and try to have it peer-reviewed because it goes against every single thing in the literature. he could not point out one thing to back him up. unfortunately, relapse is the norm not the exception. this is what happened on chantix, the new, the best drug that we have been able to come up with at this point. it actually blocks the affinity of some of the nicotine receptors in the brain. it is a great idea, and it seems to work for some people. it has a relapse rate, you heard, of 75 to eighty percent in the first year. the wonder drug, the best we can do has turned that 95 into 75 or eighty percent relapse, still leaving a very small number of people. it is hard to understand. the doctors did the best they could to teach us. you may still be saying, gosh, i just do not see it. all these people are not smoking to kill themselves. charlie gray did not smoke because he did not like his life, because he was ready to leave his wife or wanted to leave his children. unfortunately, he smoked because he got caught up in an addiction when he was very young, an addiction that he was unable to deal with and unable to handle. he is not alone. can we see number nine, please? in the united states we still today have 45 million people who are smoking cigarettes. 50 million people in the red circle have smoked at least five packs in their life, that would include social smokers, light smokers in college, but do not currently smoke. unfortunately, as you saw from the relapse numbers, those groups move back and forth. they are not mutually exclusive. the smokers quit, the quitters smoke, kind of like dr. figlar, who went to work for a cigarette company, stopped smoking, started using oral things, chewing tobacco first and then snus, and after years started smoking again. so it 11 happens. the overwhelming evidence in this case, overwhelming, is that charles gray, his addiction was a substantial contributing factor to his death. it did not happen by itself. it went together with his own choices, if you want to call it that, his relapses, his inability to break out of that addiction process, his human weakness, call it what you will; but if charles gray had not been addicted, he would have simply been what, a social smoker. we actually met one in jury selection, smoked about a pack a month. no one dies from that. it takes 30 years of that kind of smoking to get one pack year, one pack year. it takes a minimum of somewhere around ten pack years, you heard, to even start the risk, any serious risk of lung cancer. that kind of smoker would have to smoke 300 years to run the risk. it is addiction that makes people stand outside buildings in the rain and cold to puff down a cigarette during their cigarette break. it is addiction that makes people smoke when they are shunned, like they are now. it is addiction that makes people smoke when they have to go out in their backyard to smoke a cigarette, out on the back porch. they are not just choosing to die. it is addiction that plays a heavy role, and unfortunately that addiction, see number 10, kills 440,000 americans every year. dr. cummings told you it is killed over 12 million people since the surgeon general's report in 1964. charles gray is certainly not alone. charles gray is one of many. let us see number 22, please. this is simply an illustration of what we have been talking about. this is an illustration of concurring cause, the instruction that judge terrell will give you that you must follow in this case. two things occurred to cause death and death could not have occurred without both of them. death would not have occurred if charles gray had managed to stop, if he had managed to put those cigarettes down early enough, he would not have died. that is why we admitted that his own choices were a part of the cause. but you never would have got to that point, you never would have gotten to him even wanting to quit, there would have been no reason to quit had he been a social smoker. you remember that visual we put up. the social smoker has such a small exposure to cigarette smoke compared to the addicted smoker. it never would have happened without both of them. as we move through the verdict form, the second question says, "state the percentage of any fault that was a legal cause of charles gray's death that you charge to the two parties." that is what so much of the evidence was about that we showed during the trial. the history of addiction in america. how in the 22 world did we get where we got to, where we had eighty percent of charles gray's age group smoking, nearly fifty percent of adult americans smoking, 4,000 cigarettes sold for every person over the age of 18 in the united states on a yearly basis, billions and billions and billions of cigarettes sold? you saw the document that claude teague did in 1953. if we could see lp395, please. claude teague in 1953, the birth of the r & d department at r.j. reynolds is what you have been told. if we can go to page 13, please. claude teague was charged as a new chemist at the company in looking around to see what information was out there, the scientific literature about cancer, about smoking and cancer, about tobacco and cancer, and what he found is an indictment of r.j. reynolds plain and simple. all the way back to the early 1900s, all the way through 1932, all the way through the '30s and the '40s, study after study after study showing cancer, cancer, carcinoma, papilloma, metaplasia, carcinoma, some of them no effect, tumors, cancer. all of this at a time when you have been told r.j. reynolds did not do the first thing to research their own products. nothing. they were selling billions of them at this point. and the testimony you have heard is we had no idea. we did not know. you are going to hear something from judge terrell that tells you when you hear testimony, especially expert testimony, from the chemists like dr. figlar, you can accept it, you can reject it, or you can give it the weight you think it is worth. is it possible that r.j. reynolds did not sit around and discuss it, they did not do anything, they did not look at it, they did not have these in their files? the bibliography at the back of this was 78 articles long. most of them available in the '30s and '40s. most of them available back at the time when charles gray was a child. r.j. reynolds got drug into creating an r & d department when it became front page news. they did not care who they killed. they did not care who they addicted before that. they did not care what their products did to anybody until it was front page news with some mice on the front of the newspaper that grew tumors on their back and they could not ignore it any longer. then i asked dr. figlar, did r.j. reynolds ever -- were you ever the first one to point out any carcinogen? no. were you ever the first one to point out any ciliastat, the damages to the reparative structure of the lung? no. were you ever the first one to point out phenols? no. were you the first one to point out that flue-cured, the way you cured your tobacco, was 7 increasing cancer? no. they got drug along the whole way. they did not publish anything first. you saw some of the reasons why. the legal department was involved over and over again. the legal department would say, you cannot do that, it will affect our ability to defend cases. but what they did do, what they did do once they knew in 1952, 1953, they knew what was going on, they could not deny it anymore, the epidemiological studies came out showing huge increases of cancer -- you remember the line, cigarette use is like this and lung cancer was like this, rising along with it 20 years later. what did they do? they got together with all other competitors at the plaza hotel in new york city, december of 1953, and they all made a decision and what they decided is chilling. they decided to withhold the information that they had. they decided to never release, never admit, never tell anybody what we know. do not share claude teague's conclusions that it is probably these things that are causing cancer. it looks like the relationship has been shown between smoking and lung cancer, keep all of that quiet and fight like heck. form a new group, tirc and fight. that decision has caused more suffering and more death than any other decision in the history of america and you would have to look hard to find any other decisions that devastating. 12 million people since 1964. they decided to make it as easy as possible for people to start smoking and as hard as possible for people to stop smoking and as easy as possible for people to relapse. if we could see lp185, please. this is a forwarding memo from hill & knowlton, the public relations firm that all the major manufacturers met with in december. they did not meet with doctors. they did not meet with scientists. i guess they did not have an r & d department at the time, but they met with a public relations firm, a public relations firm that they had a long-time relationship from that point forward. turn to page 2, please, ryan. the first paragraph of this, this is a hill & knowlton supervisor writing, "the attitude of the men we must direct is one interesting and important for us to understand. this is why notes of the four interviews with research directors are given at some length. you will get from them little real information about lung cancer, pro or con, but you will find some mighty interesting opinions." one of them said, "it is fortunate for us that cigarettes are a habit they cannot break." they have just learned indisputably that cigarettes are causing lung cancer in alarming numbers, not just the epidemiological studies, the mice that have tumors on their backs. "it is 18 fortunate for us that cigarettes are a habit they cannot break. said another, boy, would not it be wonderful if our company was the first to produce a cancer free cigarette? what we could do to the competition." sometimes sentences say more than they seem. the first part of that is not so bad, would not it be wonderful if we would be the first to come up with a cancer free cigarette. but the second part portrays the true motive, what we could do to the competition. not what we could do to save lives. not what we could do to stop the horror and suffering of cancer death, one of the worst you can imagine. man, we could make more money. the next one says, "suppose everyone smoked just one cigarette less a day, that would be maybe 40 billion a year." they made a decision that day. it is reported on the very next page, bottom paragraph. this is hill & knowlton's charge from r.j. reynolds, philip morris and the other companies that were there. "there is only one problem, confidence and how to establish it; public assurance and how to create it, and then perhaps a long interim when scientific doubts must remain, and most important how to free millions of the americans from the guilty fear that is going to arise deep in their biological depths regardless of any pooh-poohing logic every time they light a cigarette. no resort to mere logic ever cured panic, whether on madison avenue, main street or in a psychologist's office, and no mere recitation of arguments pro, or ignoring of arguments con, or careful balancing of the two together is going to deal with such fear now. that, gentlemen, is the nature of an unexampled challenge to this office." it is a challenge that they took on. it is a challenge that they continued all the way up through 1998, over 45 years of denial. they hid all the knowledge that they had over and over again. they made public statements that were completely contrary to the information that they had in their own files showed and they did it over and over and over and over again. they did it first through tirc, but very quickly it became the center for tobacco research, i lose track sometimes. the important one is the tobacco institute. the tobacco institute was formed and the video clips you have seen and i'm about to show you in a moment all came from the tobacco institute. the tobacco institute acts as the official spokesman for the industry, always reflecting official strategy positions agreed upon by all members. you remember i showed some of those clips to dr. figlar and i asked him, were those rjr's 3 positions? he said, yes, it is my understanding that each of these statements had to be approved by r.j. reynolds. so who was the tobacco institute? it was r.j. reynolds. it was philip morris. it was lorillard. it was all of the manufacturers who contributed to it, who controlled it and it was the very top of each organization. the executive committee members over time included the presidents, vice presidents, board of directors, ceos of all the major corporations, including r.j. reynolds. a.h. galloway, bowman gray, jr., who you heard from dr. figlar, ed horrigan, gerald long, collin stokes, all of them over time served in the very top levels of ti. and what was ti doing during that time? publicly tirc, predecessor of ctr and ti, issued a frank statement. they are pledging aid and assistance to the research efforts into all phases of tobacco and health. they are forming the tobacco industry research committee and they are putting up scientists of impeachable integrity and national repute. what was going on privately? next slide, please. the tirc was conceived as a public relations gesture and it has functioned as a public relations gesture. another document, these are all in evidence that you can see. they are either from r.j. reynolds or their fellow members who joined into that group, joined into that agreement. "let us say that we are interested in the evidence which we believe denies the allegation that cigarette smoking causes disease." next slide, please. ctr began an organization called tobacco industry research council. it was set up as an industry shield in 1954. "it has always been a holding strategy consisting of creating doubt about the health charge without actually denying it." exactly what you saw in hill & knowlton's document. privately we know some of the things that r.j. reynolds put out. we have publicly again tirc in 1955. it would be made public, speaking of anything they found, any hazards in cigarettes, it would be made public immediately and just as broadly as we could make it and efforts would be taken to attempt to remove it. we cannot possibly eliminate an agent that has not yet been identified. we have claude teague in 1953 pointing out the carcinogens, labeling the carcinogens, saying looking at those other studies, indicating that they know that cigarettes are causing cancer. but it continued. next slide. 1964, same year the surgeon general's report came out. "if there are bad elements, we hope we can find them and if they are found, they will be removed. but at this point, we do not know." 1964. privately, the five pahs have been isolated 14 and identified in cigarette smoke condensate from camel blend tobacco. they knew not only tobacco in general had carcinogens, r.j. reynolds knew that camel had carcinogens. "we consider the zero level of pahs impossible to achieve." publicly they are saying there is nothing bad. and if there is something bad. privately, they know that carcinogens are there and they know they cannot remove them. next slide, please. publicly in 1984, "science does not know what role, if any, smoking may play in production of disease. only through much more research can cases and mechanisms be established and cigarette controversy resolved." while privately, the company is studying in detail the composition of cigarette smoke. much data remains unpublished because they are concerned with carcinogenic and co-carcinogenic compounds. ryan, could you play the video clips. you have going to see some clips you have already seen. each of them came from high ranking members of the tobacco institute and you have heard from dr. figlar that r.j. reynolds approved every one of these statements. (video clips played) mr. loehr: dr. figlar, on the stand i showed him some of those clips. i gave him every opportunity over and over again, that is not right, is it, dr. figlar? that should not have happened, should it? every time, no, no, that is exactly what we did. they are still doing it now. they do not admit they did anything whatsoever wrong. but what difference did all that make you ask yourself. you have heard us talk several times about global warming and the divisiveness we have in society right now regarding whether that issue is real or not. you heard polling testimony from dr. geer for the defendants saying that back during this time period, ninety percent -- back in the early '50s, ninety percent had heard or read something about the fact that cigarettes might be harmful, might cause cancer. he said that is an unbelievable number until cross-examination when he found out that 99 percent had heard or read something about ufos. but then in that poll when they were asked, what harm do you associate with cigarettes, 1954 after the mouse painting studies, after the epidemiological studies, after the front page news, after the reader's digest, what harm do you associate with it? seven percent of the seventy percent had heard or read something, 7 percent of the 70 said lung cancer. that is 4.9 percent. that was the question that dr. geer said, you cannot pay any attention to that. that is not a good question. actually it is probably the best question to ask. sure, everyone had heard or read something, but what did they think in 1954 and why did they 25 think that? why did it matter to charles gray? because back in 1953 when all this was going on, he was 18 years old. he had just gotten to the point that he was becoming more heavily addicted, maybe entered that circle at the age of 15 or 16, but look at all those factors, how long do you smoke, how heavily do you smoke, for how long have you smoked that way? the dsm-iv said pack years were important in whether you relapse or not. how much easier would it have been to break out of that addiction cycle if everyone had come clean in the early '50s? i used global warming as an example because we know what happens when there is a controversy. we know what happens when the sides line up and everybody starts going at it. when there is a whole lot that suggests that we are destroying this planet with our carbon emissions and then there is a whole other group of people that say we are not doing anything. if there is any warming at all, it is all natural. they both look at each other and say that is full of bull, that is full of bull. you heard from a very colorful witness in this case, john gray, charles gray's brother. what did you think about all those warnings? that was a bunch of bull. what was the only voice saying that? what was the only place anybody could get that information back in the 1950s? you know the answer. it came directly from the industry. it came from r.j. reynolds and the trade groups they put together, the tirc, the tobacco institute. they kept it up for 40 years. did it make a difference to charles gray? the only way to look at it is did it make a difference to america? if it did not matter to charles gray, it did not matter to anyone. this is a young man who started smoking camel, the most heavily advertised cigarette of its time and the most popular. what did he do then? he switched to winston. you have seen all the information about winston, their advertisements. they became the most heavily advertised around. he followed the trends. he did exactly what r.j. reynolds wanted him to do, just as millions and millions and millions of other americans did. if we could go back to the elmo for a moment, please. i would suggest the appropriate percentages here comparing the intentional targeting, the intentional misconduct of r.j. reynolds, doing exactly what they knew they should not have done, coming into this courtroom and telling you everything they did was consistent with the concern for public health, i would suggest the appropriate percentages are eighty percent on r.j. reynolds and twenty percent on charles gray. 10 those matters are entirely up to you. you use your own judgment, your own common sense. but you are comparing intentional conduct of someone, one of the most powerful corporations in the world with their own public relations firm, their own advertising firms on madison avenue. you saw the advertising, i'm not going to show it all over again. they overwhelmed america with their message visually through the movies, through tv, the i love lucy show, beverly hillbillies -- by the way, none of which made it on dr. parssinen's list, the historian, that he got from shook, hardy, bacon, the law firm that served on the board of directors of the tobacco institute. and he told you, i did not see any problem with it. he found 11 movies that said anything about smoking. you did not find all of the movies that glamorized it, you did not find the tv ads, the radio ads, you did not find any of that? no. he said that he thought shook, hardy and bacon was just as reliable as the library of congress. the next question on the verdict form that you will have to answer is probably the most difficult question. what is the total amount, one hundred percent, of any damages sustained by carolyn gray caused by the death of her husband charles gray? you know, we talked a lot in this trial about charles gray, but some of the things that make the law so difficult are the things that we do not talk about so much. yeah, he was a very successful businessman, opened a number of businesses successfully. they will have you believe, i guess that is how he could have quit smoking, somehow that fits together. but right by his side the whole time, when times were good, and long before that when times were very, very bad was carolyn gray. she followed that man all over the country when he did not even have a job. they trusted each other. they were together till death do them part. in a way, i suppose, all too common, they are still together too. carolyn could never go out and try to date anyone else. she was young, very young in the '50s, beautiful, intelligent, funny. what are you going to do, go try to find another charlie gray? they were partners in business. they were partners in raising their children. they were partners in life. i'll show you just a few family photos that we put together. carolyn said that when she pictures her husband now it does not bring as much pain as it used to, and sometimes it actually brings good feelings to her. she pictures him when he is in his 50s, but not sick. i think this is what carolyn sees. there is no exact number that we can tell you. there is no exact figure to put there. you use your best judgment. we have talked about the 21 scales of justice and you have to place something on one side of the scale, and somehow in some crude fashion it tries to make up for her losses. we do not ask you for some record setting verdict that is going to be in newspapers or anything else. i would suggest $7 million for what she suffered in the past. whatever you feel is appropriate for the future. the numbers are suggestions. they are entirely up to you. the last two issues on the verdict form deal with reliance. did what the tobacco industry did, did it have anything to do with charles gray? and we have already talked about it. we have already talked about the fact that all of this was occurring when he was young, all the formation of tirc and later ti, all of these things were happening at a time when charles gray had a chance, when whatever genetic susceptibility he may have had to addiction had not had a chance to completely take him over. what would have happened in the global warming situation if everyone had joined hands on that stage? if the evidence was as compelling as it was back then? now global warming is everywhere. al gore and sarah palin, george bush, barack obama, the presidents of gm, if everybody was on that stage saying, we have a tremendous problem and we have to do something about it, how would our views of that be different today? the same way that the views of america would have been different in 1953 if that had happened. can you imagine how it would have been different and what it would have done to the lives of so many americans? they want you to conclude that it meant nothing, that it did nothing, because if it did not mean something to charlie gray, it did not mean anything to anyone. the last question on the verdict form deals with punitive damages. it asks you whether by clear and convincing evidence you believe that the conduct related to this cover-up, this 45 years of misconduct, whether you believe that that conduct shows willful and wanton behavior. callous disregard, in other words, is it worse than negligent? is it worse than accidental? when you hear that jury instruction, think about the opposite of those words. if it is not callous, what was it? careful? if it was not intentional, what was it? accidental? throughout everything you heard in this trial, from all of those old documents, all the way through to the testimony, did you ever see anybody say, wait a minute, wait a minute, wait a minute, we are killing people by the millions, we cannot do this? we have got to stop. we have got to look at addiction. we know what is causing this. it does not take a rocket scientist to figure it out. people are addicted and that is why they are 6 smoking themselves to death. why did not r.j. reynolds ever look at ways to reduce the affinity of the nicotine receptors? why did not they look for ways to take the kick out of nicotine instead of putting more kick in the nicotine? never once in any of those documents or anything else that you have seen did you see any concern for human life whatsoever. it was all just driven by profits. punitive damages are appropriate in this case. you will now get a chance to hear r.j. reynolds' version of this case, and i would suggest to you that their version is one that comes from their witnesses, from dr. parssinen. the court: your one hour cue, mr. loehr. mr. loehr: thank you. from dr. parssinen and dr. keefe. they got their reliance materials from shook, hardy and bacon. they relied upon it. dr. keefe did not really rely upon them. but in this world of r.j. reynolds all you have to do to quit is just want to, all it takes is motivation to quit. addiction has nothing to do with it. addiction cannot kill anybody. in r.j. reynolds' world they did nothing wrong. they caused no harm to anyone. the tobacco institute was a valid contribution to public health. they will go through the evidence that you have heard. they will criticize dr. burns and dr. benowitz and dr. cummings because of their willingness to come into a courtroom like this and testify. they will pick and choose out of the testimony that you heard to try to cobble together a version of events that would allow you to rule in their favor, and they will ask you to exonerate them, to walk out of this courtroom completely and totally blameless. somehow that does not seem fair. mr. loehr: thank you, your honor. very briefly, i do not have a whole lot of time. but what you just heard basically is that r.j. reynolds did nothing wrong for all those years. the one thing you heard that maybe they regret is some of the language that claude teague used. maybe claude teague should have been a little more careful in some of the things that he wrote. you know, if you compress 20, 30, 40 years worth of intermittent warnings that basically come sporadically after a big study, it makes it look as if every single day people woke up in the morning, walked out and picked up the newspaper and went, oh, my god, cigarettes cause lung cancer. look at reader's digest. well, of course, charles gray did not have reader's digest. it was not one that anyone ever said that he read, but the fact is when you put them all together, it can create this image. they put up time magazine, the slide said 1952 to 1959. seven years and there is six or seven of them up there. one per year, one article someplace in there. it makes it look as if everybody knew, does not it? 9 and then they showed us some very selected testimony of some of the family members to suggest that everybody knew, but you heard the evidence. you listened to it. but since they put that up, i need to put a few things up. can i have the elmo, please? this is from betty truitt, mr. gray's sister. "was it common knowledge when you were growing up that smoking was dangerous to your health? no, it was not. it was a social thing to do." francis driver, another sister, "but back in that day i do not think people understood. they did not have the information that is available to people today about the hazards of smoking." jimmy baggett, you saw some direct quotes from mr. baggett, a brother-in-law. "did you ever talk to mr. gray about the potential hazards or risks of cigarette smoking? we talked about it sometime. what would you say? tell me the nature of the conversation. one of us would say, i wish i could quit these things. they make me feel bad and probably are going to give me cancer; they are gonna kill and all like that. did you have those conversations in the early '80s when you came back to pensacola? no, not that early on." this is the testimony you heard in the courtroom, not the little selected pieces of it. his brother david gray. "have you ever heard that smoking is not harmful to your health? yes. where did you hear it? grew up on it. can you think of someone who specifically told you that, for example? that was -- that was -- that was just the environment." same brother, david. "and i think that bob had that mindset and at one time i know he had the mindset that it did not matter where we went that they would always have a cure for it. but he truly believed for years that smoking was not harmful." now, where would they have gotten all of that information? where did that come from? this is why it mattered. he kept saying why would we withhold? my goodness, we did not look at the carcinogens until other people already looked at them. it was already in the press before we started doing our research on them. but they withheld the fact that they agreed. they withheld the fact that they knew. they created a controversy. they are the reason people did not believe it. they are the reason that people grew up thinking that cigarettes were not that harmful for them because they constantly heard that. it was constantly out there, especially in the deep south, especially in alabama. by the time he began discussing these matters with his wife, you have heard the testimony, when he got serious about this, when they started having conversations, he had been 20 diagnosed with bladder cancer. and at that point in time, yeah, he knew the risks. we never said he did not. he got it slapped in his face and he tried awfully hard to quit. they kept saying what did this have to do with charles gray? all of that advertising, i guess it was for nothing. i guess nobody paid any attention except, let us see camel was their most heavily advertised brand and that is what he started smoking and then winston became the most heavily advertised brand and that is what he ended up smoking his entire life. they said it had a filter that would help with the health problems. it did not. in fact, they had a document that they looked at. could we see that slide? you looked at this during our case. this was a strategic research report from 1984 from r.j. reynolds, but it was looking back. how did we capture the youth market in the past? the young adult smokers are the key factor for rjr. young adult smokers are the only source for replacement smokers. that is a charming term, is not it? people die. some of them manage to quit. replacement smokers. this is a significant growth opportunity. winston, the hit of the '50s and '60s. advertising dollars were a key advantage for winston. younger adult and older smokers alike responded promptly to winston's positive proposition. can we see the next slide, please? one of the advertisements they used for winston talked about the winston secret. the filter blend, ahead of the filter, that is the winston secret. what is the secret? what did they withhold? from their own documents, the polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon content of the smoke from winston cigarettes was two and a half times that of the smoke from camel cigarettes. those are the carcinogens. their filter, their highly effective, pure white filter, two and a half times the amount of carcinogens in the cigarettes he was smoking. what did it have to do with charles gray? it had everything to do with charles gray. it is a voice, it is an enabling voice. what would it be like if bacardi started doing public announcements, they formed an organization, let us call it the alcohol investigation committee, and they started issuing statements saying, this whole thing about alcoholism, do not listen to it. alcohol is not addictive. people do not get dependent on it. it is your right to drink. drink all you want. if they attacked every single message from the public health community trying to help people stop drinking, trying to help alcoholics stop and then what would they say? well, you cannot prove it did anything. you cannot prove that that is why 5 these alcoholics started drinking because after all, everybody knows once a person who is addicted -- once they stop for a while, they are not addicted anymore, are they? an alcoholic who goes on the wagon for some time, falls back off the wagon. well, it cannot be because he is an alcoholic, can it? because that is not how addiction works. they told you that because charles gray quit for a year and then relapsed, it could not possibly have to do with his addiction. and mr. kaczynski told you over and over again those neural, those receptors, they go back to normal. dr. benowitz told you in no uncertain terms about neuroplasticity, about how it can last a lifetime, about how it is permanent; and their own expert, dr. keefe, that was the conversation i was having with him about pet scans, that you can actually see that on pet scans. it does not go away. it is why once you are an alcoholic, you are always an alcoholic. it is why once you are addicted to cigarettes, you are always addicted. how responsible do you think it would be to encourage someone who has finally broken out of a cigarette habit, here, it is the super bowl, sunday afternoon? smoke a few, you are not addicted anymore. what the heck? you know, there is a lot of criticism about the expert witnesses we put on the stand. some of it related to the fact that they were not in r.j. reynolds words dispassionate. yeah, guilty as charged. how in the heck could those men be dispassionate? they have sat their entire careers and watched people die from this addiction. a pulmonologist, a cardiologist and a man who works in a cancer institute trying to help people stop smoking. and then they discover in the late '90s when finally it gets bludgeoned out of this industry, they find out all the secrets they held all those years. they find out what they were doing. they find out what they knew all along, that there never was a controversy. remember dr. burns' chart where he showed that cigarettes were going through the roof, and then they come down a little bit in 1953. then what happens? oh, we have got new filters, do not worry about it. boom, it goes up even though the cigarettes have more carcinogens and more nicotine than they started with. it comes down a little bit again after 1964. boom, it starts going back up. low tar, low nicotine. there is always an answer. there is always a way. there is always a voice from this industry to help people keep smoking. you know, you heard some stuff about how they are not responsible for anything from philip morris, but i want you to listen very carefully when the court instructs you regarding the findings in this case because what you are going 16 to find out is that philip morris and the other manufacturers were, in fact, part of an agreement. and if you find that charles gray was a class member, that they were all part of an agreement to do this, and you have seen the agreement, and that because of that anything they did in furtherance of that agreement is r.j. reynolds' fault just as much as philip morris' fault. they were all doing it together. they were all approving it from the very top to the very bottom of the comments. you were told that if you look at the philip morris of today, you should look at the premier and you should look at the eclipse. can we see -- this is the memo from claude teague that i handed to dr. figlar right at the end of his testimony. did you wonder what in the world was going on in this courtroom? what in the world was going on when that man would not agree with me that putting a little blast of menthol on a filter so somebody could squeeze it and get a blast of flavor, he would not agree that was a novelty? it took five, six, seven questions and i'm not sure he ever agreed. i think i got him to admit it was novel. why would not he agree with it? because claude teague made a blueprint, we are going after the youth market. like you saw earlier, they looked at in 1984, looking back to the past. claude teague had a wonderful idea and the idea was we need to come up with something. most of the product specifications -- if we could go to page 11. most of the product specifications defined are achievable with present technology. those which require new technology would appear to be control of irritancy and related mouth feel factors to produce a bland smoke and creation of some useful demonstrable novelty in filter, mouthpiece, package or the other aspects of the product system. earlier he talked about the name -- the court: two minutes, mr. loehr. mr. loehr: the name has double meaning, a meaning in regular society and one that might be a little different in the youth society. this is the philip morris of the year 2010. just as much as the eclipse, just as much as the premier. this is it. old habits die hard. 89 percent of their users begin smoking before the age of 18, and i gave him every opportunity, are you doing anything to try to reduce the addictiveness? have you tried to lower the binding affinity of the nicotine receptors? how would we do that? we will never know if you do not look. have you done anything to reduce the nicotine? no. just like they said so long ago. it is a good thing for us it is a habit people cannot kick. just like claude teague said, happily for us it is 3128 1 addictive. you know, the suggestion that i suppose since carolyn gray brought this lawsuit, the suggestion that she made a victim of her husband. you know what? there is things in a courtroom that really ought to be off limits and that is one of them. to accuse this woman of making a victim of her husband. the only man she ever loved. the man she spent her whole life with. i guess he was supposed to run out and file a lawsuit while he was dying of cancer. he had a few other things on his mind and when you go back in that jury room and you think about everything that happened in this trial, i want one thing to stay in your mind. i want you to picture carolyn gray on her way back to branson, missouri after she buried the only man she ever loved, going back to face what she was facing in branson, the restaurant half built, loans half put together, the entire family depending upon her, and i want it to ring in your ears that r.j. reynolds tells you that she made a victim out of charles gray. thank you.