ms. london: thank you, your honor. good morning. again, my same is sarah london. we met like this not so long ago. may not feel that way for you. and i'm here with mr. spragens again and willow, and nina is taking care of business. and our whole team -- here she is. the court: come on up. ms. london: right on cue there. (thereupon, another easel was set up.) the court: all you need is for the lights to go out in the middle of your closing; right, miss london? that would be just perfect. ms. london: yeah. okay. where was i? we are really proud to represent mrs. gray and be here with her. it is been a 20-year road trip for this family to come here before you and officially seek membership in the engle class. we are very grateful for your time, and for your service, and we did everything we could to get this case to you 43 as quickly as possible, because we respect your time; but there was, as i told you when we started, a really big story to tell. and i brought you some witnesses that had a lot of information about the tobacco companies, r.j. reynolds, and what they did; and i told you it might not seem obvious to you right away why i brought some of my witnesses, especially those that did not know mr. gray, and did not have specific information about him. but it is because, in order to judge r.j. reynolds and judge mr. gray and this family, you have to know the whole story. you need to go back in time and understand what was happening in mr. gray's life, what these companies were doing, and you have to see the big picture. so i realize at times it may have seemed, i think the judge said, cumulative. that certainly was not our intent. it was because we needed to give you as much information as we thought you needed to get the job done. we had a very limited amount of time in this trial. we had 18 hours to put on this case. and i'm proud of us. i think we gave you more than you need to do your job. but please know that 18 hours is not long enough to tell the whole story, forever and ever, about everything we could have told you. as you know, some of our witnesses surely could have gone on and on and on. you did not hear absolutely everything you could hear. we tried to edit this down and bring to you exactly what you 44 need to make your decision in this case. and we counted on these companies -- the court: let me interrupt you for just a second, miss london. ladies and gentlemen, the evidence that you are to decide this case from is the evidence that has been presented in this courtroom. so i appreciate what miss london is saying to you. it is a complicated case. you heard the witnesses. this case could have gone on -- i suspect, possibly, you know, both sides, you know that the defense did not call any witnesses -- both sides could have presented evidence and this case could have gone on for a long, long time. but you are not to speculate or to try to think about, well, what else might have come out. okay? just to make sure we understand each other, the evidence you are to consider is the evidence that was presented here, and you are to apply the instructions that i've given you. okay? so, with that caveat, miss london, if you wish to proceed. okay? ms. london: exactly right. and thank you, your honor. and that is why we gave you the evidence that we did, and we showed you what we could in the time that we had. and that is what you will base your decision on, the evidence that was presented to you in this courtroom, and your common sense. 45 and we will go through some of that together. and it is very hard for me to have a one-sided conversation. i cannot anticipate what you are all thinking. frankly, you have all played pretty good poker. it is hard for me to read what is on your mind. and i do not know what questions you have, or what things you would like to hear from me, if anything. so i'm doing the best i can to help you do your job. and the job you have, you have three jobs. one, you have to decide the facts of the case. you are the judge of the facts. the second job is you have to follow the law as the judge has instructed you. that is critically important. you have to follow the law. and the third job, and this one may not be so obvious to you, is that you have to discuss with each other how you feel, how you feel about the evidence and how you feel about the answers. you have to deliberate and discuss. that is what makes this system work so well. and it is on that issue that i'm going to spend my time with you this morning. i'm not going to rehash all the evidence. i know you were paying close and careful attention throughout this trial. but i'm going to try to give you some tools for how to talk about the evidence, and how it applies to the questions that you have to answer. i really -- look, i want to be respectful of your 46 time and your intelligence. it is, and it was, okay to be skeptical about what you heard in this trial. it is hard to believe what these companies did. it is hard to believe the evidence of this conspiracy, and its scale, and its scope, and its impact, and that what the companies did happened underneath our noses as americans in this country for 50 years. it is hard to believe that. and it is hard to believe that nicotine addiction is as powerful as it is. it is hard to believe that something as ordinary, as common, as something you buy at the drugstore, that the government lets you sell, it is hard to believe that that is such a powerfully addictive, deadly, and dangerous drug. it is hard to believe that, i know. it is not easy to digest this evidence and to make sense of it in this world, the world that we want to believe, and everything we hold true. it is hard to accept that and reconcile this evidence. i get that. and so it is okay for you to have been skeptical, and at it is okay for you to be skeptical. it is why we brought you all this evidence. but that is exactly right, what his honor said, that you have to set aside anything you came into this courtroom with, any notions, preconceived ideas, opinions, or beliefs, about what you thought you knew about cigarettes, about the companies, about smokers. you have to set that aside and decide this case based on the evidence that you saw in this 47 courtroom. i do not envy you. i'm an advocate. it is my job to come in here and advocate for my client. it is your job, you have sworn an oath, and to do your duty, you have to set aside your opinions, your passions, everything you thought before you walked in the door, and decide the case on the evidence; evidence that is hard to see, hard to hear, frankly, hard for me to put on sometimes. because it shakes our faith. it shakes our faith in companies, it shakes our faith in the government, it shakes our faith in who we are as americans. but you, as jurors, have a very powerful and important role in this system. this is an amazing company. you have heard -- i'm sorry, country. this is an amazing country. this is a place where mrs. gray, a person, just a citizen, can come before you, a jury of her peers, and hold two giant companies to account for what happened. it is extraordinary. without the government or anyone else getting in the way. the court: miss london, just a second. just a second. you have one company. ms. london: pardon me. you are right, your honor. there is one company to be held to account at this point . . . from here on out. thank you, your honor. 48 the court: that is okay. i figured something like that might happen sometime. we all make mistakes. ms. london: and i certainly expect to make more of them. the court: me too. ms. london: i did not get much sleep last night, i'll be honest with you. i'm really trying to . . . to . . . to figure out the right way to close this case and to argue this case to you. so i apologize in advance if my words get fumbled up. i'm doing my best. anyway, it is an amazing country, where mrs. gray can come here and, without the government or anyone else interfering with the conscience of the community, to hear these claims, to see the evidence, and to administer justice. it is amazing. and i'm so proud to be part of it. and i hope you have enjoyed this experience. i hope you find it meaningful, because it sure is meaningful to us. you alone, you swore your oath, you are qualified to decide these facts. you, only you. only you have heard all this evidence and the context of mr. gray's life and what these companies did and how it hurt him. only you. no other jury has heard all this. so this job is incredibly important. now, at the beginning of this case, i told you why we sued. we sued for three reasons. we sued because r.j. reynolds broke the basic obligation we expect of all 49 companies, that you have to come clean about what you know about the dangers in your product. there is no debate about whether it is okay to hide the truth. rjr made a promise to americans, and they made this promise over and over and over again, not just rjr but also its co-conspirators. they made a promise that they would be frank with americans. they made that promise. they made that promise they would be frank, they would tell americans the truth because it was important for americans to know the truth. they said that over and over and over again. but they broke that promise. you saw that. you saw that here in this courtroom. how they broke that promise, because they did not tell americans what they knew, long ago, about their products causing cancer and how addictive they were; and particularly, they did not tell americans they could not take out the bad stuff. they knew that, and they did not tell people that. instead, they conspired to deny it. they provided reassurance that they were looking, looking hard at that question, and they would do something about it if they found out. and they kept promising they were studying the issue, and they kept promising americans and telling americans, reassuring them that they were the ones that knew the truth. the second way they broke this is because they did not come clean and tell americans how addictive their cigarettes were, or what they were doing to them to make them -- to rig 50 them, to make them as hard as possible for their customers to stop. they did not tell them. they did not come clean on that. instead, they denied it, they hid it, and they did not come clean about it. and the third thing is, they did not come clean and tell americans, all along, that filter cigarettes, that menthol cigarettes, and these light cigarettes that they were marketing as safer, were no safer at all. they never came clean about that. instead, they capitalized on people's fear. they knew their customers were scared. they knew their customers were seeing reports in the newspaper. they saw the sales decline. they capitalized on that fear by marketing products they pretended were safer, knowing all the while they were not, just trying to hold on to that market as long as they could. the proof of all of this came from their own records. we made a board along the way with some of the highlights. and i'm not going to go through all of those with you this morning. you heard evidence, you took notes, you were paying attention. reynolds should have followed their own promise, the basic promise, the basic rule we expect of all manufacturers: you have to come clean about the truth of your products when you know it, not wait 50 years, and god knows, do not do everything that they did to try to hide it. if reynolds had kept its promise, if reynolds had 51 come clean about what they knew, when they knew it, this would have made a difference for mr. gray, and millions of others just like him. he could have made an informed choice. right? people can -- people make informed choices to do risky things. that is not an issue in this case. you have to understand, reynolds was claiming that its product was not risky. that is what they were doing, they were claiming it was not. they kept that a matter of debate. they should have told the truth so that their customers could have made an informed choice, knew what they were getting into, way back when, when the companies knew. the second reason we sued was because the companies broke the basic obligation that you have to make your product as reasonably safe as possible. and there is no debate about this one either. reynolds and all the other tobacco companies put out a promise to americans. it said that the public health is the paramount concern beyond anything in their business. so they are not going to -- there is no dispute that you have to make your product as safe as reasonably possible. and they broke this promise by rigging the cigarettes to make them as addictive as possible. you saw the proof. you saw the evidence of what they did. and they brought you nobody, no witness at all, to deny it, to show you a different side of that story. not one. now, making products as safe as reasonably possible, 52 that is not the government's job; right? that is not the american cancer society's job. that is the job of the manufacturer of the product. and, in fact, that is what they said. you think i'd learned by now. thank you. remember mr. gentry? we took his deposition, you saw the video. and he agreed, the manufacturer is the one with the ultimate responsibility for its product. it is not okay to put that responsibility on somebody else, like, "it is not my fault, the government should have come in and done something different." the manufacturer, that is why they are here, and that is what -- that is why we sued the manufacturer. the cigarette companies should not have made their products as addictive as possible. you heard they did not have to, that they take the nicotine out, put it back in, set at exactly the level they need to keep it as addictive as possible. they did not need to do that. and you heard why they should not have. because you heard that nicotine addiction is the key danger in the cigarettes. it is the mechanism. it is the reason people get sick. all right? because if you could put them down whenever you want to, and just walk away, you would not have 20 million people with disease. it is the reason people keep smoking. and i think mr. gentry, we tried to pin him down on that. it seemed pretty clear, and we will walk through some of 53 that chain of causation. but ultimately, that is the reason they should not make their products as addictive as possible, because it comes with a deadly dose of carcinogens. if the cigarette companies had made their cigarette -- not made them as addictive as possible, then mr. gray could have walked away a lot sooner, a lot sooner than -- well, it does not sound like he ever really did, for good. if he could have walked away, we would not be here. finally, the third reason that we sued, as i told you, was because these companies broke their obligation to market a product responsibly. we also talked about marketing filters and low-tars and lights and menthols in a way they knew customers would think were safer when they were not. but also, they targeted young people. you saw that in their own records. and they brought you no one, not one witness, to tell you otherwise. and they did not ask one question of any of our witnesses to try to explain that to you or deny that. that is not even in dispute. given what we know about these products, what these companies knew about these products, they should not have targeted these products at young people whose brains were vulnerable. and they knew what they were doing; right? because 20 -- 95 percent of smokers start before the age of 20. they know that. that is in the records. you saw that. they know that. that is the entry gates. that is who is coming into 54 the market. critical for their business. and you saw what they put on tv back when mr. gray was young. you saw all that. they should not have done it because, when people start smoking young, it dramatically increases their risk of getting addicted and getting sick. it is extra dangerous. if reynolds had not done that, had not made young people the base -- or the critical part of its business and targeted young people, then young people like mr. gray would not have started so young, would not have gotten in that market so early, and would not have had such a hard time getting out. now, i told you, at the beginning, that your main job is going to be, in this trial, to decide how much responsibility reynolds bears for what happened to mr. gray. and i want to be very clear. we are not trying to recover money for things that happened to other people. you have heard there is lots of other lawsuits for other people. i'm not trying to put that case on for you. i had to give you a lot of context so you could understand what happened to mr. gray, so you could understand and compare him against these companies. but let us be clear, your job will be to decide how much responsibility reynolds has to mr. gray in this case. so i want to talk about some of the instructions that the court gave you. the first one is preponderance of the evidence. all right? and i told you this earlier, that we have the burden of proof. the burden of proof is more likely 55 right than wrong. see, "preponderance of the evidence" simply means an amount of evidence that is enough to persuade you that the plaintiff's claim is more likely true than not true. not beyond a reasonable doubt. okay to have doubts. more likely right than wrong, that is our burden. that is what we did. now, you do not have to be sure, you do not have to be certain, just more likely right than wrong. and if somebody says that while we are in deliberations, remind them. you know, if they say, "i'm not sure, i'm not certain, i'm not a hundred percent," remind them that is fine. 50.001 percent, that goes to mr. gray, and mrs. gray. all right. now, the first few questions on your verdict form look like this. and let me just step back for a minute, actually. the first two questions you are going to answer are about whether mr. gray is a member of the engle class. and this is important, it is very important, because not everybody gets to be part of the engle class, and not everybody gets to bring a lawsuit like this one. there are limits. there is only a certain group of people that can bring this kind of case and get their day in court. so it is not anyone who ever smoked a cigarette. it is not people who just started smoking in the last few years, once the industry has -- can no longer deny that their cigarettes 56 are addictive and cause disease. it is not that kind of lawsuit, and those kind of people cannot bring a case like this. you cannot bring a case like this if you smoke just for fun at parties, or just a cigarette here, there, or the other place. and you cannot bring a lawsuit like this if you got sick from something else; right? so if there is an asbestos exposure, or you got some kind of disease that does not have any connection at all to smoking, you cannot bring that kind of lawsuit. that is not an engle case. the engle class is made up of people like mr. gray, people who started smoking long ago; people who started smoking before there were warnings; people who started smoking before the -- long before the company admitted, at least some things; people who got addicted; and people who got sick from that addiction. that is the kind of people that can bring this kind of case. and that is why we are here, and that is why we have to prove to you questions 1 and 2. that is why they are important. so let me put them back up and talk to you about them briefly. the first question is whether mr. gray was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine. so obviously you heard a lot of evidence about that. that was a big issue in the case. it is question number 1. so let us look at what you heard about that. and i'm 57 not going to marshal all the evidence. but it seems like you ought to know what addiction means. so we brought you the man who wrote, literally wrote the book on this topic, dr. grunberg. he explained to you that nicotine addiction is defined as a chronic relapsing brain disease that is characterized by compulsive use despite harmful consequences. he explained to you this is what he teaches doctors to use, this is the standard in the united states military, this is accepted, published definition of addiction. and all the other medical doctors that came in to talk to you, they agreed that when you assess somebody for addiction, it really comes down to two things, this compulsive use, despite harm. and again, you heard all the evidence on this. i'm not going to rehash it for you. you heard how mr. gray's use was compulsive; how he smoked morning, noon, and night; first thing in the morning, last thing at night; 15, 20 minutes between cigarettes; in the car. you heard that he smoked -- he had to leave sports games to go smoke. you heard that his use was compulsive. it was all the time. i mean, it is hard to get your head around smoking two packs of cigarettes a day, and how much time that really is. that is 40 cigarettes a day. that is hours and hours a day of consuming nicotine. that is compulsive use, folks. and you heard how he smoked despite harm. you heard that he kept smoking even after he was -- his mother got lung 58 cancer. you heard he kept smoking even after he had his own fear of lung cancer. you heard how he kept smoking even after he had lung cancer and copd himself. so we showed you that he smoked despite harm, no question about it. i do not think there is any dispute on their side about that at all. you even heard how his doctor would not clear him to go home because of that oxygen tank, the fear that he would keep smoking despite harm. that is a picture of addiction. that would be mr. gray like on wikipedia, next to nicotine addiction. and that is what his doctor told you; right? dr. slaton told you in his whole career, he is never seen somebody so addicted. changed the way even dr. slaton thought about addiction. and he wrote it down in the medical records, and you will have all the records back there, and it says right there in the records, and you saw it, history of cigarette abuse, history of nicotine abuse. that is nicotine addiction diagnosis in the medical records. hard to contest that. and of course, they did not bring you anyone, not one person on the whole planet, to come in here and try to quibble with us on this issue of addiction. so, now, if during deliberations, if somebody says, "well, i think he may have stopped for a couple of years," and maybe somebody -- from the evidence, that is what you take. closing argument by ms. london 59 remind them, though, that every witness who came in here, who talked about this, they said, whether somebody stops does not matter if -- to whether they are addicted. everybody can theoretically break an addiction. these are separate issues. and remind them, well -- and if somebody says, "i'm not sure, i think he might have smoked for other reasons, could have smoked because he enjoyed it or because he liked it," remind them what nicotine does to the brain. and it is hard, i think, to really see what is going on back in this . . . demonstrative that dr. grunberg wrote, but -- or drew for you, but we talked about dopamine, and you heard this from multiple witnesses, that what nicotine does to the brain is it activates the pleasure sensation, brings you up when you are down, down when you are up. it is enjoyment. it looks like enjoyment. remind them of that. that is what nicotine does to the brain. and remind them what reynolds said in its own documents, that nicotine is the primary reason why people smoke. these other reasons are secondary. so the answer to question 1, more likely right than wrong, was he addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine? the answer to that is yes, more likely right than wrong. now, question 2, more likely right than wrong, was an addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine a legal cause of henry gray's injuries? 60 and i'm going to break this one down because there is some kind of a weird term in there. it says, "legal cause." so what does that mean? okay. and no disrespect to his honor, i think this language is a little complicated, so i'm going to try to break it down. in order to prove that addiction containing nicotine was a legal cause of mr. gray's injury, plaintiff must prove by a preponderance of the evidence that such addiction directly and in natural and continuous sequence produced or contributed substantially to producing mr. gray's injuries, so that reasonably be said that, but for the addiction, his injuries would not have occurred. and this is key. in order to be regarded as a legal cause of injury, addiction need not be the only cause. addiction may be a legal cause of the injuries even though it operates in combination with the act of another, some natural cause, or some other cause, if the addiction contributes substantially to producing such injury. lots and lots and lots of legalese and clauses there. okay? but really, this just comes down to a basic chain of causation. that is really what it is. and this issue of substantial, what does "substantial" mean; right? it is the opposite of insubstantial, makes a difference, plays a role, actual. 61 bottom line question here is did mr. gray's addiction play a role in why he got sick? any of his diseases. now, we do not have to prove that addiction is the only cause. addiction can work together with other causes. and we are going to talk about that in a little while. it just has to be one of the reasons, just one of the reasons that he got sick. so . . . . i made this chart that i think helps. maybe you disagree, but i think it helps. here is what we proved. we proved how addiction causes disease. and it is basic chain of causation. addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine causes repeated exposure to cigarettes, which causes disease. a causes b, b causes c, a causes c. basic logic. so we proved this by working our way through the cause of -- the chain of causation. we started with this first one, whether nicotine addiction causes repeated exposure to toxins in the brain. you saw that. you have heard tons of evidence about that, that nicotine addiction causes changes in the brain, that it causes a need to fill those nicotine receptors over and over and over again to feel normal. and you heard about mr. gray. you heard about when he went without a cigarette, how he was irritable, he was edgy, his nicotine receptors were depleting, and he needed more nicotine to fill them back up, to function normally. that is what you heard. that is what keeps people smoking, day in and 62 day out, to fill up those nicotine receptors with the most powerful drug-delivery device. now, we know that, by the way . . . . mr. gray, right, we talked about withdrawal. why did we talk about that, and that edginess and him being frustrated and all those things? because that is not the kind of guy that mr. gray was. right? you heard the evidence about the kind of guy mr. gray was. he was the sweetest in his high school. he was a boy scout, a labrador, mr. magoo. this was not a guy who was edgy and irritable and fidgety and mean and frustrated. that is not who he was. but that is who he was without cigarettes. that is why he kept smoking day after day, it is the tolerance, it is the need to fill those nicotine receptors, day after today, year after year. it is at least one of the reasons why he kept smoking. all right. now, you also heard from dr. slaton that . . . . i think he put this pretty clearly. nicotine addiction is why people who are smart, who are -- who want to live, who care about their life, why they do not stop; why, despite trying, they do not stop. he explained that to you, that people keep smoking despite all of these fears and all of these diseases because of nicotine addiction. that is what caused people to keep getting the repetitive exposure. and you heard -- this is the modern state of the 63 science; right? that nicotine addiction -- juror 1: can we dim the lights a little, your honor? ms. london: yes. your honor, may i have the lights dimmed? thank you. all right. the court: thank you, hannah. ms. london: and you heard the modern state of the science on this point; right? nicotine addiction is the fundamental reason that individuals persist in using tobacco products. and this persistent tobacco use is what causes disease. you heard this -- you heard this over and over in this trial, because i cannot emphasize enough how important it is. and even mr. gentry from r.j. reynolds tobacco company -- now, they did not bring you a witness on this, but he admitted it. he said nicotine addiction is the fundamental reason that people use tobacco products. it is the reason that people smoke. it gets us from why mr. gray went from a to b. his addiction caused him -- it was a cause, it was a reason that he smoked so many cigarettes over so many years. right? now, let us go to the second part of this question, whether all those cigarettes caused his disease. and, honestly, i do not think mr. geise is going to disagree too much about whether smoking cigarettes caused any of mr. gray's diseases. you all heard the evidence. they 64 did not bring you a medical doctor to contest that. right? you heard -- and i'm not going to rehash it here -- mr. gray's own doctors, dr. feingold, the medical records. plain and clear that he got lung cancer from smoking cigarettes, copd from smoking cigarettes, vascular diseases from smoking cigarettes. at least it played a substantial role; right? and you heard about some of the other medical conditions mr. gray may have had, but there were no other risk factors for lung cancer or copd. none at all. and you heard that the risk factor he had, the blood pressure, high blood pressure, that that risk was multiplied by all of the toxins in the cigarettes that he got. and you heard over and over in this trial how it is that smoking causes these diseases. so i think it is pretty well established that b causes c. so then the only thing you have to put together, folks, is whether a causes c in this case. did his addiction, which caused him to keep smoking, cause the diseases caused by lots and lots of smoking? a plus b equals c. straightforward. now, if somebody during deliberations says, "well, wait a second, what about free choice?" and we heard quite a bit about choice in this trial. and i'm not here to tell you and i'm not going to argue to you that smokers have no choice. that is not really a debate. that is not the issue. the question is what choices are they going to make because of the addiction? what role does the addiction play in what somebody 65 does? and you saw dr. grunberg explain this to you clearly. nicotine addiction interferes with the frontal cortex. it interferes with your decision-making abilities in your brain. it plays a role. it influences what you are going to do. that is what nicotine addiction is. it is a brain disease. not the flu like you catch; one that comes from repeated exposure to cigarettes. grows the nicotine addiction in your brain and continues to keep you -- makes you keep smoking, keep choosing to pick up that cigarette. so whether or not mr. gray had a choice or not a choice is not really the issue at all. does not have anything to do with whether his addiction played a role in why he kept smoking and why all that smoking caused his disease. and you know what? you can -- if you do not believe that somebody gets addicted after one, two, or three cigarettes, that is fine. you do not have to believe that. that is not what this case is about. it is about whether mr. gray, who smoked 40 cigarettes a day, day in and day out, whether that addiction played a role in why he kept smoking and why he got sick. and it is clear from his medical records, even that alone, that he did. but even if you think choice played a role, it is fine if you do. because we do not have to prove that nicotine addiction is the only cause that he got sick. right? you can 66 find lots of causes. because we are human beings. and lots of things cause -- things combine, things combine to cause. and so i made this chart, this little picture here of like a funnel of all the things that you can find were a cause of mr. gray's diseases. nicotine addiction, surely. but you can find that his choice was a cause. you can find -- and i think the evidence will show -- that the industry's campaign of doubt and their conspiracy and the reassurance products they put on the market and their advertising, you can find that all of those things played a role. they combined. they worked together. the only thing you have to decide for question 2 is whether nicotine addiction played a role. was it in this funnel of things that caused? and i think the answer to that, quite clearly, is yes. and on this point, if somebody says in deliberations, "well, i think he could have quit," and i'm -- i am a betting person -- not really -- but i am betting that mr. geise will get up and here and he will say, "well, dr. feingold, he said anybody could quit." again, that is not a -- that is not at issue here. we are not talking about if hypothetically, in the air, anyone can quit, if people can break addictions. folks, that is not what this question is about. it is not what this case is about. so remind them in deliberations that the instructions say nothing about quitting, and certainly 67 not question number 2. but even so, if mr. gray's failure to quit -- and let us be clear. if mr. gray had stopped smoking when he was young, we would not be here. if the industry had done what they said and promised, to take the cigarettes off the market when they found out they did not -- they could not take the bad stuff out, well, then we would not be here either; right? so it is not a dispute that if mr. gray had stopped smoking long ago, whether by his own efforts to quit or by the industry's effort to quit selling them, either way, we would not be here. but even if you feel like his -- and let us be clear. nicotine addiction, of course you heard, nicotine addiction plays a huge role in whether people quit. right? you heard mr. gray tried over and over and over to quit and how nicotine addiction interfered with his ability to be successful. you heard that over and over. i'm not going to beat that horse. but even if you think that his failure to quit, his failure to try hard to quit was a cause, it goes in that funnel too. and it does not mean a nicotine addiction did not play a role, was not substantial, was not a huge part in why he kept smoking, why he did not stop. it is a cause. so back to this. and one more thing. mr. gray's efforts, what he did to try to stop, you know, what he believed or what he did not believe or the way he acted, that does not 68 come into this picture, by the way, in question 1 and 2. this is about his fault. and there is a whole separate place on the verdict form, and we will go through that, where you can put down how much mr. gray's responsibility -- what percentage you attribute to him. and we were clear and up front that mr. gray, and mrs. gray accepts on his behalf, some responsibility. that does not come into play here in number 2. that will come later in the verdict form. but i at least want you to be aware that you will have a place to write that down. that does not come here. so, again, basic chain of causation, a causes b causes c, means that on question 2, the answer more likely right than wrong -- frankly, i think far beyond that -- but more likely right than wrong, mr. gray's addiction to cigarettes was a cause of his injuries. and just to be clear, any injury -- this means any of his injuries that we allege. so if you find lung cancer, yes. if you find only copd, yes. if you find only vascular disease, yes. or if you find all of them, the answer is yes. just has to be one. all right. i'm not going to spend a lot of time on question 3. this question is whether smoking cigarettes caused mr. gray's death. on this question, you saw the evidence on this. you heard from mr. gray's doctors about what caused his 69 death, that smoking cigarettes substantially contributed. but it can be up to you. you can decide that all of the diseases combined, that only one of those diseases combined. or maybe you decide that it was the heart disease only. this question is really there to help you decide questions later on. so when you are back there and you are looking at the medical records and considering the evidence, just whatever you found was proven more likely right than wrong. i would suggest to you that more likely right than wrong, smoking cigarettes was a cause of his death. but that will be up to you. that will be the evidence. but you will proceed from there and keep answering questions regardless of what you find. all right. and i need to spend a little time here on these next questions. these questions are on fraudulent concealment and conspiracy. and they are very tough questions. the language, i think, is kind of tough. it says, "please state whether henry gray relied to his detriment on statements made by defendant reynolds that concealed or omitted material information concerning the health effects and/or addictive nature of cigarette smoking, and, if so, whether henry gray's reliance was a legal cause of his smoking injuries." 70 okay. so in order to answer these questions, you are going to need to use the engle findings because they are very important to these questions. and i realize, of course -- you know, i've never sat on a jury. but i can expect that it is awkward and strange to rely on what another jury did. you did not see that evidence. you did not sit for a year. you did not hear all those witnesses yourself. but some other jury did so you would not have to decide everything. and so you are going to accept these as though i proved them to you. and mr. spragens. as if we proved this to you here in this courtroom. that is how strong these engle findings are. and here is what they are on this question. "engle defendants, including r.j. reynolds tobacco company, concealed or omitted material information not otherwise known or available, knowing the material was false or misleading, or failed to disclose a material fact concerning the health effects and/or addictive nature of cigarettes. you must accept that determination." i want to point your attention to a few things here. okay. first of all, what they concealed was not otherwise known or available. okay? so if in deliberations somebody says, "well, what about all those reader's digest articles and the newspapers and what aunt betty said, and all that stuff, you know, is not that the end of the story?" 71 no. no. not at all. because what this case is about is what was not known, what was not available, what was only available inside of these companies. that is what this case is about. so -- and what does this word "material" mean? okay. this is tough. material means something that would have made a difference. so we know, walking in here, that reynolds concealed information that would have made a difference. and they did that -- that was not otherwise known or available. so the only question for you is whether it would have made a difference to mr. gray if somehow -- you know, if he was like everybody else. you know? if you would have heard the truth, would it have made a difference to him? so what is it? what is it that was concealed, that was not otherwise known or available, that would have made a difference? well, first, that the companies could not take out the bad stuff. right? that was only known inside the companies. they did not share that with anybody else, what they knew. right? they did not share with anybody else what they knew inside about the power of addiction or what they were doing to make their products as addictive as possible. remember, you heard from dr. grunberg, the company was doing these studies 20 years before scientists were. 20 72 years. these things were not otherwise known or available outside the industry. and it was not otherwise known what they were doing to rig those filters and those menthols and low-tars and lights. was not known. their studies showing they knew plain and clear all along that those were never going to be safer and were not safer. that was not otherwise known or available to anyone, including mr. gray. certainly not the government and definitely not to mr. gray. so that is what this is about. i would not even stand up here and try to argue to you that it was a secret that smoking could be bad for you or could be hard to quit. i think you would just laugh at me. and i would not even try. because that is not -- was -- that was known. that was available. here, we are talking about what is not known, what is not available. so let us keep our eye on that ball. and here again you will see this -- this question of legal cause. and this is so weird, i think, this language about whether you rely to your detriment on a statement that concealed information and whether that was a legal cause. folks, what this comes down to is if they had come out and told the truth -- the whole truth, right? -- would that have made a difference? that is it. that is what this question comes down to. right? and it does not have to be the only thing that would 73 have made a difference. right? and i showed you that chart of all the things i think would have made a difference to mr. gray. just has to have played a role. has to have made a difference to him if he would have heard the truth. well, now, i think an easier way to think about this is what if they had not lied? what if they had come clean with what they knew when they knew it about all those things? how would the world be different? how would that have made a difference? do not you think it would have made a difference to mr. gray? the evidence you heard in this courtroom about who he was. he was a smart guy. he had a lot to live for. he had a great life, i mean, a very blessed life. do not you think it would have made a difference to him, to a smart man who had a lot to live for, with five children, a lovely wife, that if he knew he was killing himself, if he knew how bad these products were going to be for him and that he would have such a hard time stopping, do not you think it would have made a difference to him? i think that is the most appropriate inference from this evidence. otherwise, frankly, you have to believe he had a death wish. you have to believe that he just did not care about his life or his health. right? that is what you have to believe if you think it would not have made a difference to him. you know he switched to those low-tars and lights -- 74 i'm sorry -- the filters and the menthols. you know why he did that. he told his doctor. he told his wife. they would be better for him. this was not a guy with a death wish. this is not a guy who was out there saying, "hey, screw you, i'm going to go smoke, whatever the consequences." he was careful. he was cautious. that is the kind of man he was. that is what you heard. and i think if you believe it would not have made a difference, i think that is pretty cynical, honestly. i think that means . . . i think that means that you have to believe that the companies have no responsibility at all to tell the truth. that you should not -- we should not expect companies to put out -- to tell people everything they know on their website, that you should not be able to rely on what companies say. you know, that as long as a company says, "oh, well, somebody out there is going to tell people. we are going to rely on the cousin betties of the world to tell people about our products and how dangerous they are. we are going to rely on somebody else. and as long as those people are out there, do not sue us." i think that is a pretty cynical world to live in, folks, if we believe it would not make a difference for companies to tell the truth, for these companies to have come clean about what they knew. it is a pretty cynical world i 75 would not want to live in. you know, imagine -- i mean, just imagine if all companies did this. really? i mean, imagine if you could not go to a website for a product like baby formula and get the truth from that company about whether it would be safe for your baby. imagine if you had to rely on your cousins or people who did not know, who were not inside that company. imagine if that was the kind of world that was okay. it is not. honest companies come out and come clean, and tell people and let them make an honest choice so that people can protect themselves. because we all want to protect ourselves. that is who we are. and we need that information from the source. from the company. that is whose job it is to tell us. so there is no confusion, there is no debate. and you do not have to rely on, you know, blogs or hearsay or other things. that is not the world we live in. we know the industry thought their conspiracy made a difference. we know they spent billions of dollars to keep it up. we know they spent billions of dollars advertising and marketing filters. you saw from the ftc that the company -- that even the government concluded that these companies were marketing these products in a misleading way and that people believed them. and you saw from their own documents they knew people were relying on them. mr. heimann said it. he admitted 76 it. "we expect customers to rely on what we say." we know they thought it was successful. we know they thought it was intercepting people from quitting. it was keeping the exit gates closed. we know they thought it made a difference. that is why they celebrated themselves. you saw that all throughout the documents. and how do we know? how do we know the world would have been different if these companies would have told the truth? if they would have come clean, it would have made a difference to people like mr. gray? well, we know because now these companies can no longer deny that their products cause cancer and are addictive. and the rates of smoking have plummeted. new people are not starting to smoke today. it would have made a difference. it would have made a difference to mr. gray. so the answer -- and that is the question on fraudulent concealment. and i think that goes right alongside with this issue of conspiracy. they work together. so it would not really have worked that well if just reynolds had lied, had concealed the truth. that would not have worked as well. right? because if the other companies said, "oh, you know what? actually, let me show you our own files, and we will be honest." would not have worked. the gig would have been up. but they worked together. and that is why it worked. and 77 there is an engle finding that matters here. and that is this one, instruction 14. it says, "another engle finding was that the engle defendants, including r.j. reynolds tobacco company, agreed to conceal or omit information regarding the health effects of cigarettes or their addictive nature" -- and here is key -- "with the intention that smokers and the public would rely on this information to their detriment. and you must accept that determination." these companies agreed together to conceal information with the intention that smokers would do exactly what mr. gray did, buy one cigarette or buy one pack, smoke every cigarette in that pack and buy another pack. you heard from mr. heimann himself, that is what they wanted people to do. that is why they hid the truth. they wanted people to rely, and they knew it would make a difference. and there is nothing special or different -- i mean, mr. gray was a lovely, wonderful person. but there is nothing super special about him in this regard. you would have to believe that it would have made a difference to everyone else but him. that he was somehow careless, callous, indifferent about his life. and that is just not the evidence you heard. and just specifically on this question of how we know mr. gray relied on statements from these companies. you heard about the menthols and the filters and why he smoked them. you heard that from two witnesses and you heard nobody to 78 contradict that. and you know and you saw how these companies marketed those products. you saw some of the ads, and you saw what the ftc said. and you know that the companies knew that people believed they were safer. and you know all of that. and, of course, i could not bring you mr. gray to say where he got that information from. and i expect mr. geise to point that out. he will say, "well, we do not know. we cannot prove that he relied on some statement that reynolds made." well, remember, i talked to you about the umbrellas and the forecast and the wet hair as a way to prove the rain; right? and the judge gave you this instruction, just like i thought he would, that you can consider "both direct and circumstantial evidence, and you may make deductions and reach conclusions which reason and common sense lead you to make." and "circumstantial evidence is a proof of a chain of facts and circumstances tending to prove or disprove any fact in dispute. the law makes no distinction between the weight you may give to either direct or circumstantial evidence." so using your common sense, using the pieces of the puzzle that we gave you, you can reasonably infer that mr. gray got this idea that filters and menthols and lights would be safer for him from reynolds and from their co-conspirators in the other cigarette companies. you can find that. 79 now, if somebody in deliberation says, "well, he could have heard about that from the government," right, because the government was telling people that, remind them that the industry outspent the government 365 to 1. that is the proof. the industry advertised over and over and over again, in all the things that mr. gray read, sports illustrated, time magazine. you heard all that evidence. more likely right than wrong, he saw something from these companies -- excuse me -- from reynolds that assured him that these products would be safer. i showed you a document about kools, the product that he smoked the most of throughout his life. you saw where they marketed that, how often they marketed that, the billions of dollars they put behind that. i think more likely right than wrong, you can certainly infer that he saw that. and also remind them, right, that what the government -- the information the companies had, they concealed that from the government too. right? so if he is relying on just what the government said and not on what the company said, the companies are still responsible for that. because we know what the public health community would have done if they knew what the companies knew back in the '70s. they would not have recommended them. and how do we know that? because that is what they did. as soon as they 80 found out the studies and the research that the industry had, they stopped recommending them. we know it would have made a difference in terms of what the public health community would have told people. so, frankly, it does not matter. i think it would be virtually impossible for mr. gray to have missed these ads over all this time about filters and low-tars with how often they were marketed. but even if he did and he just relied on the one out of 365 messages that came from the government on this question, that is still on them. that is still on reynolds. so the answer to these questions, question 5 and question 6 -- i'm sorry -- question 4 and question 6, these are yes and yes. you are going to have to answer some questions about timing. and these are for legal reasons about why -- do not speculate about why it matters before or after 1982. that is something that the lawyers and the judges have to fuss over. you guys have to decide the facts. so the question here is whether mr. gray relied, before may 5th, 1982, on or after may 5th, 1982, or both. and i brought this, you know, table out here for you to see just to remind you that the companies relying and concealing all the way, all the way through, before that date, after that date. never stopped until after mr. gray died. and he kept buying those cigarettes, he kept buying filters, he 81 kept buying menthols all the way through that time. so the answer to this question, more likely right than wrong, is before and after may 5th, 1982. the defendants did not bring you any evidence to the contrary of that. all right. i'm going to skip over question 8 for a moment, and i want to talk about damages. because i told you your main job was to figure out how much responsibility these companies have. but we are really in this room to fix, to help, and to make up for. and we are going to get to this question of how much responsibility after we talk about damages. i told you at the beginning of the case that in order for you to determine how much the verdict would be, i'd have to show you the harms and the losses. not for sympathy; that time is over. we cannot bring mr. gray back. we cannot give ellen gray back the life that they had, the life that they hoped to have together. but healing requires justice. and in our system, as amazing as it is, we cannot resuscitate people and bring them back to life. so it requires a verdict in damages, in dollars. that is how we do it. and so that is what we are asking for. now, the instruction says that you have to assess the full amount. "in considering the issues of damages, you are instructed you should assess the full amount you find to be justified by a preponderance of the evidence as full, just, reasonable compensation for all damages for mr. gray's injuries 82 and death." no more, and, of course, no less. and a lot of the damages we are asking for here, folks, these are not what we call, you know, tangible damages. so we did not put on evidence with medical bills, have you pull out a calculator and add that all up. and we are not asking you to think about or speculate about how much money he would have made over his life as lawyer. you heard he had some financial difficulties at the end of his life. so we are not going to ask you to try to even go there. this case is really about the intangibles, the harms and the losses of losing someone's life, or for mr. gray losing out on his life. compensatory damages are not restricted to the actual loss of time or money. they cover both the mental and physical aspects of injury, tangible and intangible. thus, no evidence of the value of such intangible things as pain and suffering or loss has been or need be introduced. in that respect, it is not the value you are trying to determine, but an amount that will fairly compensate plaintiff for her damage from mr. gray's death. there is no exact standard to be applied, and any such award should be fair and just in light of the evidence. so i'm going to give you a way to think about that, because there is no perfect standard for figuring this out. you need to consider the harm. how bad was it, how 83 long was it, and how much did it interfere with? and we are talking about -- now, let me give you an example. so if a spouse breaks their arm, and you see them hurt, and it lasts for weeks at a time, and you lose out on them being able to go out and throw a football around or something like that, that is hard. that is an injury. that is worth something. that is probably worth something in the low thousands of dollars, if somebody caused that harm. but then there is like a mid-level loss; right? so let us say a spouse goes into a coma for four years. now, that is a much worse kind of harm. you lose their comfort, their protection, their ability to be with you, to listen to your day, to be there with you through the good times and bad, to help around the house, to help with the kids. that is a pretty significant harm, four years. that is the kind of harm -- now we are talking in the hundreds of thousands if not low millions of dollars. and then there is this kind of harm, the worst kind of harm, where you take somebody away for the rest of their life, where you lose a spouse -- and you saw it, and you will be instructed -- about 17 years of life taken away, 17 years of companionship with your first love, with the person you spent nearly 38 years of your life with, building your dream home together, planning out your retirement, delighting in your grandchildren, everything you would worked so hard for for all 84 those years, gone forever. that is the worst kind of harm. that is the kind of harm that reaches into the bigger millions of dollars. and that is why i have to ask you in this case, i think -- it is up to you, but -- how you think evidence -- what it showed about the kind of life they had together and what she missed out on. i'm not going to rehash that for you. you heard that. i suggest to you that, when you consider that kind of harm over that period of time, you are looking at half a million dollars for every year they lost and i think another half a million dollars for going through the death of your child without the father of that child. you heard how painful that was. you heard what that was to her. now, that is on question number 5 -- i'm sorry -- 9. and you are going to reach that question only if you decide that mr. gray died from something caused by smoking; right? that is the question that you will answer. but if, in your deliberations, you decide that none of the smoking-related injuries actually caused his death, then you are going to make that same kind of determination not for mrs. gray's loss, but for mr. gray's loss, for what -- for how it felt for him to go through the lung surgeries, to go through the fear, to go through the decline. and you heard what the smoking did to his body, what 85 the injuries did to his body, and looking out at his sea of friends and his loved ones, and what that was like for him to go through. and he got sick in '93. that is what the medical records show. that is when he really started feeling the effects of his injuries. so i submit to you that -- if you get to question 10, if you find that none of his injuries actually caused his death, i would submit to you that a fair and just reasonable compensation for what he went through for those last two years would be $1 million per year, $2 million. that is up to you. these are intangibles. you have to bring your sense of what that life and that value is worth. now, if somebody in deliberation says -- and this is really important. if somebody in deliberation says, "you know, i just do not think money is appropriate. we cannot bring him back," or if somebody says, "it seems like too much money for one person," or "i think this will encourage more lawsuits, and it will be bad for our economy if, we as a jury, award this money" -- and i'm not saying there is anything wrong with feeling that way. i think we all come in here with feelings. but you swore an oath, and it is incredibly important that those feelings and those attitudes and opinions -- they do not come in here. you cannot -- the judge has instructed you: you cannot be guided by passion or public opinion or 86 these outside influences. on this question, the issue is harms and losses, and it may be hard for you to put a dollar amount here. i get that. but that is your job, and no one said your job was going to be easy. now, also, if someone in deliberation says -- and, you know, "mrs. gray has done her best to move on, you know? it seems like this was a long time ago. what good would the money do now? it seems like she is okay." now, the judge has instructed you that you are not allowed to take into account her relationships. that is the law. you cannot. but i'll also submit this to you. you heard this case started very, very long ago. mrs. gray has been waiting a very, very long time for her turn, patiently, to have her day in court, like this, with a jury like you. it takes time to get here, a long time. and mrs. gray, she did what she could to move on with her life. she was in her 50s when her husband died. it was not easy. not her preference, of course. but if somebody says that in deliberations, remind them you cannot replace -- and it is not fair to ask mrs. gray to wait all these years and not even try to move on with her life, and it does not change the harm, and it does not change the loss. you do not just replace people like that. 87 and if somebody -- if somebody cannot follow that law -- if somebody cannot follow the law that you need to set aside these outside reasons, then you need to knock on the door and tell the judge. it is that important. each of you have the right to be on a jury that follows the law and to come to a fair and reasonable verdict. that is -- you have a right to that. and, in fact, the judge has instructed you, you have that obligation to ensure that others do as well. all right. the very last -- well, there is two last issues, and i'll wrap up here. and i promised you you would get a chance to allocate fault and responsibility, your main job. and that is what this case was about for the most part. in addition to -- and you do need two engle findings to help you with this one, though. so i'm going to show them to you. i do not think it is quite obvious from the instructions, but these ones you need to take into account to answer this question. so in addition to the engle finding that these companies -- that -- i'm sorry -- that reynolds fraudulently concealed and conspired, there is also these findings that you must accept and that you need to answer this question. one of the engle findings was that r.j. reynolds was 88 negligent with respect to the manufacture and sale of cigarettes, and you must accept that determination. and one of the engle findings was that r.j. reynolds placed cigarettes on the market that were defective and unreasonably dangerous, and you must accept that determination too. so we know that reynolds put unreasonably dangerous and addictive products on the market. those were the ones that mr. gray smoked. that is in the stipulations of fact. reynolds manufactured kools, and we know that is the main brand that mr. gray smoked. we know they were defective and unreasonably dangerous. we know the company was negligent. that is what this finding said. and actually you even heard more about kools. you heard they were the highest nicotine delivery. you saw that evidence. we showed that to you. these were highly addictive cigarettes and unreasonably dangerous. and each one of these cigarettes that the companies put on the market put thousands of chemicals into his body every time he took a puff on a cigarette. those chemicals, over time, accumulated to cause his disease. and you heard how it worked its way through every one of his body -- every aspect of his body. and they brought you no witness to say anything different. 89 so how do you figure out how much fault goes on these companies versus mr. gray? well, we know what mr. heimann told us in the video. he said, "you would not blame a smoker for smoking two packs a day for 40 years." well, that is mr. gray; right? they would not blame him, although i do not think that is what you will hear from mr. geise. and we know, as mr. gentry said, it is not unreasonable for a smoker to smoke as much as mr. gray. that is not unusual. they certainly do not tell people not to. no instructions telling people how much is okay or too little to smoke, certainly not when mr. gray was alive. so how do you figure this one out? well, this, of course, is a question that the defendant -- that reynolds has its burden on. so they have to prove to you how much mr. gray acted unreasonably and how much of that was -- what happened to him was on him versus them. it is actually their burden to prove this. so you are going to have to figure that out. and, of course, when we talk about reasonable, what did -- mr. gray did that -- if he acted unreasonably and to what extent. you have to measure him against an ordinary person, not a doctor, not a scientist, not somebody in their company, just an ordinary person, what is average. 90 so you will have to decide whether he exercised ordinary care over himself and to what extent his own failure to do that was a cause of what happened to him and to what extent. and we told you up front we admit you should judge mr. gray up against these companies. put them side by side. he is got nothing to hide. so let us look at what -- versus what reynolds did, was mr. gray reasonable. and i think you could start this question at 50/50. you could say reynolds made a defective and dangerous product and did not tell people how bad they were. and on the other side, mr. gray, he smoked them, even though some of his family members and some people out there were telling him they could be bad for him. so you could say that is 50/50. they both are to blame. kind of like -- i think a good way to explain this is if a pedestrian walks into the middle of the road, does not look both ways, is not taking ordinary care of themselves, and at the same time a driver is coming down the road and is texting, not taking reasonable and ordinary care for others, and the truck -- or the -- the truck driver, who is texting, hits the passenger -- or the pedestrian. because the pedestrian was not looking, the truck driver was texting, 50/50. if either one of them had not been doing that unreasonable thing, the injury would not have happened. that is 50/50. 91 but what if the driver knows a lot more about that road, and knows it is particularly dangerous, and knows the people crossing that road are more vulnerable? starts to get a little bit less like 50/50, if that driver texts anyway on that road. starts to look a little more like 60/40 on the truck driver. and then imagine if the truck driver knows that, when it texts as it goes down that road, one out of two or three people -- it will hit one out of two or three people and texts anyway, and the person who is crossing they know is vulnerable and does not have all the information available. in that circumstance, you are going to be a little more like 75 percent on the bus driver [sic] and 25 percent on the pedestrian that walks out in the middle of the road. and that is not even close to as bad as what the industry did in terms of enticing young people to start, come into that intersection, with the full knowledge and awareness they had about how dangerous it was with a pedestrian who is impaired, who is got the addiction blinders on and cannot see, because of what they did to the product. i mean, it is just not the same. i mean, we are talking now more like ninety percent of fault on this truck driver, ninety percent fault on these companies, ten percent on mr. gray, in light of all he knew, in light of all the information he had, in light of the addiction 92 that was happening to his brain. and you heard it all -- and i'm not going to rehash all that they did when you compare it against him, how they set him up to fail, how they enticed him, kept him like a pavlov's dog, pushing the lever, with the reassurance products, all of that stuff, and then look at him. now, could he have not ignored his wife? sure. could he have listened to cousin betty? sure. could he have tried harder to quit? sure. i mean, you heard a whole lot about what he did to try to quit. that is in your notes. they brought no evidence on that. but i think, when you weigh all that these companies did with the knowledge they had versus what mr. gray did and the knowledge he had, i think you get to 90 and ten percent, but that will be up to you. because, of course, who could have stopped this collision from happening? perhaps both of them could; right? just like the pedestrian could not have walked in the street and the truck driver could not have been texting. but you have to think about who had more knowledge, who had more power over that situation. was it the manufacturer who knew everything about what they were doing to the product, knew everything about how they were marketing them, and knew what would happen if they did it, versus 93 mr. gray and the limited information that he had and the control that was impaired by addiction. all right. very, very last issue, and that is punitive damages. that is the last question. and this is where i have to prove to you -- and i told you this one has a higher burden, because we do not just go around punishing companies willy-nilly. this one is very serious. this is whether, by clear and convincing evidence, punitive damages are warranted in this kind of case. and the judge has already instructed you on punitive damages and what i have to show you, and it really comes down to this: did the companies know what they were doing was wrong? did they act intentionally? and is what they did a serious public wrong? i think this evidence is quite clear on all of those things. did they act knowing -- but i want to be very clear about this. we are not punishing them in the air. i'm not asking you to punish them for what they did out there in the world that could have hurt everybody. mrs. gray is seeking punishment for what happened to her, what happened to mr. gray. and did reynolds know that people like mr. gray could get hurt? you betcha. sure as i'm standing here, they knew 94 their cigarettes would kill their customers. they saw it in the studies, in all those reports. whether it was available scientific literature or whether it was the literature in their own files, it does not matter. these companies knew how many people were dying. they saw it. they saw the death and destruction and the disease. they saw it. could not have missed it. these are real people. these are americans. these are veterans. these are grandparents and mothers and fathers and sisters and brothers. these companies saw that. they saw actors -- they showed you these videos -- yul brynner, bill talman. you think the companies did not see these public service announcements? you think they did not get it, the human suffering of what they were doing? i do not think they could have missed it, folks. i think they knew exactly what they were doing. nothing stopped these companies. nothing stopped them from seeing the death and the destruction. what kind of moral and decent company goes on and does what they did with that knowledge? what kind of company does that? i think the evidence will show you that these companies -- they did not intend to kill their customers. i'm not going to argue that to you. i do not think the evidence 95 shows that. i think what happened is that something took over. the fear of going out of business and profit overcame the paramount concern of public health, clouded their judgment, drove reynolds to forget its promise and to lose its way. i think they saw death as an unpleasant side effect in pursuit of profit that came from the powerful addictive effects of nicotine, and people like henry gray were just caught up in it. this question is really about whether punishment is appropriate, punishment and deterrence. they did not bring you any witness to explain it. they did not tell you, "hey, we are a changed company now." no. i think what you saw, in fact -- and you saw this from mr. gentry, and he said nicotine addiction is not a public health problem. and i think you saw why they say that, because that means they would have to do something about it. and they have not. they have not done anything about the mechanism that causes all this disease and suffering, that caused mr. gray's death. they have not done anything about it. do not plan to. do not even have anyone on their staff who is dedicated to that position. punitive damages are important. they are not just to punish. they are also to deter. they are required in this kind of circumstance when a company needs to be deterred so it never 96 happens again, this cloud of judgment, this pursuit of profits over health. but it is not just for these companies -- i'm sorry -- for reynolds. it is also for any company out there, so we do not live in that kind of world, the kind of world where you cannot trust what a company says. we do not want to live in that kind of world. it is not right. so i want you to be plain and clear. the evidence, i think, was clear and convincing on this. the answer to question 11 is yes. and i assure you i know that many of you have sacrificed a lot to be here. i know that, and i thank you. it is not easy to serve. and if we get to a phase 2, meaning you come back and you give an amount of money to punish them, i promise you i will put on that proof quick, we will get you in and out, you can see what you need to see, and you can make your verdict. this will not prolong things at all, and you are not that kind of jury. i know you will take this seriously. so thank you. thank you for your time and your attention. i know it may have seemed like i brought you really fancy experts that made a lot of money and just go around and around and do this; that this does not matter for them or for anybody. i brought you people here that knew what they were 97 talking about, that could bring this case to you as efficiently as possible, could show you the truth, so you can make your decision. i think i did that, and i thank you. ms. london: thank you. good morning, again. i know i stand ten minutes between you and lunch, i think, but this is important, and i just want to make a few final comments. mr. geise suggested to you that this was all just a big coincidence, that all the money that the industry spent, billions of dollars to market their products, billions of dollars on the campaign of doubt and denial and conspiracy, the pure white filters, the billions of dollars spent marketing those filter cigarettes, what they did to the cigarettes, the manipulation, all that did not have anything to do with mr. gray at all. he missed it. he was like in those geico commercials, the guy living under a rock, just missed it. this is the campaign that their own document said was brilliantly conceived. they would have been in a deplorable position had they not acted the way they did. i told you at the beginning of this case that you would hear two versions from reynolds: one story when they are 157 here being called to account, and one story when they thought no one was looking. you will have the documents back there. of course, you do not have the 60 million pages available on the internet to you, but you have enough to see what these -- what this industry was saying behind closed doors. and i encourage you to look at those, and you will see what these companies knew, when they knew it, and their view about why their products were selling the way they were. you will see, one, based on the studies they did, those products were highly, powerfully addictive; that they understood better than anyone that they sold those deadly, dangerous products because they were powerfully addictive. the addiction drove their sales. it is baffling to me the argument somehow that addiction had nothing to do with why mr. gray smoked. it is absolutely astonishing to me to make that argument. they know full well, and those documents show exactly, why people bought those products. it is because of that addiction. you know, mr. geise, he suggested to you that they are not challenging the findings and that i was up here arguing a bunch of things that they do not dispute. but i've got to tell you i think the case that they put on before you and the arguments i just heard suggested to you they did not do anything 158 wrong at all. "oh, we tried hard. we tried to make our product safer. oh, nothing was a secret from anybody. oh, we gave everybody all our research. we opened our files up, and we shared everything all along the way. we cooperated. we cooperated. all those times we went out and we attacked the surgeon general? never mind about that. we cooperated." i do not know what to say about them challenging what the engle findings are. the judge has instructed you that you have to accept those. that is the truth in this case. so i'm not really sure what to do with all that. certainly you can disregard that. it is not the law. mr. geise also reminded us -- and it is true -- cigarettes are a legal product. he is right. it is currently legal to sell cigarettes, and it is currently legal to buy them, if you are over 18, in florida. but it is also legal to sell cars. it is legal to drive. but a car company that makes a faulty air bag and ignition switches does not tell people they are responsible for the harm. there is no law saying that these companies had to sell a needlessly addictive product. no law saying they had to market them with pure white filters and be misleading about it. there is no law that makes them make billions of dollars of profits and spend billions of dollars on advertising. there is 159 no law that says they have to do that. the law allows cases like this because we have to put limits on companies. when they are responsible for the harm, somebody who gets hurt gets to come in here and they get to go to you. so i do not know what this business about it being a legal product has to do with anything, nothing at all. being legal does not make it right. i cannot spend all day going after and reexplaining why those cherry-picked things do not matter at all. i mean, really, r.j. reynolds telling you that you should believe a document that they wrote to a regulator saying, "oh, look. we did not do anything wrong"? a document that i showed you that public health authorities had reviewed and wrote a peer-reviewed paper on, that said, "oh, no. these companies sure knew that ph affected sales." i'm surprised they are suggesting that to you as something that we overlooked in our case. obviously it is not credible. and then -- that is okay. you know, we brought you witnesses that knew what they were talking about. they are professional, no question about it. they know what they are talking about. if these -- these companies have ample resources. if there was one person on this planet, one, that they could bring 160 in here to tell you anything that we put on was wrong -- mr. geise: your honor, i object to their comment about our resources. the court: ladies and gentlemen, you are instructed to listen to the evidence that is -- that has been presented to you -- the evidence that has been presented to you. okay? ms. london: thank you. that is right. you could not consider any evidence from them. they did not bring you anybody to help you understand, put any of this in context. mr. geise tried this case, amply so, but what he says to you is not evidence. so, for example, he commented to you, i think, for a while about mr. gray's motivation, that he knows better than mr. gray's doctor and mrs. gray herself about how hard he wanted to quit, what he did, how he tried, how he cried in a psychiatrist's office. come on. the last person on this planet that can come up here and challenge mr. gray's motivation to get off a product is the manufacturer of that product that certainly did nothing, nothing at all, to help keep him motivated. and there is nothing on that verdict form that says "motivation." can i have the elmo, please. thank you. 161 i'm glad mr. geise said he was not going to say mr. gray was unreasonable. we showed you this evidence. this is how many men were being just like mr. gray. born in 1930 -- and you see the slope up here? that is nearly eighty percent of men of mr. gray's generation are smoking when he smoked. he is not unusual. he is not rare. he was not crazy. and he was not just seeing all this stuff and saying, "oh, screw you." it was a culture of smoking perpetuated by r.j. reynolds. it was not unusual at all. and actually, if you look at this, all the way out till 1990, basically, even fifty percent of men in his generation, born when he was born, still smoking. that is extraordinary, extraordinary. and he is extraordinarily common, unfortunately. all right. finally, mr. geise said we need to respect mr. gray's choices. you know what? i actually do agree with him on that. mr. gray, starting back from the '70s, wanted to stop smoking, did not want to end up prematurely dead like his mom. he tried. he wanted to. he made a choice to try over and over and over and over and over again. and you know from the evidence how likely it was each time he was going to succeed because of the addictive nature of these products. you saw this evidence. nothing challenged this at all. 162 three percent. that is what he was up against. that is how powerful this is. wanting to stop, trying to stop over and over and over again? that is what it takes, because people almost always fail. that is what happened. and as far as whether he quit or did not quit, after 1993 -- ladies and gentlemen, you heard the testimony, right? i mean, you know what you heard -- his wife said he did not. his doctor would not know, was not playing golf when his legs were all cramped up and he could not walk a block. and even so, he had lung cancer and vascular diseases and all those diseases in '93. so whether he picked up a cigarette or not or quit after that, the damage was done, folks. the damage was done. it was a legal cause of his disease. that is a distraction, and that is irrelevant. and finally, how does a company show respect for their customers' choices? right? because if we are going to respect his choices, we should have respected his choices to quit. does a company hide the truth about the dangers in their products? do they rig them to make them more addictive? do they treat them like pavlov's dog, like animals, rats in a cage? do they keep exit doors closed, knowing that most of their customers would quit if they could? is that what a company does who respects their customers' choices? calls them "replacement smokers"? 163 no kind of respect. and i'll end as i began, two kind of stories: one when they come in here being held to account, and one back when no one was looking. and what did they say about this whole idea about free choice back when no one was looking? they said, "the entire matter of addiction is the most potent weapon a prosecuting attorney can have in a lung cancer case. we cannot defend continued smoking as free choice if the person was addicted." and that is what mr. gray was, and that is why we are here. and we thank you for your time, and i ask you for a verdict in mrs. gray's favor. thank you.