mr. reilly: thank you, your honor. good morning, everybody. the jurors: good morning. 7-47 mr. reilly: i want to start my closing argument the same way i ended -- i guess i opened my opening statement, and that was by thanking you for your service as well. the court: please use the mike. mr. reilly: sorry, your honor. the court: thank you. mr. reilly: a little far away. we have been together now for -- this is our seventh day, right? not that you are not counting them, but, you know, as mr. migliori said, it is inconvenient. i know that, but you guys are the backbone of our civil judicial system, so i just want to start out by saying thank you for your service. all right. now, when i finished my opening statement, i said to you guys that when i got up here in my closing argument, i expected that i'd be using many of the very same boards -- and i know i've got a bunch of them here -- many of my very same boards in my closing argument because i was confident that what i was showing you on those boards was actually going to be the evidence that occurred in this case. and sure enough, that is exactly what the evidence turned out to be, so as i promised, i'm going to show you, much more quickly i hope than i did in my opening statement, the same boards, same timeline because that is exactly what the evidence turned out to be. and remember, i started with this board, and i said, 7-48 "this case" -- and judge lisi has been kind enough to give us a draft of the instructions she is going to give you after the closing arguments are done. so i now know that, just as i predicted, there is going to be pages of legal instructions, and there is lots of legal terms filling those instructions. but you really could and can condense all of that down into what this case really turned out to be about, and you guys sat here and you listened to all of the evidence in the case. so now you know that there was an enormous amount of information communicated on the topics of control and responsibility. this is not a class action. you know, you now know, having sat through this evidence, that this case is about one smoker and one smoker only. and who is that? mr. griffin, and the decisions that he made in connection with his smoking. and so the question became one of control of mr. griffin's decisions about smoking, to begin to smoke, to continue to smoke, to become a regular smoker, to continue to enjoy smoking until what -- until his midlife crisis in the early '90s when he decided, i want to change my lifestyle, and then mr. griffin's decisions about quitting smoking and his ultimate decision to quit for good. and the question of control included, where did philip morris fit in any of that -- in any of those decisions? 7-49 and then the question became one of responsibility. what responsibility did mr. griffin have for the decisions that he made? not some class, not some -- not the american public, but one smoker and one smoker only. and then what, if any, responsibility, in light of mr. griffin's life, what, if any, did philip morris have in this case? and i said that control and responsibility would not appear on the instructions or the verdict form. well, in fact, i was a little wrong about that, because while "control" does not appear, "responsibility" does. and i'll show you that when we get to it in -- as i go through the rest of these boards. now, i suggested to you that the only way you would know the answers to these questions of control and responsibility in this case would be to know how mr. griffin lived his life. and mr. griffin came here and testified about his own life, right, and you remember his testimony. you remember how he was on the stand. you remember his demeanor. you remember all of that. and so i just want to walk through now exactly what i told you was going to happen and did happen in terms of his life story, and i'm going to use the same timeline that i used in my opening statement. but you know what? i'm going to make it briefer because you now know that mr. griffin, born in '45, had absolutely no connection with cigarettes or smoking until 7-50 high school when he tried, what, a cigarette or so? he had no interest even in high school to being a cigarette smoker, and you now know that. undisputed that is the evidence in the case. but you also know that in this case, mr. griffin revealed that while he was in what he called secondary school, which is high school, that that is when he saw the warnings about smoking in the news. the warnings raised his consciousness of the health hazards of smoking, and a little later, he remembered seeing the warnings on the packs. now, throughout high school, college, seminary, and before entering the navy, mr. griffin was a nonsmoker, right? did not have any interest in smoking. he is a nonsmoker till age 21. so throughout -- and what is he talking about regarding the warnings? well, you know, you heard from dr. proctor that florida schools taught about the health risks of smoking, that they were very aggressive about that. mr. griffin could not remember it because it was too long ago, but you -- you saw the coverage of the '64 surgeon general's report in january of '64, when mr. griffin is midway through his senior year of high school. so how old is he when he is, by his own statement, seeing the warnings about smoking in the news and having his consciousness of the health hazards of smoking raised? 15, 16, 17, 18? that is how old you are in high school, right, and that is when he said he did it. 7-51 so now in high school he is an informed smoker about the health risks. what does the surgeon general say in '64? smoking causes lung cancer. you saw on the screen the news coverage from cbs, special report. that was just an example, just an example of the news coverage. and what did you see harry reasoner -- what did you hear harry reasoner say? he said, okay, ladies and gentlemen of the american public, it is up to you now to decide for yourselves. nobody's going to tell you that smoking's good for you. nobody's going to tell you, you cannot smoke. now it is up to you to decide whether you are going to take the risk of developing illness if you smoke. now, i have to digress for just a minute and say mr. migliori just showed you a bunch of internal documents from philip morris in which folks at philip morris reported things, said things about nicotine being in cigarettes and nicotine being the reason why people smoke. you remember -- the reason why i showed you and walked -- went through it with their expert, dr. proctor, and he agreed with everything i asked him. you know, he never disputed a thing i asked him. people have known for 150 years that nicotine is in tobacco; nicotine is why people smoke. it is like saying, you know what? why do people drink whiskey or gin or whatever. why do they do that? duh. it is because there is alcohol in it, right? 7-52 why do people smoke cigarettes? it is because there is nicotine in cigarettes. that is why people do it. is that some surprise? so what does mr. griffin know before he ever picks up a cigarette when he is enlisted in the -- when he is a sailor in the navy? he tells you himself he is had his consciousness of the health hazards of smoking raised by the warnings he sees and by the warnings on the packs, which are there on every pack of cigarettes before he even gets in the navy and before he ever accepts a cigarette from another sailor who offers him one sometime after boot camp. maybe it is in boot camp. but even then, mr. griffin does not become a regular smoker, does he? no. he does not become a regular smoker until after boot camp, sometimes -- sometime later in the navy. and at that point, we have the one and only connection between philip morris and mr. griffin and his decisions about smoking that ever occurred in this whole trial, and what was that? mr. griffin decided that he is going to smoke philip morris manufactured cigarettes. what brand? benson & hedges. now, mr. griffin acknowledged in this trial -- i asked him: "mr. griffin, are not you the only person that decided to smoke your first cigarette in the navy?" he said, "yeah, i'm the only person who decided to smoke my first cigarette in the navy." 7-53 why does he choose benson & hedges cigarettes? this is what he told you. he said, "i chose benson & hedges cigarettes because other sailors were smoking them" and because he saw a cute advertisement. remember the ad where somebody was sitting in a car or something like that and they would turn their head and they would break the cigarette because it is a little longer? here's mr. griffin in the navy, a 21-year-old man. you know, it is been legal for him to buy cigarettes and smoke them for three years now. we here in the state of florida have decided that at age 18, you are old enough to make the adult decision for yourself whether you are going to smoke or not. and so for three years, before he even smokes a cigarette as a sailor, mr. griffin has had the right and the responsibility to decide for himself whether he is going to smoke or not, and he is decided he is going to. and he is the one who decides whether he is going to go to the store and buy a pack of cigarettes. now, did mr. griffin say, at any point during the trial of this case, that in 1966 or '7, when he goes to the store and buys his first pack of cigarettes, that he does not know that what he is doing comes with a health risk? no, of course not. how could he? he is already acknowledged that in high school he had an awareness. he is already got a warning on every pack. he is a 21-year-old man. 7-54 so did he ever say to you, during this whole trial, i did not know that i was taking a health risk when i started smoking? i did not know i was taking a health risk when i decided to buy my first pack of cigarettes or any other pack of cigarettes after that? no, he never did. how could he? did he ever say to you, you know what, i relied on something that philip morris said? or i was waiting to hear from philip morris, something else? did he ever say that in this trial? you guys get to look at your notes. you get to reel back your memory. did he ever do that? no, he never did. how could he, so he never did. you saw all the things that mr. migliori is talking about that were put in front of you by dr. proctor, every one of them. did he ever get up on the stand and say, i was misled by anything that philip morris ever said, that i made a decision because of something philip morris said or failed to say? did he ever say that? no, he never did. all right. you saw the public service announcements that ran. now, mr. migliori said something about the cost of those ads was outweighed tremendously by advertising for cigarettes. what you guys heard from dr. proctor was that 1300 of those public service ads ran in one year alone right here in the '60s, when mr. griffin is deciding for himself whether or not he is going to smoke, become a regular smoker, and you saw 7-55 the ads. you saw bill talman, the guy that fought against perry mason and always lost, and you saw the dramatic -- the dramatic ad that said, "i'm dying of lung cancer. if you do not smoke, do not start. if you smoke, quit. do not get lung cancer like me." you cannot miss 1300 of them in a year. cannot be missed. does that cause mr. griffin to change his mind and to not start or to not continue to smoke? he is 21 years old. he is making an adult decision, an informed, adult decision. by this point in time, you heard dr. proctor say that something like -- i think it was like 26 million americans have quit smoking by the end of the '60s. let us go to the '70s. when mr. griffin returns -- before mr. griffin returns to the united states, there is already been a change on the packs of cigarettes in terms of the warning. now it says, "warning: the surgeon general has determined that cigarette smoking is dangerous for your health." and mr. griffin said, you know what? i did not even observe that the warning had changed because i already knew the warning was there. i did not bother to look at it. that is okay. that is a decision you get to make, but it is a decision you have made. philip morris did not tell him do not look at the warning. 7-56 those ads on television that mr. migliori was complaining about? you know, they are gone as of 1970 -- january of 1971, but the public service announcements remain. i showed you public service announcements from every decade. 1972, this warning went on every -- if there was an ad in a magazine, an ad on a billboard, warnings on every ad. i will not go through his work history, but you heard dr. proctor -- this is kind of interesting. you heard dr. proctor say that their last witness, dr. burns, as a public health figure, was saying to the american public, in 1975, more folks know that smoking is dangerous than can name the president of the united states. than can name the president of the united states. is there any reason to believe, in light of the testimony by mr. griffin and the testimony by dr. proctor about dr. burns's own opinions, that mr. griffin does not fall into the category of a person who would have known that smoking was dangerous? no way. college education. working for dale carnegie. looking at the paper every day. some of -- you know what? i've put a lot of documents, a lot of reader's digests, newspaper articles, magazine articles, that sort of thing -- and, yes, many of them go back before mr. griffin was born -- just to show you what i talked to dr. proctor about. and that is, look, the idea that smoking was called an addiction or a 7-57 habit or a habituation or that it could be difficult to quit was known a hundred years before mr. griffin ever smoked his first cigarette. that is the point. it is not like -- you know, it is like alcohol. you do not have to be told every day that if you drink alcohol, you run a chance that you might become addicted or that there is alcohol in scotch or there is alcohol in beer. you do not need to be told that every day. and the american public did not need to be told every day that if you begin to smoke, you run the chance that you could be become addicted or that, addicted or not, it could become difficult for you to quit. because it is what? it is pleasurable to smoke. everybody that came here that talked about it said, look, smoking is pleasurable. that is why people do it. all right. he is reading the newspaper every day. we gave you copies of the wall street journal, the atlanta constitution, the savannah paper just to show you the kind of articles that mr. griffin has access to. if he is reading the paper every day, these are the articles that talk about the health risks of smoking. now, mr. griffin can jump over them if he wants to or he can read them if he wants to. he may feel it is not necessary to read them because he already knows what they say, that the thing he is doing -- and here he is in the '70s -- the 7-58 thing he is doing is pleasurable. now, there he is actually smoking a little cigar, right? but is this something he hates doing? no. this is something -- he acknowledged this was something that was pleasurable for him that he did as an adult activity, and that throughout the '60s, the '70s, the '80s, and into the early '90s, he has no desire to quit, none. did mr. griffin enjoy smoking? this is what he said. this is about mr. griffin and his decisions about smoking and his enjoyment of smoking. he said he very much enjoyed smoking. he felt more relaxed when he smoked. smoking relieved stress and anxiety. he enjoyed social aspects of smoking and taking a break while smoking. remember, he told me, you know what, i did enjoy going to the bars with other sailors and having cigarettes and beers. he enjoyed having coffee and cigarettes in the morning. he enjoyed -- i mean, smoking is pleasurable. smoking helped him focus while working, and smoking helped him feel more energized. those are all things that he reported. by the end of 1979, 30 million americans have quit smoking. that is the decision they made, but that is not the decision that mr. griffin made in that time frame. how much of this did mr. migliori tell you in his closing argument? 1981, he talked about the federal trade commission report, but i showed you, through dr. proctor, the actual survey data. 7-59 i do not know if you will remember this or not, but i showed you with dr. proctor the actual survey for the attitudes of white, college-educated, catholic men, that they were that refined in their survey. and what did it say? it said that, what was it, 82 or 83 percent of those people that were surveyed either knew or thought that smoking caused lung cancer. and i said, dr. proctor, is there -- is there any way that you get one hundred percent? i mean, just to show you what the scaling is here. he said, oh, no, you could never get one hundred percent. you could not get one hundred percent of people to name the president of the united states. so i asked dr. proctor, is not that a huge percentage? huge percentage. any reason to believe that mr. griffin is not in that 83 percent? no, no reason. he is already acknowledged he is. he already acknowledged he is. and that is as of 1982. but does he have an interest in quitting smoking at this point? no, he does not. he has not had that, what is it, middle age crisis? i do not know. but he has not come to the conclusion that he wants to quit smoking at this point. 1985, we know the warnings changed. 1985, the 7-60 warnings changed and now they explicitly say that smoking causes lung cancer, emphysema, heart disease. and they have rotating warnings that talk about quitting smoking now greatly reduces serious risk to your health, cigarette smoking contains carbon monoxide and cigarette smoking by pregnant women may result in fetal injury, premature birth, and low birth weight. now, this was the only moment in time when mr. griffin reported anything about seeing anything to the contrary about the health risks of smoking, and this is what he said. he said he saw the ads relating to the '85 pack warnings reporting on health hazards. then he said he heard some scientists claim they were not accurate, and he tended to believe them. now, mr. griffin sat here throughout the entire testimony of dr. proctor. he listened to his counsel give his opening statement, and yet when he took the stand, did he say anybody that he was listening to was related in any way to the cigarette industry? that this was a statement made by somebody by philip morris or -- no, nobody. did he even tell you what it was that the scientists were talking about? no. no. and that becomes extremely important when you get to the questions that you are being asked to answer in this case. so that is the sum total of any -- any kind of question that mr. griffin ever had. that is as close as he got 7-61 to having a question. by 1989, 38 million americans have quit smoking. 1990, '91. 1991, that is when mr. griffin has his scuba diving course. that is when he does not perform as well as he thought he should have, thinking back to the days when he swam as a lifeguard, and so he decides he is going to have an evaluation of his lifestyle. he felt short of breath when he could not swim as many laps as he felt he should and he could not do the lifesaving carry as well as he thought he should, so he decided he needed to evaluate his lifestyle and quit smoking. he did not describe what other lifestyle modifications he decided he would make at that time, but that is a -- who made that decision? mr. griffin. did philip morris play any role in his decision to change his lifestyle in 1991 or '2? nope. next time we see mr. griffin, it is in october of 1995. he says at that point -- you know, he said he tried many different ways to quit smoking. remember, he said he tried the patch; he tried the gum. dr. kaplan asked him specifically, "when did you use gum?" and he said 1993. and that is impossible because you had to have a prescription to have the gum in 1993, and he did not have a prescription. he said he went to hypnosis. what did he tell dr. norenburg? mr. migliori said, "you really need to pay close 7-62 attention to these medical records," and i agree, because these people created these records without any consideration of a lawsuit in which mr. griffin would be asking for money against philip morris in 2014. so what did he say? he said he quit one time in the past but started back up. and he reports he was walking on the beach, got out of breath, talked to dr. norenburg about the patch. did he get the patch? there is no indication. dr. kaplan said you had to have a prescription. there is no indication he got a prescription for the patch. you will have all these medical records. i've tried to separate them out so that they are easier for you guys to access. you know, there is 8,000 pages of medical records, and i did not want you to have to comb through 8,000 pages of medical records to find this stuff, so i think that there is a more concise exhibit that will contain these specifically. this is november of 1996. he quit smoking for eight months. how'd he do it? he just quit smoking. if there is any question as to whether or not he would quit for eight months, three weeks later he tells dr. fralicker, "i quit eight months ago." and if there is any question about that, he tells dr. fralicker in july of 1998 that he quit for two years. now, you heard from dr. kaplan. you heard from their expert, dr. difranza that within 24, 48 hours, the nicotine's out of your system. if -- if you are going to have -- not 7-63 everybody has withdrawal symptoms, but if you are going to have them, they are -- what did he say? they are sort of like the same level as having the flu, and then he said -- both of them said, you know what? they are gone in about a week. they dissipate and then they are gone. now, relapse, if you are going to relapse because you are missing nicotine, how long is that going to last? well, both of them said, you know, the relapse period for almost anybody is three months. can mr. griffin stay quit if he wants to stay quit? yeah, he stays quit for two years. now, i know that mr. griffin said, "no, i never did that. these medical records are all wrong. i never said that to people. i never said that to dr. fralicker. i never said that to" -- i know he said that. and i know that he said -- where is it? i know that ultimately -- you know, at first he said, "i could never quit for longer than six weeks, and i could only do that once." i understand all that. and then you saw him on the stand finally say that between 1995 and 1998, he spent more time not smoking than he did smoking, but what he told all these doctors was that he would quit for two years. and then in 2000, may of 2000, he told his psychiatrist, dr. brockunier, that he quit for another year starting immediately. literally at the time he was in 7-64 dr. fralicker's office in july of 1998, he quits for another year. can mr. griffin quit when he wants to quit? does he have the ability to do that? he -- obviously, he demonstrated it. he demonstrated it to the doctors who were caring for him. if he wants to quit, can he quit, and can he stay quit? to whose satisfaction did he demonstrate that? to the doctors who were caring for him. let us go to the 2000s. you see on this -- we will go through more of the medical records in a little bit, but he goes to see dr. brockunier in 2000. why does he go to dr. brockunier? again, you know that he indicated that the medical records were wrong, that he did not go -- did not request a psychiatric consultation in 2000, but you saw the medical records where he did. he did at his mother's suggestion. why was he depressed? you will have the -- again, i've separated these out so that you can have easier access to them. what was troubling him? it was the failure of his business going all the way back to 1991, and then his lack of a social life. i just heard plaintiff's counsel indicate in his closing argument that you should compensate mr. griffin for a lack of a social life. if you look at these psychiatric records, you are going to see the troubles that mr. griffin has had with social life for his whole life. 7-65 i had not intended to even talk about it, and i'm not going to talk about it very much because frankly, if you take the time to look at that, you will see what the problems have been. but to compensate him for the fact that he had poor relationships with women over the years is just -- that is crazy. when he goes to see dr. brockunier, he is been in a debilitating depression. he is not taking care of himself, and dr. brockunier talks to him about it. neglect of medical problems. that is his mental state, and it does not have anything to do with his smoking, but he does talk to dr. brockunier about quitting smoking. dr. brockunier tells him you should stop smoking, but they are going to wait. he says, "okay. wait until your depression has stabilized." this is july -- i'm sorry, june of 2000. mr. griffin declines class. more specifically, a year later, he is going to specifically say, "i'm not interested in quitting smoking." why? because he does not want to work on it now. because he is depressed. he wants to work on his depression. now, as his depression gets better, he begins to decide, "yes, i'd like to quit," and he signs up for a smoking cessation class that is going to happen in january of 2002, but he does not go to that because he collapses at home. again, mr. migliori said, "you ought to compensate 7-66 him for his collapse and his hospitalization for three weeks." nobody connects that with his smoking. nobody did. no doctor came here and said that was related to his smoking. so why did he ask you to compensate him for it? when he is released from the hospital -- as a matter of fact, there are medical records that suggest, in connection with that hospitalization, that they think it might be an alcohol withdrawal. i'm not claiming that. mr. migliori: objection, your honor. that is in limine. the court: excuse me? mr. migliori: that was an in limine. mr. reilly: no, it is not. the court: overruled. mr. reilly: the bottom line is the doctors were speculating why in the world did mr. griffin have this collapse and this problem in december, late december, of 2001 and these hallucinations that he had in 2002, and they never really came to an explanation why it happened. but he gets released from the hospital. i think there is also an indication from his psychiatrist that it may have been a result from withdrawing from the medication he was on for his depression, nardil. i think you can find that in the medical records, if you are really interested in it. but the bottom line is that when he gets out of the 7-67 hospital, what does he do? he does not want to smoke ever again, and he does not smoke ever again. never smokes ever again. can he control whether he smokes? sure. he has. yeah. he may -- he may remember the enjoyment, the pleasure of smoking a cigarette, but does he smoke again? no, he does not smoke. so now mr. migliori says, "well, you ought to take a look at the medical record" -- well, let me stop there because i'll get to it in a little bit. that is it. that is the end of his smoking history. where in that history did philip morris appear? where in that history? you know they made the benson & hedges that he smoked, and if he changed brands to a lady's cigarette in the early '90s, to virginia slims -- they made virginia slims too, but did they have anything to do with his switch to virginia slims? nobody ever claimed that. of course, there is a question as to whether that ever happened. you know, i walked you through with him all the changes he made to the reports he had as to what brands he smoked. all right. so now let us go to what the verdict form actually asks you to address because that is -- that is the evidence about how mr. griffin lived his life. all right. the first question you are going to get 7-68 asked in it -- i do not have the actual verdict form. these are similar, i believe, to the questions, how they are going to posed by judge lisi. the first question's going to be, "did patrick griffin's copd first manifest itself on or before november 21st, 1996, yes or no?" now, mr. migliori said this is -- this is cut and dry, easy stuff. judge lisi's going to give you a whole instruction on how you determine this manifestation question. mr. migliori: your honor. the court: excuse me? mr. migliori: this is i believe to be part of the instruction. we were told not to present the instruction. the court: you were not there yesterday, mr. migliori. mr. migliori: your instructions are posted right now. mr. reilly: that is not a problem. the court: that is okay. mr. reilly: again, we were given a draft. it may be worded slightly differently, but i do not think so. so what is this manifestation instruction going to tell you? this manifestation instruction is going to tell you, "in order to determine whether or not mr. griffin's copd first manifested, the critical event is not when the plaintiff was 7-69 actually diagnosed by a physician with copd." well, we know when that is. that does not happen until 1998, so that clearly did not happen before november 21st, 1996. but when he knew or should have known that there was a reasonable probability that his copd was caused by cigarette smoking -- that his copd was caused by cigarette smoking. "plaintiff knew or should have known of such a probability if the copd manifested itself in such a way that supplied evidence of a causal relationship." these are all key terms not to be overlooked. judge lisi does not have an extra word in her instructions. these are all keywords. "experiencing symptoms or effects of a disease is not sufficient evidence -- not sufficient evidence -- unless the symptoms or effects actually disclose a reasonable probability that the disease -- the disease -- was caused by cigarette smoking. not the symptoms, the disease. so, now, let us take a look at what the actual evidence is. i'll put this one up. yes, mr. griffin found himself a little short of breath -- actually, i do not know if it was short of breath so much as -- the court: mr. reilly, you have got a pen in one hand 7-70 and a mike in the other. do not talk into the pen. mr. reilly: right. so what is going on in 1991? well, here's the only medical record we have, and it says he had a normal physical examination. is anybody connecting -- is anybody connecting the fact that he cannot swim as far as he thought he should with the disease being caused by cigarette smoking, copd? no. the next record we have -- better put it up over here. if i put it down here, can everybody see this? no. the next record we have is from october 11th, 1995, and there he says he is walking on the beach. he is winded. does anybody say "you have copd" or that "you have a lung disease"? no. but let us get more specific, because this is one of the very few questions -- so that is dr. norenburg in '95. this is the only other medical record we have before november 21st, 1996, and let us see whether or not a doctor actually connects mr. griffin's dyspnea -- and what did -- what did you hear dyspnea was? dyspnea was shortness of breath on exertion. so did any -- then he is being treated by dr. brockunier -- i'm sorry, dr. baumgarten. this is at the va. and this is the question i asked dr. burns. i said, "dr. burns, what does etiology mean?" and he said "cause. dyspnea, cause, question mark." 7-71 did dr. baumgarten connect his dyspnea with copd or even cigarette smoking? no. he writes exactly what he thinks. that is why these records are so important. you cannot gloss over it like mr. migliori did. so what does this say? this says, "you have got shortness of breath, but i do not know why." and i'll show you in just a minute why he did not know why. but let us go to -- and this is even after november 21st, 1996. let us go to dr. fralicker, december 6, 1996. what is he say? he says, "patient quit smoking approximately eight months ago but has not noted significant improvement in his exertional dyspnea." that leads you away from smoking. but let us see if dr. fralicker is led away. what does he say? he says, "look, i looked at his oxygen saturation. it is 97.2. he denies any chest pain, denies any kind of cough or productive cough. the lungs are clear to auscultation." you are going to see in just a minute that that is what was done at the va as well. percussion and auscultation, that is when they thump on your back and have you take deep breaths and they listen with the stethoscope to your lungs. nothing wrong there. and at the va, you are going to see in the medical records that they did a chest x-ray, a chest x-ray to see whether or not there was any indication of copd or anything else going on in his lungs, and you will see in the medical 7-72 records that the chest x-ray came back normal. normal. all right. so now dr. fralicker tells you what he is thinking about. what is he say? he says "plan" -- that is what p stands for -- "recommended scheduling a treadmill stress test." that is for your heart, not your lungs. why is he doing that? it is because mr. griffin -- that is because mr. griffin has very high blood pressure values. 150 over 98, 124 over 90 on a repeat. how do we know that dr. fralicker's concerned about that? because he says so. he says, i want you to go get a treadmill stress test. if the treadmill stress test is normal -- that is an if -- then i will consider a pulmonary referral. and what is he say? he says, "patient is to follow up within two weeks and is to record several blood pressure readings during this period of time." now, what is he thinking about? you guys can tell. is he thinking this gentleman has copd caused by smoking and that those -- that is why he is having this exertional shortness of breath? clearly not. now, who has the burden of proof in this case on this issue? the plaintiff does. so here are all the findings by drs. baumgarten and fralicker. dr. baumgarten, on 11/12/96: "no chest pain. chest clear to percussion and auscultation. the oxygen level was normal. chest x-ray normal. dyspnea, etiology," question 7-73 mark. here's dr. fralicker three weeks later: "quit smoking eight months ago but no improvement in dyspnea. no chest pain. no chronic or productive cough. chest x-ray was unremarkable at the va. oxygen level's 97 percent and lungs are clear to auscultation." that is why it is important to read the instructions that go along with the questions so that you understand what judge lisi is requiring that you consider when you answer this question. so what is that -- now that you know that that is what the medical records show and now that you know that that is the question, then what is the answer? and if you think that the answer is no, you check no, and then you deliberate no further, sign the verdict form, and notify the clerk you have a verdict, and that is that. now, i do not know -- i think that, you know, that is the evidence, so you guys have to answer that first question before you do anything else. now, if unanimously you guys conclude that no, the answer to that question is yes, then you have to go on to the second question. what is the second question? the second question says: was he addicted? and, yes -- by the way, you will not get an instruction from judge lisi telling you how to decide whether someone is addicted. 7-74 you are not going to get a definition of addiction. you are not going to get a test for determining if someone is addicted. that is not in her instructions. it is entirely up to you guys. in this room, you have heard a variety of tests. you have heard dr. kaplan, and he is told you about the diagnostic and statistical manual that the american psychiatric association publishes. he walked you through that. he explained to you how he assessed each of the criteria in connection with mr. griffin's smoking. you heard from their expert, dr. difranza. i'll talk about that in just a minute. but let us take a minute and ask ourselves, okay, well, who did the most thorough job of assessing this whole situation? you know that dr. difranza talked to mr. griffin on the phone for 25 minutes. dr. kaplan talked to him in person with plaintiff's counsel present for three, three-and-a-half hours. you know that to both of these folks mr. griffin indicated that he enjoyed smoking. dr. difranza did not get all the medical records. you remember how surprising it was when i asked dr. difranza whether he had the psychiatric records, and he said no, i was not given those? so he did not even have the psychiatric records where dr. brockunier talks to him about his smoking and does he want to smoke and does he not want to smoke and his 7-75 quit for a year. he did not even get those records. was not that surprising? but dr. kaplan had all the medical records. dr. difranza did not even ask him about his quitting history, and dr. kaplan, of course, did, although mr. griffin did not tell him -- he did not tell him even what he told you guys on the stand. he did not tell him about going from 1995 to 1998 not smoking more days than he smoked. did not even say that. that he revealed for the first time in cross-examination in front of you guys. dr. difranza did not even ask him about his depression, but, of course, dr. kaplan did. and dr. difranza did not even know about it because he did not have the psychiatric record. and for some reason mr. migliori, in his closing argument, just said that dr. kaplan only sees patients about 1 or 1 1/2 percent of the time, 1 or 2 percent of his patients come to him and he deals with smoking issues. that is not right. both dr. difranza and dr. kaplan said, look, we rarely have a patient come to us solely for the purpose of dealing with quitting smoking. yeah, why is that? because ninety percent of all folks quit on their own without any assistance whatsoever, cold turkey. 7-76 so i do not know why he said that. but the truth is that both dr. difranza and dr. kaplan generally see these folks because they have come to them for something else. and during the course of the visit, they talk about, do you smoke? and the difference was that dr. difranza does not make an assessment. he just -- he just goes on. dr. kaplan, on the other hand, makes an actual assessment as to whether or not they meet the criteria for determining whether they are nicotine dependent or not. and he told you he is done that with thousands of patients, and he told you -- in spite of what mr. migliori said, he told you that he has set up two smoking cessation tracks at two different hospitals. and, of course, dr. kaplan does not just treat folks who only have -- only have a desire to quit smoking. he treats all kinds of addictions. and he is a board-certified psychiatrist. he is a board-certified -- he is board-certified in medical forensics. you know that he testifies in state cases involving questions of whether or not someone is truly addicted in a variety of settings. and then dr. kaplan walked you through the diagnostic and statistical manual, and he explained to you that mr. griffin did not show even the overarching criteria of significant impairment and distress, and then he explained to 7-77 you an example of that in connection with mr. griffin's depression. and then he walked you through these criteria, and he explained to you that, yes, he met three, but you have got to meet seven in order to satisfy not just tobacco use disorder but, instead, to satisfy the subset of this, which is nicotine dependence or addiction. you are not being asked to decide whether or not mr. griffin had tobacco use disorder. you are being asked to decide whether or not he was addicted. dr. difranza. yes, dr. difranza has a significant -- significantly more liberal approach to determining whether someone's addicted. if you smoke one cigarette a day, he said two-thirds of you are addicted. if you smoke two or three cigarettes a day, he said you are all addicted, everybody. that is a pretty liberal approach to determining whether or not someone is addicted. he did create the honc test, and what did -- you remember i asked him, if you answer one of these questions yes, you are addicted? yes. if you say you think you are addicted, you are addicted? yes. if you say you would like a cigarette, you are addicted? 7-78 yes. that is a pretty liberal test. so you guys have to decide for yourselves do you really think that is the right way to determine whether someone's really addicted or not, i mean really addicted? and he does not use the diagnostic and statistical manual ever unless he is in court. and by the way, you know, mr. migliori's right. if you testify a number of times, you will -- because it is the natural course of things, you will earn an amount of money. but i -- i told you right up front how much money dr. kaplan has earned during this -- what dr. kaplan did. but i had to drag it out of dr. difranza. you remember he said, well, i've been paid $14,000. and i said, well, wait a minute now. you have testified 18, 19 -- he is testified in as many cases as dr. kaplan. and then he said, well, maybe i've made $100,000, and then he said maybe it is $200,000. and then i said, doctor, is not it at least 300- or 400,000? you remember that? i had to drag it out. all right. so what is the answer to this question? you guys have to decide for yourselves. with a smoking history like mr. griffin's, are you convinced that he was addicted? and all of you have to be convinced of that. were you 7-79 convinced he was addicted? if you do not think you have been persuaded, because the burden of proof, again, rests on the shoulders of the plaintiff, then you answer that question no, and, again, you do not deliberate any further. you sign the verdict form, and your work is done. if all of you agree that you have been convinced that the plaintiff has carried his burden of proof, then you have to answer this next question which was: is plaintiff's addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine a legal cause of his copd? legal cause. that is a big hurdle. there is a lot of legal language in here, and i think my marker has run out of ink. maybe somebody could give me one. thank you very much, michael. but what this basically requires -- this is a lot of legal terminology. he has to prove that smoking -- thank you very much. that smoking cigarettes directly and in natural and continuous sequence -- addiction, not just smoking cigarettes. it is not just a question of whether or not smoking cigarettes caused his copd. i told you that. i told you that in my opening statement. why they put dr. burns on to tell you that his copd was caused by his smoking, i have no idea, because i said that to you in my opening statement. 7-80 but that is not what they have to prove. what they have to prove is that addiction was a legal cause of why he developed his copd. mr. migliori can stand up here all day and say we have proved that smoking caused his copd. that does not get the job done, ladies and gentlemen. what he has to prove is that addiction to smoking cigarettes directly and in a natural and continuous sequence produced or contributed substantially to producing his copd so that it can reasonably be said that but for his addiction -- not his smoking, his addiction to smoking cigarettes -- his copd would not have occurred. all right. what does that mean? that means that they have to have proved to your satisfaction that his addiction was so strong that it kept him smoking to the point that he got copd, that it was not the pleasure, it was not the enjoyment, it was addiction that caused him to go on and on and on, which is interesting because dr. -- we had dr. burns say all the way back before he even wanted to quit smoking, before he made that lifestyle change decision in the early '90s, that he already had symptoms of copd. so how can it be that addiction pushed him on? how can that be? so if you do not believe that the plaintiff has satisfied their burden of proving that his addiction satisfied this but for this involuntary smoking, then your answer to that question is no, and, again, you deliberate no further. your 7-81 work is done. all right. now, if unanimously you think that the answer to that question is yes, then you have to go on to this question, and that is: what percentage of responsibility that was a legal cause of plaintiff's copd do you allocate to each of the parties? and, again, there is that term legal cause. and some things you need to know before you even get there -- the court: that is a problem, mr. reilly. mr. reilly: yes, your honor. i understand. before you even get there, you have to know what legal cause requires. and let me show you that little diagram that i showed you in my opening statement. in order for something that philip morris did to be a legal cause of mr. griffin's copd, it has to have had a direct connection with mr. griffin and the decisions he makes about smoking. how -- more than that, it also has to have had -- in other words, he has to have seen it, heard it, has to have had a direct connection. in addition to that, it has to have had a substantial impact. how substantial? so substantial that without having seen it or heard it, it would not have happened. mr. griffin would have not smoked, not begun smoking, not continued to smoke. was there any evidence of that in this case at all? 7-82 none. in light of the story you know about mr. griffin's decisions, i mean, this is only one person's case. this is only one smoker's personal history, so i ask you, in light of that, was there anybody else making the decisions that mr. griffin made? anybody else participating in that any step along the way, really? if the answer is no, there is nobody else, then that is one hundred percent, and you have to ask yourself, in light of this smoking history where mr. griffin begins as a 21-, 21-and-a-half-year-old man who is already known for, what, three, four, five years as a high schooler about the warnings of smoking that are coming out and the surgeon general's report and all of that, sees the warnings on the packs -- this is a guy who starts smoking after the warnings are on the pack. i leave this up to you, but that is the story. if you get this far in the questions in the verdict form, you have to answer the next question: did plaintiff rely to his detriment on the defendant's concealment or omission of material information concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes? well, there is an instruction that goes along with that. what is the operative word? i think it is me. these things simply do not want to write. 7-83 rely. rely to his detriment. that means did he make a decision about smoking, to begin smoking, to become a regular smoker, to continue smoking, to quit or not quit? did he make any of those decisions based on anything that philip morris said or did? and you know the answer to that, because there is no evidence of that in this case, none. absolutely none. so what is the answer to this question? this question must be no, based on the evidence in the case. and if you answer this question no, then you do not go on to this question 6. only if you answered question -- this question yes do you go on to answer the additional requirement of determining whether or not this reliance was a legal cause of his copd. and that is that same test i showed you just a minute ago. he has to have heard it, seen it. it has to have had a substantial impact on his decisions about smoking, and, again, there is no evidence of that. so if you answer this question no, you skip 6, and you go to 8. but if you have -- and the judge may have numbered these differently, but you get the idea. if you answered that question -- those two questions yes, then you have to answer so when, before or after may of '82? in light of the fact that mr. griffin has already acknowledged that he was aware of the warnings, that he was aware of the health risks of smoking in high school, i do not 7-84 know how it could possibly be before or after 1982, but it sure as heck cannot be after 1982. but let us go to question 8. i think i'm out of space. question 8 is very similar to question 5. did the plaintiff rely to his detriment -- again, these keywords -- on the concealment or omission of any information? was there ever any time when mr. griffin, on the stand, said to you, you know what? i would have made a different decision if i'd heard something else. i was waiting to hear from philip morris or somebody connected with philip morris. did he ever say that? never did. and this -- as i said, this is a case about one smoker and one smoker only. so the answer to this question -- this is: did plaintiff rely to his detriment on the concealment information that the defendant made in furtherance of defendant's agreement with others, other cigarette manufacturers, to conceal or omit material information? there is just no evidence of that at all in this case. so if you get this far in the verdict form, the answer here is no. you skip this. and frankly, here's the same set of questions about timing. you skip that too. but then you have to get to this question of if you get this far, if you ever get this far, you have to go to 7-85 damages, right, compensatory damages. and mr. migliori said -- and i already talked about this a little bit -- that he wants to be compensated for lack of a social relationship and he wants to be compensated for the hospitalizations that have nothing to do with his smoking, and that is just -- now, did i agree? yeah, i agreed that from the date that he became totally disabled to age 65, that a lost wage calculation i would stipulate to was $100,000. okay. and, yeah, his lung transplant, the bill for that was 500 and whatever the number is. i'm not disputing those two figures. but you do not have to award either one of those figures. that is entirely up to you. now, mr. migliori did not tell you how much money he wants in -- in pain and suffering damages, and he gets to get back up again. my guess is he is going to get back up again and give you an enormous figure. that is my guess. but that is entirely up to you. this last question says: "please state whether you find by clear and convincing evidence that punitive damages are warranted against philip morris under the circumstances, the circumstances of this case." that is mr. griffin's case. this is about mr. griffin, a connection between mr. griffin and should philip morris be punished for punitive damages. 7-86 in light of this case and the lack of involvement of philip morris and the fact that they cannot satisfy their burden of by a greater weight or the greater preponderance of the evidence -- you know, let me just explain that for just a second because mr. migliori said, "all i've got to do is tip the scales." what that really means is he has to come with a bigger truckload of evidence than i did, and i've just been walking you through the evidence that i brought. that is what he has to do. he has to tip the scale beyond what i did. he does not just have to come in with a scintilla of evidence, just a little tiny bit of evidence. no, no, no, no. he is got to come in with more evidence, more persuasive evidence, than i did, and i've just walked you through what the evidence is in this case. that is their burden. but here on this issue, their burden -- let me just show you the burden. their burden is to show you by clear and convincing evidence rather than just a preponderance of the evidence that you ought to award punitive damages. what does clear and convincing require? clear and convincing evidence is evidence that is more compelling and persuasive. it is evidence which is precise, explicit, lacking in confusion, and of such weight that it produces a firm belief or conviction, without hesitation, about the matter at issue. 7-87 what is the matter in issue? under the circumstances of this case, mr. griffin's case, whether punitive damages should be awarded. now, ladies and gentlemen, there is no precise, explicit, lacking in confusion evidence about philip morris's involvement in mr. griffin's decisions about smoking other than what? that he saw an ad for -- a funny ad for benson & hedges cigarettes. there were other sailors that were offering him benson & hedges cigarettes, so when he bought his first pack, that is what he bought. when he continued to buy cigarettes, that is what he bought. that is it. that is it. and that also is the end of my closing argument. i appreciate you guys have given me -- i've been looking at each of you as i've been giving my closing argument. you have been greatly attentive. i greatly appreciate it. i look forward to your verdict. and now i do not know how much time mr. migliori still has. i think it is in the nature of 10 or 15 minutes, something like that. mr. migliori: about an hour. the court: i do not think so. mr. reilly: oh, my goodness. well, you are in for a treat. bottom line, because he has the burden of proof, he gets to get back up again, and he gets to try one more time, 7-88 another bite at the apple, to try to convince you that what i've been telling you is wrong, that that is not mr. griffin's life. but you sat here and you saw it. you know that is mr. griffin's life. and so i would just ask -- since i do not get to get back up again, i just ask that you guys ask yourselves, whatever he is talking about, just ask yourself, where does that fit in mr. griffin's life? thank you very much.