mr. migliori: thank you, your honor. good morning, ladies and gentlemen. the jurors: good morning. mr. migliori: i thank you. thank you for taking the time to listen. this is a process that we have in this country that does not exist anywhere else. and i know it is a burden on your personal lives, and i know that this has been something you did not schedule into your june, but we really appreciate your attentiveness and your consideration. so on behalf of mr. griffin and the lawyers and team that is here to help present this case to you, again, thank you very much. now, i want to try to go through a lot of the evidence, but not all. and i plan to save about 15 minutes to come back and talk to you again at the end. but this is my last chance to talk directly with you, so i want to make sure that we sort of go back and take a big-picture look at all the things that happened and the reasons why we are here. and i need for you to focus on the first basic idea that this is not a typical case. we are not asking -- i'm going to step in front of that all day. we are not asking you to find whether or not philip morris did something wrong. this is a unique case, because that is been done. there is another jury that is already decided that. the question in this case is only does mr. griffin 7-8 get the benefit of what another jury has already decided. so this is very unique. it is unique in almost every respect. but philip morris was already found to have been negligent. they were already found to have concealed information from the smoker. the question that we are asking you to decide is, does mr. griffin get the benefit of that finding by proving the basic elements of the engle questions. so we started with this, and this is where we are going to ask you to proceed. to be entitled to the findings that philip morris was wrong, we have to go through this roadmap. the first two points, there is absolutely no dispute about. in fact, i'm going to show you that in some other points, there is no dispute. but mr. griffin was at all times relevant -- a resident of florida. being a resident of florida is an important element of proving that he is part of the class. did he have copd? there was only testimony here that he suffered from emphysema and copd. there was no testimony to the contrary. there was no witness to suggest otherwise. the treating physicians in this case are so critically important on so many issues, but you saw dr. cornwell's deposition early in the case, and the term he used was "undoubtedly caused by smoking." and i'm going to show you what the burden of proof is in a minute, but there is no question that mr. griffin had copd. 7-9 so here is where the real battle is, and i want to go through the verdict form. you will get a piece of paper that you will go through the questions to answer each one, and it will follow this procedure, this sort of outline. did mr. griffin's copd or emphysema manifest during the time frame? now, i had a board up where i drew on the board and we showed that the -- from '91 through '96, the chronic exertional dyspnea or the prolonged shortness of breath when he did some exertion was growing in the time frame. no. 3, there was no testimony to the contrary. there was never even an effort to say that that was not true. there was never a question asked to demonstrate that was not true. i do not think that is a disputed point at all, not in the record. the next question: was his addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine? this is the battleground. this is where we are going to spend a lot of time going through the evidence and helping you come up with what we believe is the right answer to that, and we think that is, of course, yes. then the last question is sort of the catchall. was his addiction to philip morris cigarettes the cause or a substantial cause -- you will see the language; the judge will give you the actual law -- was it a substantial cause of his emphysema. and we will show you how that works, but, again, we have undisputed testimony that he had copd, and we have the 7-10 linkage between that and his addiction. so while dr. cornwell said it was undoubted, beyond a reasonable doubt, in his mind, that smoking caused the copd, that is a standard that is different from what you will be instructed in this case. in criminal trials, you have to prove beyond a reasonable doubt to put somebody in prison for life or for a sentence because of the loss of liberty. here in a civil context, the law has a different standard. it does not mean he did not prove it, but the standard that you are going to be applying is, is it more likely true than not? there can be some component part of variability. maybe somebody believes it is eighty percent true; maybe somebody believes it is one hundred percent true; maybe somebody believes it is 52 percent true, but in all three of those examples, that means that the plaintiff, mr. griffin, sustained his burden if it is more likely true, if the scales tip more likely true than not that we have proven each of these different questions, okay? so on behalf of florida smokers, the jury made certain findings that apply to all, and if you determine that mr. griffin is part of that class, what you are saying is he is not left out of those findings. he is not one of the florida smokers who does not get the benefit of the earlier jury's findings that philip morris was negligent, knowingly concealed or omitted material information, entered into an agreement with 7-11 other cigarette manufacturers to conceal or omit material information. that jury already found nicotine is addictive, that smoking cigarettes causes mr. griffin's disease, copd, and that philip morris placed those cigarettes on the market that were defective and unreasonably dangerous. those are findings that you are bound to if you find mr. griffin is a member of the class. so, again, we are here to decide does he get the benefit of what is already been decided? you do not have to find any of these component parts in your deliberations. so if you find that he is a member of the class, one of the questions you are going to be asked is was he fully and fairly compensated; that is, can you come up with a way of fully and fairly compensating mr. griffin for philip morris's responsibility based on those findings? now, there is going to be a lot of discussion about what is mr. griffin's responsibility in this. philip morris has the same burden that we have, to prove that mr. griffin acted unreasonably, that he did something wrong, that he was not reasonable -- mr. reilly: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. mr. migliori, there was a change. mr. migliori: in this case, you will have to decide 7-12 what responsibility mr. griffin has, and i'll help you go through that process and what we think is the right way to decide it. in the end, you will have the opportunity, in addition to compensation, to deliberate on the question of should philip morris be punished for it. should philip morris, in addition to compensating mr. griffin, suffer a punishment for concealing information, its negligence, putting a defective product on the market, acting in a way that caused harm to mr. griffin. so let us go through the questions. the very first question that we anticipate on the verdict form is: did mr. patrick griffin's copd first manifest itself on or before november 21st, 1996? dr. burns came here. you saw his credentials. dr. burns participated in every single surgeon general's report since 1975. he is here as an expert. he testifies in many of these cases. he is here to talk about the smoking health consequences. and in this case, after looking at all of mr. griffin's medical records, he said there is no question that between 1990 and 1996, mr. griffin's copd manifested itself. the symptoms of it began to appear. we will go through some of those. in '91 there is the scuba event. he goes to take a scuba lesson, recognizes he is got tremendous shortness of breath. it scares him. he starts the process of wanting to 7-13 try to quit. 1995, he has a job, has a hard time keeping up physically with the job. he ends up losing his job because he cannot carry things that are heavy because upon exertion, he cannot keep his breath. same year, he becomes a taxi driver because he does not have that heavy lifting job anymore, and he suffers shortness of breath during the tasks of lifting bags. he goes to his doctor in october. he complains about it. talks about walks on the beach that cause him to -- actually described as actually scaring him. he ends up going to the va outpatient in november of the next year, still within the class period, complaining of shortness of breath or the dyspnea ongoing for the past year, and he continues to try to quit smoking. two weeks, three weeks outside of the class period, then we have a medical note from the va where -- or, i'm sorry, from his treating physician, where he says in the record -- the doctor says in the record that he has chronic exertional dyspnea ongoing for the past year, manifestation going back for the past year. during that whole time, it was very much appreciated that it was related to his smoking for mr. griffin. so we believe the first question, did he manifest, the answer is yes. there is no evidence to the contrary. the second question is: was mr. griffin or was the 7-14 plaintiff addicted to smoking cigarettes? now, ladies and gentlemen, you have heard experts here. in fact, you have heard experts being paid a large amount of money to go to each one of these cases, sometimes multiple cases in the same week, you heard, go to each one of these cases and testify. they are honest people. they are doing their best. but the thing that is most telling, in my mind, about the quality of evidence is what you see from the treating physicians, the people that were actually there at the time treating mr. griffin for the purpose of making him better. those doctors are the ones that we see the most amount of information about what he went through, why he went through it, and what he was experiencing. from his testimony, from his medical treating physicians, from the surgeon general's reports and definitions, from the national institute of health definitions, from dr. difranza's expert testimony, the answer to no. 2 is yes. why? let us go to the medical records. it is not accidental that there is an icd-9 billing code with a diagnosis. that is put into the computer. that is put into the system because it is treating a disease in the hospital. hospitals do not carelessly handle information about diagnoses of patients. you heard yesterday dr. kaplan say that he trained in 7-15 a va years ago, not on tobacco, but he trained in the va long ago, and this was just put in the computer; they always do that at smoking cessation clinics. that is not true. that is not true, ladies and gentlemen. this icd-9 code, that is actually out of the dsm-iv that dr. kaplan uses, and the icd-9 code, the 305.1 says nicotine dependence, nicotine use disorder. dr. kaplan, their expert, admitted that is addiction. so is that in the record? it is absolutely in the record. this is the va clinic for smoking cessation. you see that there is the icd-9 code for nicotine dependence, tobacco use disorder. what is also important about this, ladies and gentlemen, is he is going to a cessation clinic after he quit. he is not smoking while he is going here. why would a person who is not addicted to cigarettes, who can just quit, just non -- without help, quit, why would he go to smoking cessation clinics multiple times after quitting if it were that easy? in the va records, you have got dsm-5 criteria where -- i'll show you the dsm-5 is what is in effect as of may of last year. now they use the term tobacco use disorder. well, in the va records, that very term, history of tobacco use disorder, august 2013, when the dsm-5 is in effect. history of. back to 2002, it is not just the billing code that says it, the staff takes the time to say under a, under 7-16 assessment or diagnosis, "mr. griffin has nicotine dependence." dr. kaplan tells you that that is equivalent to addiction. this is a medical record in 2002 at the time by people trying to help him quit. these are not experts. these are not forensic people. these are not people that are trying to convince or help a jury understand one view or another. these are people trying to take care of a human being, and they assessed him as nicotine dependent. that should have a high weight. this is a person who is an addiction therapist, specializing in addiction. and on multiple occasions -- this is the second visit, this is the third visit, all with nicotine dependence. by the fourth visit, there is even a representation that he is getting better; that he is actually trying and it is actually working. you heard about the withdrawal and how it takes time and it takes days, but you start to get better. and dr. kaplan just sort of waved all that off, all the anxieties lasted forever, all the symptoms lasted forever. here's a comment in the medical record in 2002 saying "this patient, although still smokeless, has stopped smoking, is dependent, but he is getting better." you wonder if withdrawal is not, in fact, part of mr. griffin's recovery from smoking. then you heard that, well, that cannot be true because 7-17 that is not a doctor, it is just an addiction therapist at a smoking cessation clinic that defendants were critical of mr. griffin for not doing earlier. now that he is done it and the smoking cessation clinic says he is nicotine dependent, they are saying, "oh, that clinic. that clinic just put that in there. they did not know what they were writing when they called him addicted." well, here are some doctors' notes, if the addiction specialists are not enough. you saw this report yesterday. final report of st. vincent's medical center. this is in 2013. it is not nursing. it is not addiction therapists. it is an attending physician, that is a doctor, that is a medical doctor, consulting with a pulmonary doctor and an infectious disease doctor and a nephrologist, and they are looking at his entire complex as a human being. these are the different diagnoses of a human being. this is what he is going through. history of tobacco use disorder. that is not a careless word. that is not a word that is not precise. that is not doctors just sticking something in the record. that is a very specific term. why is it a specific term and why is it repeated twice? on the second page, they talk about the history of copd and history of tobacco use disorder. why is it repeated twice? because that is what is -- and why do they use the term? it is because that is the term of dsm-5, tobacco use disorder, which 7-18 is addiction. so let us talk about the experts on this topic. dr. difranza, who testified very early in the trial, wrote chapters in the '89 and '94 u.s. surgeon general's report. he is cited in the united states surgeon general's reports 20 times. he is cited by philip morris in pamphlets that philip morris is putting out to the public. he is an invited speaker by the fda. he wrote a book on smoking cessation. he wrote book chapters on addictions. he teaches at universities and medical schools about addictions. over 30 research grants to study addiction, and wrote 116 peer-reviewed articles related to smoking and addiction. remember, peer-reviewed means it is not my opinion only. it is that this is good science based on the other scientists in my field who reviewed this before it was allowed to be published. 116 peer-reviewed articles. i will not go through all of them, but for dr. kaplan, he did not publish in any of those areas. he became a smoking addiction expert when, in 1997, he serendipitously met up with mr. reilly on a plane and became an expert in this litigation. even today, 1 to 2 percent of his practice has to do with smoking cessation. when the surgeon general changed its definition in 1988 to take intoxication out of the definition of addiction so 7-19 that smokers could be properly diagnosed, in the surgeon general's opinion, with addiction, he kept it in his. although he was still in school, still a resident, he never accepted that smokers could be addicted until 2000, after he became an expert, and also, as you heard from mr. jupe, after the philip morris announcement to the world in 1999, finally, that smoking is addictive. you remember in 1994 they even got up in front of congress. they raised their hand and said, "smoking is not addictive." he maintained that if you were a smoker and a patient of his in 1995, he would have said, under the definition that is not used by the surgeon general, "you are not addicted under any circumstance because cigarettes do not cause intoxication." so to be right, dr. kaplan has to establish that all these other folks are wrong. remember, we showed you the nida definition for addiction? he does not agree with that. the u.s. surgeon general's definition of addiction in '88, he does not agree with that. the veterans administration diagnoses that i just showed you, does not agree with those. st. vincent's medical center, the doctors, the team of doctors worrying about mr. griffin's care who diagnose him as having a history of tobacco use disorder, they are wrong. and, of course, the expert who came here to explain it to you with the scales and how people go on and off and 7-20 relapse and fit the definition, the nida definition, the national institutes of health definition, the surgeon general's definition. dr. difranza came to tell you that, yes, in fact, mr. griffin was addicted to the nicotine in philip morris cigarettes. we can go through all the checklists. i do not have a lot of time, but we can go through the checklists of the dsm-5. it is not the only criteria. it is the one that dr. kaplan chooses to use. dr. kaplan gives you three. we actually had dr. difranza show you how eight of them apply. you heard the testimony. you heard the testimony of how things are different than what mr. kaplan -- or dr. kaplan suggested. dr. kaplan always had a reason why some piece of evidence did not fit. but you can look at any of these tools. you can take the most basic one that dr. difranza used as a clinician called honc. you can discard it if you want, but he said that all ten things that are examples of addiction for people he treats were present in mr. griffin. the fagerstrom is not a diagnostic test. it does not say whether you are addicted or not. it says being addicted, how severely addicted are you? so this is not just about whether he is addicted. this is how severe of an addiction mr. griffin had. dr. kaplan never bothered to take that approach, but 7-21 dr. difranza did, and he found that mr. kaplan -- i'm sorry, that mr. griffin was not only addicted, but he was severely addicted. and then the dsm-5, applying the criteria that both people said. again, i'm going to leave it to you. i'm going to leave it to you. dr. difranza testified that 60 cigarettes a day, based on the scientific literature, one hundred percent of smokers who smoke this many cigarettes in a day every day, or on some days only 20, but if you are between 20 and 60 cigarettes a day, 100 percent of those people are addicted. and he supports that using three different tools and two different definitions, not limiting himself to one and then restricting his view of the evidence to fit. under the nida definition alone, you can find that mr. griffin was addicted, and that is as simple as this. "addiction is defined as a chronic, relapsing brain disease that is characterized by compulsive drug seeking and use, despite harmful consequences." he used it chronically. 70 pack-years, according to dr. kaplan. he relapsed. very importantly, this is a brain disease. this is not an issue of choice at this stage. we will talk about choice when we talk about fault later. addiction. if he is addicted, it is a brain disease. it is a yes or no. it is not a percentage. it is a brain disease 7-22 by compulsive drug seeking and use despite its harmful consequences. the warning on the side of the pack and continuing to smoke. classically, mr. griffin fits this definition. and you saw studies that actually show this is not just a choice. this is not willpower. addiction is a brain disease. if he is addicted, it is because his brain has been affected by the insult of chemicals. and to undo that, mr. griffin went through several different aids to help him stop feeling and stop having the compulsion to continue to have the next cigarette, and you heard the testimony about those various forms of treatment. and dr. burns came in here and said very clearly that former smokers are at an increased risk of relapse for a period of five years. so whether he quit for one month, three months, one year, or two years, your brain does not just stop being sick. he still talks about leaving his building and walking through the gauntlet of smokers who smoke outside his building and having that need, feeling that compulsion to want to smoke again. but now that he is out of it, and now that his compromised lung is so bad, he fights that every day. but to get there, to break the addiction, he had to go through it multiple times over a period of ten years. how do we know he was interested? how do we know he 7-23 wanted to quit? again, please put the time into these medical records. these are people that are looking at him as a human being, as a patient, not as a person in a courtroom. 1995, the medical records say he is very interested in stopping smoking. 1998: "patrick seems very motivated to stop tobacco -- his tobacco." wants zyban. a telephone message. he calls in and says he wants zyban. 2000: "has not been able to quit on his own." 2000: "quit smoking times one year ago -- two years ago for one year with help of three months of zyban." he needed the aid to quit. it is not just about choice for mr. griffin. "has some wellbutrin left over from when he temporarily quit two years ago." another example of using aids to quit but relapsing. classic definition of addiction. states that he desires to stop smoking in 2001, just before, ultimately, at the end of that year, he finally does quit. why? because he almost died. he spent be more than three weeks in a coma, found by a relative in his apartment alone, and he realized at that point he cannot continue. he cannot. and so after ten years of struggling, the classic definition, he finally quit. dr. kaplan talked about all the withdrawal symptoms he felt, the frustrations, the anxieties. blew them all off though because he said, well, he felt those too long. those are not classic withdrawal symptoms. then he tells you all 7-24 these reasons why he did quit, but dr. kaplan agreed and admitted that all of these feelings of enjoyment and happiness and relief from stress, all of those feelings are feelings that people who are addicted can feel because of the neurotransmitters that make you feel that way. these are not reasons why he chose to smoke. these are the impact of what cigarettes and nicotine in cigarettes give the smoker. and the industry knew that, and we will go over why they knew that. do not forget, each one of these things -- do not forget, the tobacco industry -- or dr. kaplan said fifty percent of people who smoke are addicted. fifty percent of people who smoke are addicted. one hundred percent of people who smoke this much, 60 cigarettes in a day, are addicted. so we will go through this quickly, but the surgeon general talks about it at length: "cigarettes and other forms of tobacco are addicting and nicotine is the drug that causes the addiction." this is important. in talking to doctors, the surgeon general said, "recognizing tobacco use as an addiction is critical, both for treating the tobacco user and for understanding why people continue to use tobacco despite the known health risks. you are going to see today, and you have seen in this case, reader's digest from before mr. griffin was even born, 7-25 never mind before he started smoking, where the defendants will say, "that is why he knew better, and he chose to smoke. this was something he just wanted to do," a bunch of articles in reader's digest, before he even was born. the surgeon general, who is focused on the health of smokers, says that addiction is the reason why some people smoke even though there are known risks that are being talked about in the public. so we get to the third question: was the addiction to smoking cigarettes containing nicotine a legal cause of his copd? now, a legal cause is just a phrase that means was it a substantial cause of his disease. was it a -- not the only. was it a substantial cause leading to the disease? we actually have this, i think, as clearly as the evidence could possibly be. dr. burns testifies to it, dr. cornwell, the treating physician, testifies to it, mr. griffin's testimony, the records themselves, and dr. difranza. remember, in 1959, before philip morris was ever purchased -- before any cigarette was ever purchased by mr. griffin, in 1959 philip morris knew that its cigarettes had components that led to chronic bronchitis and emphysema. 1963, i'm sorry. internal documents. they knew before he picked up 7-26 his first cigarette that it caused the disease that he ended up suffering. not only that, they knew that a number of experts have predicted that the cigarette industry ultimately may be in greater trouble in this area, that is, in emphysema, than in lung cancer. in 1963, philip morris realized that the disease that mr. griffin has actually may be a bigger problem in terms of health effects than cancer. they knew that before he started smoking cigarettes. so dr. burns will tell you the copd caused -- was caused by philip morris cigarettes, and he actually said that but for -- that is, without philip morris cigarettes, he would not have gotten it. but for smoking philip morris cigarettes, mr. griffin would not have developed copd. and despite the fact that i wanted this slide changed, it is a cumulative injury. it is an injury that keeps happening. every puff is another exposure to tar. every puff is another exposure to nicotine. they make you come back for more. the more the nicotine, the more the toxins, the more the disease. mr. griffin's severe copd was undoubtedly caused by his smoking, and smoking, according to the surgeon general, is a result of behavioral and pharmacologic factors that lead to highly controlled or compulsive use of cigarettes. you have heard mr. reilly talk at length about control. 7-27 mr. griffin told you, "i did not control the cigarettes. i feel like they controlled me," and that is the classic definition of addiction. so richard jupe on video testified that tar and nicotine go hand in hand. you cannot separate tar and nicotine in the philip morris cigarette. so when you are taking in all of these exposures to tar, you are taking in all these exposures to nicotine. the two of them work together. nicotine addiction is the fundamental reason that individuals persist in using tobacco products -- mr. reilly: objection, your honor. this is not in evidence. mr. migliori: absolutely. the court: this is the 2010 surgeon general report. it is not in evidence. mr. migliori: it is not in evidence. it was a demonstrative used with the last witness. mr. reilly: it was taken out. it was not shown. the court: take it down. the jury will disregard. mr. migliori: that is not -- your honor, we will move on. we will show the reference later. this is the legal cause component. nicotine addiction causes smokers to continue to smoke. you are addicted, you take another smoke. you take another smoke, not only do you get more nicotine, you get more tar, you get more 7-28 danger. that is what leads to copd. that is all -- that is all legal cause is. is this process of nicotine addiction a substantial cause of the copd in mr. griffin? and the answer to that, we believe, is yes. so if you answer yes to the first three questions, then the way this works is that the engle findings then become applicable to mr. griffin. philip morris was negligent. they concealed information. and philip morris starts at complete fault. that is where they start. now, what is mr. griffin's fault? how do we calculate, if any, what fault mr. griffin has? on question 4, this is where you will have to decide. how much choice did mr. griffin have? at what point was choice taken from him? does philip morris's concealment of information get a pass? do they not hold any responsibility for what happened to mr. griffin, for the copd and the lung transplant? this is where you get to decide. if you think that mr. griffin completely had choice, completely had the ability to quit, had no addiction, did not fight, did not struggle, did not express a desire to quit, did not try to quit using aids, if you find all of that to be true, then mr. griffin's 100 percent at fault, but that is not the evidence, ladies and gentlemen. philip morris is one hundred percent at fault until you can show that mr. griffin bears some responsibility, and that is 7-29 where you have to decide. when someone gets addicted -- and the testimony here is that he was addicted within the first year of smoking, from the 1960s -- what percentage of fault do you put on the smoker who then becomes addicted and cannot get out of the cycle? we are going to talk about the doubt and controversy campaign and how tobacco actually used the process of creating doubt in the smoker's mind as a way of keeping them smoking that next cigarette, creating that psychological crutch to continue smoking. but it is about responsibility and control, but it is about philip morris's responsibility and control. tobacco institute in 1980, the same institute that philip morris belonged to, wrote: "we cannot defend continued smoking as free choice if the person was addicted. it is not about choice anymore when a smoker is addicted." you cannot defend that. that is not my words. that is not our expert's words. that is the tobacco institute's view. if the smoker's addicted, you cannot defend this as choice. philip morris created the environment where it was the social norm to smoke cigarettes. you heard that from dr. proctor. philip morris created a product, a mass marketed product, that is highly addictive. they knew that going back to the '50s. they engineered their cigarettes in a way to sustain addiction. it was not just enough to get the smoker addicted. 7-30 it was about getting the smoker addicted and keeping the smoker addicted. philip morris did not disclose its knowledge that cigarettes are addictive and difficult to quit. they got before congress and said it was not, when internally they had known since the '50s it was. do they get a pass for that? in 1999, jupe said they finally admitted that it caused copd. in 1999, they finally admitted what they knew back in the '60s and '50s, that it was addictive. do they get a pass for that? do they get one hundred percent freedom of responsibility or liability to mr. griffin when they intentionally engaged in that campaign to keep him and sustain him as a smoker? philip morris created an environment where there was doubt and controversy about health hazards. they did not do anything to help people quit. and as a member of an industry, it knew that its product -- every year they had this doubt and controversy campaign, every year, they knew that its product was killing more than 400,000 americans a day -- i'm sorry, a year. how did they do it? well, you heard from dr. proctor the technology changed. really, the 1900s was the growth of cigarette smoking. you are going to see the chart of consumption. well, it is exactly the same chart as the information was made available. but the bonsack machine is 7-31 what made it a mass marketable product. you heard about flue curing and how that actually allowed for cigarettes to be more easily inhaled, that it is brought deeper into the lungs, which causes more profound disease like the copd dr. burns described with that stocking. mass marketing was the effort to actually steamroll over any kind of effort to get the word out, whether it be reader's digest from the '40s or the surgeon general reports. the mass marketing is what got the message out that it was acceptable, it was okay, and that it was not harmful. and there was an article that you saw about the pervasiveness of it. there was nothing larger in our society, in our history, than the nationwide campaign of the tobacco industry to promote its product. you heard and saw these psas. the very last thing you heard in the trial was a public service announcement. i think that was from the american cancer institute. just to understand perspective, one year of spending on public service announcements was the equivalent of one day of the tobacco industry spending on advertising its cigarettes as pleasurable. 360 times more money was spent by the tobacco industry steamrolling their message about cigarettes and their social acceptability than public service announcements of cowboys coughing in a saloon. $250 billion over 60 years was spent on advertising, 7-32 and you will see that the growth of consumption peaks almost exactly where? mr. griffin started smoking. what better evidence than you show the consumption of cigarettes, and mr. griffin entering into the consumption history right at the peak, right when it was most socially acceptable, right when the tobacco industry was at its peak of getting smokers to start and keeping them smoking. it is sensitive. sorry. this is now the ftc, federal trade commission, 1967. the important thing to pull out of this is that there is no indication in any of that -- all of that spending and advertising that a person smokes cigarettes regularly for a while, smoking is no longer a matter of choice for him but becomes a matter of need. nowhere in the advertisement do they suggest anything about the compulsive needs of a person who is addicted to cigarettes, the regular smoker. the dominant themes are that smoking is youthful; vigor; good health; good looks; personal, social, and professional acceptance and success; compatible with a wide range of athletic and healthful activities. interestingly, these benson & hedges cigarettes that he smoked in the '60s, when he was starting, there was a concern by the ftc that there is a trend towards using the benson & hedges extra long cigarettes in 1966, the very year he started smoking. this trend is of a serious and disturbing 7-33 nature since these extra long cigarettes are also -- also expose the smoker to greater amounts of tar and nicotine, making them potentially more hazardous than the shorter length cigarettes. that is not conveyed to mr. griffin. the attitude of men we must directly deal with in the industry is that once -- interesting and important for us to understand -- one of the men said, "it is fortunate for us that cigarettes are a habit they cannot break." hill & knowlton is that advertising agency, that pr agency, that helped the industry with the frank statement to create a message about their commitment to the public health. and when they interviewed executives from the tobacco industry, they reported that they understood that it was fortunate that cigarettes were a habit that smokers cannot break. they appreciated the addictive nature of their product. in 1959 -- now, you saw a big chart from mr. reilly about why mr. griffin smoked. not once did he put the word addiction on there. not once did you see addiction. philip morris, in 1959, why do people smoke, underlined "do," why do they smoke? physiological reasons. addiction. that was appreciated seven years before mr. griffin started smoking in internal philip morris documents. they do not admit it in '94 to congress. they do not admit it until 1999, after mr. griffin gets copd. in 1959 you also see other examples. this is not just 7-34 one random internal document. this is another example of philip morris understanding why people smoke. "one of the main reasons people smoke is to experience the physiological effects of nicotine on the human system." 1972, philip morris: "motives and incentives in cigarette smoking. no one has ever become a cigarette smoker by smoking cigarettes without nicotine. most of the physiological responses to inhaled smoke have been shown to be nicotine related. despite many low-nicotine brand entries into the marketplace, none of them have captured a substantial segment of the market." they understand that nicotine is their product. they understand that addiction is the way they keep the smoker smoking. same document: "the cigarette should be conceived not as a product but as a package. the product is nicotine. the cigarette is but one of many layers. there is the carton, which contains the pack, which contains the cigarette, which contains the smoke. the smoke is the final package. the smoker must strip all of these package layers to get that which he seeks. nicotine." in 1978, again, philip morris, internal document. this is very important. "we think that most smokers can be considered nicotine seekers for the pharmacological effect of 7-35 nicotine is one of the rewards that comes from smoking. when the smoker quits, he foregoes his accustomed nicotine. the change is very noticeable. he misses the reward, and he returns to smoking." philip morris, in 1978, understood relapse, understood the balances of scales that dr. difranza showed you of getting up and getting off and coming back and needing more. he called it the homeostasis. they understood in '78. they understood that keeping the smoker smoking is what continued to sell their product. in the psychology program review in '77, there are some distinctive features about the cigarette market. "we sell a product that is bought often be and used from 10 to 60 times a day." in mr. griffin, 60 times a day, day in, day out. "we provide a product that is essentially a commodity in a habitual act. it is inevitable, therefore, that we focus on habit formation and habit maintenance." let me say that differently: we focus on getting the smoker smoking, habit formation, and keeping the smoker smoking, habit maintenance. that is addiction. philip morris internal memoranda, 1980: "nicotine is a powerful pharmacological agent which multiple sites of action may be the most important component of cigarette smoke." "nicotine and understanding its properties are important to the continued well-being of our cigarette 7-36 business. this alkaloid has been cited often as the reason for smoking and the theories have been advanced for nicotine penetration." it is why smokers smoke. i have to go a little bit faster now, but my reason -- and this is, again, an internal document in the '80s: "my reason for this high priority is that i believe that the thing we sell most is nicotine." the responsibility and the control was in philip morris's hands to control what it was that they were taking in, that smokers were taking in, and how much of it they were taking in. philip morris had control of the design. they knew that nicotine is addictive since the '50s. philip morris has had the resources to develop a nonaddictive cigarette, and philip morris has had no project to develop a nonaddictive cigarette. instead, they go before congress and they tell them it is not addictive as late as 1994. so what is doubt and controversy? well, doubt and controversy, as you heard from dr. proctor, is the effort to keep the smoker smoking. you create the doubt in the smoker's mind. you get up -- every time somebody says something about smoking being bad, you get up and say, "it has not been proven." the net effect, the smoker that smokes continues to smoke. 7-37 that is not my description of it. that is the tobacco institute's description of it. this document here, philip morris in 1964. this is before mr. griffin starts to smoke. "the restraint and unity of the industry has been very effective in this period. opponents have had their inning. the industry has demonstrated its seriousness and responsibility in saying that we would study the report. however, at some point, reflecting the same seriousness with which we met the report, meaning the surgeon general's report in '64, we must in the near future provide some answers which will give smokers a psychological crutch and self-rationale to continue smoking." keep the smoker smoking. philip morris completely denies it causes disease through 1999. the consensus was linking copd and emphysema back in the '60s. they publicly denied it through the tobacco institute in the '70s and in the '80s. the doubt and controversy campaign by the tobacco institute that by their own admission, philip morris is a member: "our basic position on the cigarette controversy is subject to the charge and may be subject to a finding that we are making false or misleading statements to promote the sale of cigarettes. smokers must perceive and understand and believe in evidence to sustain their opinions that smoking may not be the 7-38 causal factor." this is about keeping doubt in the smoker's mind so they continue to smoke. and when it comes to this campaign to create the ctr, in order to tell the public in 1954 that health was their paramount concern, in reality, they admit what the ctr was for. it was not for real research. "we are interested in evidence which we believe denies the allegations that smoking causes disease." they were interested only in creating further doubt and controversy about whether smoking causes these diseases. they actually applauded and congratulated themselves. "for nearly 20 years, this industry, the tobacco industry, has employed a single strategy to defend itself on three major fronts: litigation, politics, and public opinion. while the strategy was brilliantly conceived and executed over the years, helping us win important battles, it is only fair to say that it is not, nor was it intended to be, a vehicle for victory. on the contrary, it has always been a holding strategy consisting of creating doubt about the health charge without actually denying it." 1972, on the roper proposal, the tobacco industry tells you what their strategy was and how for 20 years at that point it was brilliantly conceived and carried out to keep the smoker smoking. and the ftc points out how it was successful. 7-39 millions of smokers in 1981 still do not know that smoke is a harmful habit. dr. proctor talks about throughout the decades how it was not fully appreciated. the documents you saw demonstrate that it was not fully appreciated. in 1906 you saw the florida health notes that mr. reilly showed you talk about today the cigarette is looked upon by all smokers as the very worst form of tobacco addiction, as if somehow that is a public truism that everybody should be held to. and yet almost a hundred years later, 88 years later, they are still getting up in front of congress and saying it is not true. they want mr. griffin to be held to the standard of knowing reader's digest articles from before he is born, but they get up in front of congress in '94 to say it is not. why? why did all these news stories come out? why are all these publications coming out? because it is news. why is it news? because the message was not getting through to the smoker. why was not it getting through? because of the marketing and the doubt and controversy. and how does one know the message was not getting through? look at the evidence. look at the ftc reports. look at the evidence. philip morris does not own up to it until 1999. they do not own up to cancer, emphysema, or addiction. they even 7-40 argue with companies that come out, like dow chemical, with aids to help people quit. you saw evidence that they had an interaction with dow chemical, who had been developing the nicorette gum and a program to help people quit. philip morris did not embrace them. "through a series of meetings over a few years, dow has been repeatedly advised of our displeasure over the antismoking nature of dow merrell's program." yet, they promised to stop selling cigarettes if they ever found anything in them to be harmful. you saw those clips with dr. proctor. they never did that. philip morris hurt mr. griffin by making the choices it made. mr. griffin became a smoker in the navy in 1966 because of the social norm philip morris helped to create. they created a highly addictive product and mass marketed it, and mr. griffin became addicted. and he remained addicted as a result of the sustained doubt and controversy and because he had smoked so much that he had become controlled by the cigarette. he started smoking without knowing of the addictive nature of cigarettes or its harmful effects. and he struggled to quit. he struggled to quit for ten years. his copd is so bad that he ultimately had to get his lung transplanted. suppose everyone just smoked one less cigarette a 7-41 day. why would the tobacco industry do this? it is simple. one less cigarette a day -- in one of the documents you saw it. back in 1954 dollars, if everyone smoked one less cigarette, that would be $700,000 a day of loss. every next cigarette that you will say, well, i'll just have one more, that is the value of it to the industry. all right. i'm going to do this part very, very quickly. but did the plaintiffs rely to their detriment? they did. understand here, did mr. griffin rely to his detriment on the concealment? understand, you are talking about relying on something that he did not know about. he did not know about all the things that philip morris knew. he did not know about them. he told you that. he did not know about the '54 memo. he did not know about the '59 memo. did he rely to his detriment on what was omitted, on what was kept from him? of course he did. he kept smoking through that entire period. did he rely on the concealment or omission of material information concerning the health effects? same thing. he relied on it. he relied on what they did not admit or own up to through '99. and he relied on things that were said publicly. he relied on what was out there. we think you should check "yes" for both of those reliance questions. and that information spans from the '50s through '94, when they get before congress 7-42 and say it is not addictive, through '99 when they finally admit that it causes emphysema. reliance. philip morris never admitted any of those things until it was too late. has plaintiff proved his reliance on the concealment made in furtherance of defendant's agreement with other cigarette manufacturers? this is another way of saying not just philip morris, but in the group of tobacco companies like the tobacco institute where all the companies participated, did mr. griffin rely on their omissions, on the things they had hid from mr. griffin? we think the answer to that is also yes; and we think that that spans the entire span of his smoking history. so this is the compensatory. so this is what you are going to do. at this point, if you get to this stage in the questions, there is one line for what the compensation is for mr. griffin. now, that one line, however, you will hear from the instructions, has multiple component parts. it is undisputed that the lost earnings in this case are $100,000. both sides have stipulated to it. we read it to you. it is undisputed that the medical bills in this case are $584,200. now, what is important about this is that if you find him to be a member and if you find that philip morris bears a percentage of fault, the number that you put here is not the percentage number. you put the full amount of what you believe 7-43 it to be. even though both sides agree that it is 100,000, if you decide that it is 100,000 based on undisputed evidence, the number you put in here should be 100,000 for lost earnings. if there is a percentage applied to that, you do not do that here. you put the full amount here of what the damage is. this is not where you reduce the amount based on percentages of fault. that is done completely separately. that is important, because if you find that we have proven our case and you believe that these are the economic losses of earnings and medical bills and you accept what both parties have put here as stipulated amounts, this total amount would be $684,253 on this line just for the economic losses. the percentages get applied totally separately. the pain and suffering is the component that you are going to get an instruction about, and this is where you get to decide what, if anything, mr. griffin is entitled to for all of those years of trying to quit, not being able to quit, losing his jobs, losing his relationships, getting to a point where his lung was working at 16 percent of what it should be, passing out, being found by a relative, being in a hospital in a coma for 21 days. this is where the pain and suffering component is added. so whatever number you put for this value of pain and suffering, you would add it to these others and put a total number of those in this one line. and the apportionment, the 7-44 percentage of fault that you give to mr. griffin, that is handled later. do not apply the percentages of fault in this if you accept the numbers. he had a life of copd. he endured a lung transplant, diminished lung capacity. he has to use oxygen now just to get around. his life expectancy is diminished. you heard dr. cornwell, his treating doctor, say that he is got a 25 percent chance of living five more years. one lung is actually impinging on the other lung. the medications needed to keep that lung there are causing further toxic damage to his body. this is life with copd. he is gone through hundreds of doctors appointments. he is lost his livelihood. you saw what it was like to go through that surgery. but i do not want you to have -- this is not about empathy or sympathy or pity. this is about responsibility for actions. dr. cornwell, in addition to these survival statistics, said something very, very important. he said to get a transplant, he had to be a good person, he had to have good health, he had to have good social structure, he had to have good family and friends. they would not have given him a lung if he did not have all of those qualities beforehand because lungs are too precious. mr. griffin has a desire to live. he has a desire to be in a relationship. he has a desire to work. cornwell tells you that. this is not a man who is asking for your pity. he is 7-45 asking for you to be a part of a finding that a jury came to many years ago. he asked to be included in a group of people that have already found -- have already been included to have the benefit of a finding that philip morris did something wrong, and they need to take responsibility for it. then you are going to be asked whether or not they should be punished. they should be punished. you get to decide how. the standard's higher. it is closer to criminal. it is not criminal. the judge will explain what that is. but in addition to what he should recover as compensatory damages for his pain and suffering and for his loss of economics, they should be punished, and you get to decide what that amount is. philip morris gave mr. griffin the psychological crutch to keep going. philip morris put a product on the market that it knew, before mr. griffin smoked his first cigarette, was addictive and caused the disease that he has. i want to thank you so much for your time. i want to thank you for your consideration. on behalf of mr. griffin, we hope that you go back and take your time to go through the evidence, to look at the medical records, to appreciate what the treaters really said about this man, and return a verdict for mr. griffin for what you think is fair, and we think that you should return it where you accept and acknowledge and find that philip morris bears a responsibility to this man as well. thank you so much. 7-46 thank you, your honor. mr. migliori: thank you, your honor. okay. i do not have an hour. i have probably ten minutes. but there are a few things that i just want to clarify. you know, this whole case seems to be defended on the idea to create doubt about mr. griffin's credibility. mr. reilly: objection, your honor. the court: just a minute. i'm sorry, mr. reilly. mr. reilly: the whole case is predicated on the concept of creating doubt. the court: it is argument, mr. reilly. overruled. mr. migliori: thank you, your honor. do i get that time back? the court: it was three-and-a-half seconds. mr. migliori: okay. it is predicated upon creating doubt in your minds, but think about -- i think mr. reilly took a shot saying that i was glossing over the medical records. in the 120 slides i showed you, i do not think i glossed. i think i tried to cover what our burden is, that is proving to you some things, but i want to show you some things. i'll slow down for him on a couple points. the manifestation, the law that he showed you, he 7-90 made it sound like it is when a doctor associates the shortness of breath with his condition, and that is not the law. that is not the law. the manifestation issue is decided by when mr. griffin associates the symptoms -- he agrees, mr. reilly agrees, that he had copd. but the symptoms of copd, the chronic exertional dyspnea that we see in the medical records, it is when mr. griffin appreciates that those symptoms are associated with smoking that matter on the first question of manifestation. so when does mr. griffin put the two together, that his shortness of breath is smoking related? 1991, you see it in the scuba record. he showed it to you. i'm not going to gloss over it. i'm just not going to show it to you again. in 1995, again, mr. griffin associates that with smoking. it is also true of the taxi driver. but i am going to show you this one october of 1995 medical record that mr. reilly did show you because it is in the record. it is not just mr. griffin's testimony. the manifestation issue is when mr. griffin puts the two together. apparently he was walking on the beach with his girlfriend and he really got winded, and that is when it really struck him that he probably needed to do something about it. do something about what? "he has quit at one time in the past but started back up. he will sometimes smoke as many as three packs a day." 7-91 it was his complete awareness that his smoking was related to -- his shortness of breath was related to smoking that is the manifestation issue that you are going to have to decide. doctors question etiology because their job is to find out the diagnosis, but that is not the law. and you will see in the instructions it is not when he is diagnosed, it is when mr. griffin appreciates that his shortness of breath is associated with smoking, and it is right there plain as day in the class period. so the first question should be dispensed of easily. but if you go back to that original slide -- gina -- and, of course, on the -- in 1996 in december, it is very clear that that is been a complaint for the past year, going back into the period. but these are the other bits of evidence about mr. griffin, mr. griffin's association of shortness of breath with his smoking. now, there is another confusion created in this in how philip morris defends this case, because it talks about the importance of the medical records but yet not once did mr. reilly ever talk to you about the diagnoses of mr. griffin by his treating physicians with addiction. he did not put those slides up. he did not put a board up. he never once tried to deal with it. he did not show that record when he put dr. kaplan on the stand to explain that addiction was diagnosed by his own treating doctors. that is 7-92 part of the doubt. if you only look at some things, you will get the result that you are looking for, and that is how this case is defended. there is discussion about when mr. reilly -- i'm sorry, mr. griffin finally got so sick that he became unconscious and went into a coma. please look at that record. there are 8,000 pages, i regret, of medical records, over half a million dollars worth of medical care. i wish i never had to put that into evidence for you, but that is my burden, representing and giving voice to this man. but if you actually look in december of 2001, what happened to him when he was in a coma for three weeks or more, all over the records you will see respiratory failure. you heard testimony that his lungs were functioning at 16 percent. there is no question why he was in the hospital at that time. his addiction caused him to smoke so much that he got so much exposure to tars in cigarettes, in philip morris cigarettes, that he had his lung function down to 16 percent in a form called copd. that is legal cause. legal cause is not clear and convincing evidence, like the punitive damage standard. it is did we more likely prove, or not, that he was addicted and that addiction cause his smoking-related disease. we have proved more than just barely, or i think the 7-93 term mr. reilly used was scintilla of evidence. all the work done on this case to present this to you, you did not receive a scintilla of evidence from us; you received, as he put it, truckloads of evidence from us. this is an unfortunate outcome for a man who did what philip morris marketed him to do, and now they have -- use whatever adjective you want. now they come here and they blame it on his psychiatric condition. well, he was depressed anyway. all these depressive issues had nothing to do with his health; it is about girlfriends and other issues. let us look at the actual medical records that mr. reilly did not show you in his closing. can you go to the rebuttal slides? here's a may 25th psychology record, 2005. in his history by a ph.d. psychologist: his formal treatment started approximately five years ago on an outpatient basis following a hospitalization for emphysema. he reports at that time that his health had deteriorated and he had suffered financial setbacks secondary to an inability to maintain employment and he sought outpatient care for depression. mr. reilly has painstakingly removed smoking and the impact of mr. griffin's smoking on his health from his equation of why he was depressed. you cannot do that in a human being. you cannot take out the health consequences that this man suffered. this is not whiplash. this man had a lung removed 7-94 and replaced. his depression was related to his health and the effects of his health on his ability to maintain relationships, his ability to work. and i'm not asking you to compensate him -- i never asked, ever, for you to compensate him for losing a relationship. i'm asking you to see that the impact of this copd had an impact on every phase of his life, and you cannot separate out the impact on his health from what was causing him his depression. but here's another psychologist's note. this is in 2004: he has never had any psychiatric hospitalizations, however, he states he has had a low-grade depression for most of his life. patient is also concerned about his present medical condition related to his lungs. he is telling the people that are worrying about him for his mental wellness that he is concerned because he is sick. it is not just about financial -- i think the battery just died. of course. it is not just about the financial implications of losing a job. it is about his health and how it is intertwined in a human being's life, how it affects every aspect of his life. and if you do find that we have satisfied the burden of answering the first three questions, you do have to account for the fact that this man's depression was, in fact, a consequence 7-95 of his smoking and the results of his smoking and the health effects of smoking. he had in front of him -- his doctors have told him that they are looking at three options which include a possible lung transplant, lung volume reduction surgery, or a shunt. he went on to state, one good bout of pneumonia could put me in the hospital or kill me. his depression is not about girlfriends; his depression is about the state of his life, the addiction he suffered started in the '60s. and so when all this information starts to come out -- when mr. reilly talks about dr. burns saying more people know about the health effects of smoking than the president, you heard dr. burns, you heard what he said. he said, "it was enough talk. we in the public health community have to start helping the addicted stop smoking." it is not about the words, it is about getting smokers to quit. how do we equip people like mr. griffin with the tools to quit? the words are enough. you can say it all you want and people might know the words more than they know the president, but that is not where the help is needed. the help is needed in getting people like mr. griffin out of the cycle of smoking, out of the addiction that causes the cumulative injury to the lungs. i'm going to finally show you two more things. why 7-96 does it matter? mr. reilly asked the question, where does philip morris fit in mr. griffin's story? well, i can tell you every day philip morris had 60 different roles in mr. griffin's life, but philip morris played other roles in mr. griffin's life. let us first do the reader's digest. you heard testimony about the reader's digest and all of these dates prior to his even birth. you heard testimony from dr. proctor there were 30 articles out of 12,000 that dealt with this issue, most of them before mr. griffin was born. and now philip morris is telling you not to hold them responsible for its design of cigarettes to keep the smoker smoking, when less than .25 percent of the articles from that very periodical even had anything to do with it, in a magazine that he did not even read. next. why does it matter? exhibit 260. philip morris actively tried to keep him and all smokers from believing in the health effects. you heard this during the trial. (from video:) "cigarette smoking may be hazardous to your health. it may not be. we just do not know." "i do not know. frankly i think that smoking may be 7-97 hazardous. it may not be." "smoking may be hazardous. it may not be. no one, including tv 7, knows for certain." "it may be or it may not be. we do not know." "i do not know if cigarettes are bad or they are not bad." "we do not know what causes the ailments that have been attributed to cigarette smoking." "i'm saying that the science to date and over $100 million in our industry indicates that there is no causal link." "i'm not denying the fact that cigarette smoking could be a risk factor involved with some people." "what do we know? if a rabbit runs through a briar patch, it is really hard to look back and see which briar stuck him." (video stopped.) mr. migliori: they do not know through the '60s, through the '70s, through the '80s. why? because they set out on a campaign to make sure smokers had doubt. doubt. it is how it is defended here. doubt is how they got smokers to keep smoking. the next one, this is helmut wakeham, philip morris. (from video:) "i think that if the company as a whole believed that cigarettes were really harmful, we would not be in the business. we are a very moralistic company. i think the management of philip morris is sincere in this position. i 7-98 think there is a great deal of doubt as to whether or not cigarettes are harmful. if you read both sides, not only the point of view of the people who are -- who have missionary zeal to make the world stop smoking, but the people who are trying to be objective with respect to this question, you will discover there is a great deal of doubt with regard to whether or not smoking causes all these diseases which are alleged to be caused by smoking." (video stopped.) mr. migliori: it is not an accident that you hear the word doubt over and over and over. and that does get to dr. burns' point. you can talk about the message all you want, but getting the smoker to get out of the cycle of addiction requires breaking down that doubt and giving that smoker the tools to quit, and it took ten years, medications. the prescriptions, by the way, i challenge you to find the prescriptions from over 10, 11, 12 years ago in the records. not all the records are there. the lack of a prescription from the medical record does not mean he did not take it. he testified he took it. you saw records that he took those medications. there are records that he took six -- three months worth of wellbutrin, and there is no prescription in the record to support it. the record supports it. this is a campaign to make you doubt mr. griffin, but it is not anything you can doubt. in fact, the word that mr. -- 7-99 that dr. cornwell used in his own testimony, in his own words, and not as a person being paid, was that this was undoubtedly caused by smoking and what caused him to smoke was his addiction. finally, gina, the last. so the case comes down to addiction. now, if you answer the first three questions, and you do not answer any other -- if you answer the first three questions that he belongs to the class, then you do fill out the percentage of fault, and you do fill out the compensatory damage. it does not matter what you say about punitives or the like. so the question really is, as i started my closing with, is he a member? should mr. griffin get the benefit of the findings of the prior jury because philip morris has already been found to conceal information from smokers? so it comes down not to manifestation, not copd, which mr. reilly concedes, but to addiction. gina? the court: mr. migliori, you are getting very close -- mr. migliori: 30 seconds. the court: -- to time. mr. migliori: people who are not addicted do not smoke 40 to 60 cigarettes per day. they do not smoke a cigarette every 20 minutes. they do not buy multiple cartons of 7-100 cigarettes at a time and suffer physical withdrawal symptoms without cigarettes. people who are not addicted do not smoke when they are taking nicotine in the form of a nicotine patch. they do not smoke while they are on zyban. they do not smoke while they are taking wellbutrin. people who are addicted do not lock cigarettes in the car to keep from smoking them. they do not smoke while also being on portable oxygen. they do not take smoking cessation classes after they have already quit smoking, and they do not crave cigarettes even 13 years after being smoke-free. mr. griffin served our country in the navy at the same time as when he started this horrific habit and became addicted. we are asking you to put him as a member of this class. we are asking you to go through the questions carefully. we are particularly asking you to focus on the fact that philip morris controlled the design of the cigarette and how it was sold and how it kept smokers smoking, and that is a responsibility that they have to share. and i think they equally share it or greater, but that is a decision for you. i'm not going to ask you for enormous sums of money. i'm not going to take from you what is your job. but in addition to the $600,000-plus in actual economic costs, please think about what mr. griffin has gone through. when you give that pain and suffering component to 7-101 the award, give the full amount. what is it to go through that? and then the percentages, if any, will be applied to that number. do not discount that pain and suffering number beforehand, just take him for his damage. and if he is responsible for fifty percent of that damage, that will be handled later, but give him full consideration of what it must be like for a man to have suffered what he has suffered. please accept our absolute, complete appreciation for everything you have done in sitting through this for seven days with us. we have tried to bring it to you as concisely as we can, and we hope we have lived up to that promise. it is been an honor representing mr. griffin. it is been an honor presenting this case to you. thank you very much. thank you, your honor.