mr. alex alvarez: counsel. john. good morning. the jurors: good morning. mr. alex alvarez: the first thing i want to do is explain to you -- first of all, thank you for giving up your time, several weeks of your life, for this trial. on behalf of john hackimer and the 3088 rest of the team, we really appreciate the sacrifice that you made to make this process that we call the american civil justice system work. thank you. the second thing i wanted to tell you is i am going to split up my time with mr. freidin, i am going to go for about an hour and 15 minutes, he is going to go for about 20 minutes, and then i'll have an opportunity at the very end, very briefly, to talk to you. and the last thing i wanted to talk to you about is i want to introduce one more member that you did not -- you actually saw -- you actually heard him when he was deposing dr. figlar. you heard the voice, but you never saw the person. well, this is gary paige back there. mr. paige: (raises hand.) mr. alex alvarez: he was the lawyer that was taking the depositions. so i want to talk to you about some of the issues in this case. mr. philipson: want me to start it? mr. alex alvarez: yeah. this is a -- this case is about a conspiracy that started in 1953, when john was a little boy. 3089 and, you know, it went on until 2000, way after he was injured and suffered from copd. i mean, it culminated in 1954, when the heads of tobacco companies went in front of congress, swore to tell the truth, and lied, and lied to congress about the health effects and addictive nature of smoking. and this was a massive conspiracy. it was a well-funded conspiracy. it was a conspiracy that reached every level of our -- of our lives. and it was massive. and it cost the lives of 20 million americans. and caused a significant and serious illness to john hackimer. and that is what we are here to talk about. if you will look at some of the documents that you have seen already, this was one of them that was actually published by the -- this is one of the leakage documents that talks about the simple truth. and it talks about how heavy cigarette smoke -- smokers thus appear to be true addicts. you know, they knew it. they knew what they were doing. they knew how addictive nicotine was. they purposely did these things, said these things because they knew, they knew an addicted smoker, if they had a choice and they had competing messages, they would choose the competing message that 3090 created doubt and confusion, and they knew it, and they purposely did this. these were very smart men and women, very educated, knew more about the science, knew more about the medicine, knew more about addiction than anyone. and what they knew is if you do not grab the kids, if you do not hook the kids, your business is done. they knew that. and they made that the focal point. they made that the focal point of their marketing practices. and, you know, here are documents that talk about "school days are here, and that means big business for somebody. let us line up the most popular students." you know, the most popular students, let us get the most popular students, give them cigarettes so that they look cool so that other kids will follow and that they would have lifelong customers, knowing that they were peddling death. they did it intentionally. they did it purposely. and they did it for one thing and one thing only, is to make money, and they did not care who they hurt. you know, the records are clear even as early 3091 as 1960, they had marketing studies of 14- to 24-year-old age group. they talk about how this represents 21 percent of the population. they even knew to a -- to a -- to a percentage, to a percentage, you know, the number of kids in this country and what they had to do to grab that market. "they represent tomorrow's cigarette business." and that is all they cared about. "as this 14 to 24 age group matures for at least the next 25 years." that is all they cared about. they knew if they grabbed the kids and they had them for the next 25 years, they would stay in business. and this was massive. this was well funded. this was intentional. this was purposeful. these men and these women did it for one thing and one thing only. one of the things you did not see in any of those documents from anyone is where they showed one, one statement where they cared about any smoker. all they cared about was their profits. and that is not right. that is not right. i want to talk to you about the very first question on the verdict form, which is "was john hackimer addicted to cigarettes containing 3092 nicotine, and if so, was such addiction a legal cause of his copd/emphysema?" and that is basically two questions. the first question is, was he addicted, and was that addiction a, not the legal cause, a legal cause of his copd/emphysema. so let us talk about that. i want to talk about the addiction component of it. and then mr. freidin is going to talk to you about the medical causation component of that question. okay? so, you know, you talk -- mr. furr: objection, your honor. if you could take that down, i need to make an objection on it. the court: sure. counsel, sidebar. (the following proceedings were had before the court at the bench and out of the hearing of the jury.) the court: what is the objection? mr. furr: this is the same issue that came up in purdo, if the court will remember. he is got a slide where he is going to say the class membership is not about choice. obviously, that is an incorrect statement of law under the florida supreme court's opinion that says a class membership, it is not an issue of whether the smoker 3093 smoked because of addiction or some other thing like their decision to smoke for weight control or some other choice that they made. the court: if i recall correctly, i allowed him to use it in purdo, but just made that correct statement saying -- mr. alex alvarez: i did not say anything about the law. i'm saying here this is not about this in class membership. and i'm going to read the instruction. i could argue the instructions whatever way i want. the court: is not that what we did in purdo? mr. alex alvarez: yeah. mr. furr: what he cannot say, though, is that choice is not part of the analysis as a matter of law. the court: yeah. no, he is not going to do that. he is just going to use the jury instruction, that is fine. mr. alex alvarez: i'm going to use -- but i can say addiction, it is not about choice, it is not about -- the court: that is fine. mr. furr: okay. we will see what he says. the court: okay. (the following proceedings were had in open court before the court and the jury.) mr. alex alvarez: go ahead, put it up. so, you know, keep your eye on the ball. keep your eye on the ball because addiction is not about choice. people do not choose to be addicts; right? addiction is not about the ability to quit, because their own expert admits that even if you are addicted and you quit, that does not mean that you were not addicted from the beginning. so the fact that you were able to quit does not have any determinative factor on whether you were addicted. it is not about the known dangers of smoking. that has nothing to do about whether you are addicted. and it is not about control. it is not about control. those things have nothing to do with addiction at all. in fact, this is the legal standard that you are going to hear. "addiction to cigarettes is a legal cause of copd/emphysema if it directly and in natural and continuous sequence produces or contributes substantially to producing such copd/emphysema so that it can be reasonably -- reasonably be said that but for the addiction to 3095 cigarettes, the copd would not have occurred." and think about it this way under the but-for addiction. if he was not addicted, would he have smoked one, two, three packs a day for over 32 years? would somebody do that, smoke up to three packs a day for over 32 years if they are not addicted? use your common sense. and there is also an instruction -- i think this is very important -- this is called the concurring cause instruction. it says, "in order to be regarded as a legal cause of copd/emphysema, addiction to cigarettes need not be the only cause. addiction to cigarettes may be a legal cause of copd/emphysema even though it operates in combination with some other cause if the addiction contributes substantially to producing copd/emphysema." so there are other factors that could play a role in you getting addicted and causing your disease. and the law allows for that. and that is what this instruction does. so nicotine addiction is the reason people smoke enough to get sick. and, you know, you heard, you know, dr. giakas. he put up this -- 3096 this was the defense addiction expert. he put up this and he talked about how, you know, smokers report many reasons for smoking, you know, pleasure, relaxing, social aspect, weight control, opportunity to take breaks, you know, things of that nature. but, you know, reynolds knows the real reason. and you know how they know the real reason? because they spent hundreds of millions of dollars researching this and studying this, and no one has studied more about this and their internal records say that we now know more about addiction than what is published in the literature. and what do they say about that? they say, "if it were not for nicotine in the tobacco smoke, people would be little more inclined to smoke cigarettes than they are to blow bubbles or light sparklers." i mean, that is -- that is the truth. internally, that is what they were saying. nicotine is the reason people smoke one pack, two pack, three packs a day. not because they are bored. "addicted smokers smoke for enjoyment and to reduce unpleasant feelings. the addicted smoker suffers whenever he is without a cigarette." 3097 "he suffers when he is without a cigarette." "nicotine addiction contributes substantially to producing copd/emphysema." and look at their internal records. because reynolds and their co-conspirators knew that nicotine is the important chemical that keeps addicted smokers smoking. you know, let us look at some of these. it talks about "moreover, nicotine is addictive. we are then in the business of selling nicotine, an addictive drug effective in the release of stress mechanisms." "therefore, in the design of any cigarette product, the dominant specification should be nicotine delivery. nicotine is a potent drug. our industry is based upon the design, manufacture, and sale of attractive dosage forms of nicotine. we provide a product that is essential -- that is an essential commodity in an habituating act." and it talks about how you put the rat in the cage, you hit the lever, and he gets a reward. and smokers, and they compare smokers exactly to those rats. that is what they did. and you had an instruction about experts and believability of experts. and let us look at the 3098 quality of the witnesses that we brought you. we brought you a professor from stanford who has made his lifelong professional career studying the tobacco company. okay? we brought dr. henningfield by video deposition. he is a professor at johns hopkins. he is a former investigator for the nicotine addiction for the nida, he is a former lead scientist for fda, he is published over 400 journal articles, two-thirds of them on nicotine addiction. he is a consultant for the cdc, he is on the standing committee member of the world health organization, he is testified before congress. this is a man who studied this area and this subject. okay. and who do they bring? who do they bring? they bring a -- they bring a gentleman, a doctor who has never published on nicotine addiction, who has never lectured on nicotine addiction, who has never performed any studies on nicotine addiction. less than 1 -- an expert, this is the expert, who is less than 1 percent of his patients are treated exclusively for nicotine addiction. and even the substance abuse people that he treats, patients he treats, only 10 to 15 percent. but he spends 35 percent of the time testifying in court. 3099 that is the expert? that is the expert who has made $2 million from tobacco companies in the last eight years, who is never written anything, who admits that if you google him and nicotine, you are not going to get anything? this is the expert? and in all the cases that he is testified in, 13 cases, the smokers are 0 and 13. and he wants to make it 0 and 14. mr. furr: objection, your honor, this is improper. the court: sustained. mr. furr: move to strike the argument, improper. the court: sustained. mr. alex alvarez: and he is only been asked to be an expert by the tobacco companies. no one else in the world has ever asked him to be an expert on nicotine addiction, only the tobacco companies. that is the qualifications when you do the comparison of the two. who is the real expert? and what did jack henningfield, dr. henningfield say? he talked about that 400 percent more nicotine receptors in the brain. the time of the first cigarette is very important. and you heard from john that one of the first things he 3100 did when he woke up is he reached for a cigarette. he talks about how one pack a day or more is a heavily addicted smoker. and he talked about the fagerström is the most widely used test for nicotine addiction. i went through it with john. he answered all the questions. he is heavily addicted. he talked about the heaviness of smoking index, which is basically how much you smoke and when you smoke. those are the two most important factors. well, in his case, that is the first thing he does when his eyes open in the morning, the very first thing he does is he reaches for a cigarette; right? and there was a time that he was smoking up to three packs a day. now, we are going to talk about how long it takes to do that. and let us talk -- you know, you are not going to get -- you know, you just got the law. there was no definition of addiction. you do not have to accept any definition of addiction. none. it is up to you to decide and use your common sense and experience. what is addiction? what is nicotine addiction? but let us look at what their own corporate scientist for r.j. reynolds says is a layperson's 3101 definition of -- a laypeople like you, what is the definition? can you play that? (videotaped deposition of michael borgerding, ph.d., played as follows:) by mr. paige: q. dr. borgerding, on behalf of r.j. reynolds, if you can give a layperson definition of addiction, what would you say? a. in terms of a layperson definition of addiction, i believe that a reasonable definition would be something that someone does for an extended period of time and they have difficulty quitting. (videotaped deposition stopped.) mr. alex alvarez: and let us look at that. that is a very simple definition. how does it fit john? well, it fits john because he smoked for over 30 years. he smoked three packs a day. it took him two months to quit smoking. he needed prescription medication. he failed multiple times while he was trying to quit. it took him two months. and what does dr. henningfield say about addiction? (videotaped deposition of jack e. henningfield, ph.d., played as follows:) 3102 a. as i mentioned, you can boil it down to what is sometimes called the heavy smoking index, which is two items from it, how much you smoke and when do you smoke. in my opinion, well, it is really two. it is number of cigarettes. so if somebody is smoking more than a pack of cigarettes per day, virtually every day, that is a sign that they are very likely heavily dependent. and the waking-up cigarette. people that smoked more quickly when they get out of bed regularly are more likely to have higher cotinine levels, higher nicotine levels in their blood, stronger withdrawal, greater difficulty in quitting, and so forth. (videotaped deposition stopped.) mr. alex alvarez: lay the facts on top of this testimony, and it is obvious that john is addicted. you know, they brought you the dsm. and they actually read this portion of the dsm to you. they published -- put it up there. and it said, "note that the word 'addiction' is not applied as a diagnostic term in this classification." it is over. they admit that the criteria that they are using from the book, the book says, "note that the word 'addiction,'" which you have to 3103 decide whether he was addicted, "is not applied as a diagnostic term in this classification." so they are using a book that does not even apply, but let us look at the facts. this is a young man who started smoking between 10 and 11. he became a regular smoker by high school in 1961. he smoked first thing in the morning as soon as he could. he only went to places where he could smoke. his favorite cigarette of the day was when he first got out of bed in the morning. he started smoking one pack a day and went all the way up to three packs a day. he smoked while he was sick in bed. he never intended to smoke for over 30 years of his life. he tried quitting cold turkey. he tried cutting down. could not concentrate at work, he had to leave his office to smoke every few minutes. he suffered from withdrawal anxieties and symptoms, irritability, insomnia, agitation, anxiety. he was on the edge. i mean, by the way, this is a criteria that the expert gave him. and he always had a cigarette near him or around him. he craved cigarettes. would constantly smoke everywhere, in the house, in the car, at work, in bed. 3104 why would somebody do that if they were not addicted? there were times that he would wake up in the middle of the night to smoke. wake up in the middle of the night to smoke. who does that unless they are addicted? he tried several times to quit, but was unsuccessful until he was finally diagnosed in 1993 with copd. and then he used the patch, and it took him two months. he still has cravings to this day. i mean, this is a classic profile of a heavily addicted smoker, heavily addicted. you know, let us look at the -- if you were to take the average amount of cigarettes that he was smoking, let us say he smoked -- you know, we know he smoked more than 32 years, but let us use 32 years. and let us -- we know he started at one, then he went to two, then he went to three packs a day, but let us you use two packs as an average; right? so for 32 years he smoked two packs a day. that is 14,600 cigarettes a year; right? and the cigarettes smoked over 32 years, that is almost half a million cigarettes; right? and it takes an average -- let us say it takes an average of about ten minutes to smoke. that is almost 5 million 3105 minutes. that is 4.972 minutes. in hours, that is 77,866 hours. in number of days spent smoking, at 16 hours -- remember, it is not 24 hours, you are awake 16 hours a day. that is 4,866 days. and actual time spending, using or smoking, okay, is 13.33 years. that means if we were to lock him in a room there and tell him to smoke, he would smoke for 13.3 years. let us put it in context. let that sink in. that is how much smoking he did. and he was not addicted? something he did for -- that would take 13 point -- 13.33 years and he is not addicted? how does that make any sense? half the time that he is awake, he was smoking. now, there are many carcinogens and compounds in cigarettes. dr. proctor told you about some of them. there is hundreds of thousands of them. there is over 70 of them that cause cancer. and, you know, nicotine is a disease. 90 -- 90 to 95 percent of all copd cases are caused by smoking cigarettes. smoking cigarettes is the number one cause of lung cancer. there is thousands of chemicals in smoke, like cyanide, arsenic, polonium-210. you know, fifty percent -- one of the things that 3106 dr. proctor told you from his research is 50 percent of all long-term smokers, fifty percent of all regular smokers will die of a smoking-related disease. that is not something they told him when he was 10 or 11 years old. over 500,000 americans die each year from a smoking-related disease. so we know the addiction caused him to continue to smoke, and that continued smoke caused his copd. and all we have to do is prove it by the greater weight of the evidence. this is not we have to prove it a hundred percent. it is just the greater weight of the evidence, which means the more pervasive [sic] and convincing force and effect of the entire evidence in the case. that is all. all we have to do is tilt the scales. but we have done more than that. we have done more than that. we have gotten -- we have brought you the world's best experts from the historical aspect of medicine, science, and the tobacco industry, to nicotine addiction, to one of the foremost experts in the world on copd. and they knew a lot about nicotine addiction. 3107 i mean, this is more documents from their internal records. "without the chemical compound, the cigarette market would collapse, philip morris would collapse, and we would all lose our jobs and our consultant fees." that is all they cared about. you did not -- like i said, you are not going to see a document that says they care about smokers, that they are hurting people. this is what they say they are worried about, they are worried about their pocketbook. "however, we can never be comfortable selling a product which most of our customers would stop using if they could. that is to say, if the exit gates from our market should suddenly open, we could be out of business almost overnight." that is what they cared about. they concealed; they did not reveal. so, again, "addiction is a legal cause if it produces or contributes substantially to producing, but for the addiction, to cigarettes, the copd/emphysema would not have occurred." would he have smoked one, two, three packs a day for over 30 years if he was not addicted? and the answer to that question is yes. if the answer to that question is no, we go home. the 3108 case is over. we are done. but we have proved this case not only by the greater weight of the evidence, but by the overwhelming amount of evidence in this case. i want to talk to you a little bit about the world that john was born into, because the culture of smoking was created by them. was created by reynolds and their co-conspirators. they created that culture. he grew up in a small country town called -- was it maple shade? very small town where kids congregated at the little candy shop; right? they played pinball and they had shakes and they smoked cigarettes. that is the world he was born into. they shaped that culture. they shaped that culture in the movies. they shaped that culture everywhere. his parents smoked. at 16, his parents said, you know, you are old enough now, go ahead and smoke. get a job, buy your cigarettes, and smoke. that is the culture that he was brought into. they created that culture. people did not wake up in the morning and smoke bananas. they smoked cigarettes. they smoked cigarettes for a reason. it was the most heavily marketed and advertised product in the united states, in america. 3109 they got ball players, football players, hockey players, golfers. they did everything, they permeated every aspect of americana to make smoking normal. that is the life and that is the world that john was born into. he was not born into this culture, he was born into that culture that they created and shaped purposely, intentionally. they glamorized it. they had doctors, people posing as doctors say it was healthy for you, it is better for you. smoke this brand. sixty percent of all doctors smoked in the '50s and '60s. they spent over $250 billion marketing cigarettes from 19 -- as an industry from 1940 to 2004. $250 billion. that is a lot of marketing. that is a lot of messaging. that is a lot of impression. and that is why people saw smoking as normal. let us play some of these. (video clip played as follows:) speaker: what cigarette do you smoke? you will be interested to know how the doctors of america answered that question. it was camel. yes, according to the survey, more doctors smoke camels than any other. speaker: do you inhale? then you are better 3110 off smoking philip morris. and here is how you can prove it. light up a philip morris. take a puff. singer: do not miss the fun of smoking. do not miss the fun of smoking. mildness is a pleasure with pall mall. aunt pearl: winston tastes good. granny: like a cigarette oughtta. ms. london: you get a lot to like with a marlboro, filter. chorus: filter. fred flintstone: okay, how's about taking a nap? barney rubble: hey, i've got a better idea. let us take a winston break. fred flintstone: that is it. winston is the one filter cigarette that delivers flavor 20 times a pack. winston's got that filter blend. speaker: -- uses a fine quality tobacco. and for another, i like kent's filter. to me, kent is the mildest taste in smoking. speaker: and all over america, kent with the micronite filter is smoked by more scientists and by more educators than any other cigarette in the country. why not discover for yourself that for good smoking taste, it makes good sense to smoke 3111 kent. (video clip stopped.) mr. alex alvarez: you could not turn on the tv, you could not open up a magazine, you could not open up a newspaper, you could not drive down the street and go past a billboard where this was not part of americana. that is the world he was born in. that is the world he grew up in. that is the world he smoked in. now i want to talk to you about -- i'm going to skip question 2 because mr. freidin is going to talk to you about question number 2. but let us talk about question number 3 and 4. and the judge read it to you. but i want to focus in on certain parts of that that talk about -- see, because it is not so much about what they said, it is about what they concealed. okay? it is about what they concealed and did not reveal. that is what this case is about. because they had the information and the knowledge that they should have shared and they did not do it, and they purposely created doubt, created a controversy so that people, especially an addicted smoker, would continue to smoke, and it happened, and millions of people believed them, including john 3112 hackimer. and you cannot create a conspiracy, you cannot create a conspiracy of lies, controversy, and deceit. people believe you, and then run. and it started 1953. "it is fortunate" -- they knew. i mean, they knew as early as 1953 this is -- this is -- these are the interviews with the scientists from the company in 1953. "it is fortunate for us that cigarettes are a habit they cannot break. boy, would not it be wonderful if our company was the first to produce a cancer-free cigarette." it is 1953. they did not tell the world that. they did not -- they concealed that. they did not reveal that. they did not tell john hackimer and the rest of the world that. and it talks about here, "the very heads of the great corporations themselves signalized the end of the old days when they are linked arm" -- "they linked arms and walked together." i mean, they were not going to let this thing happen. they were not going to let their business go out, go down the tubes, they were not going to admit it. they were making huge profits. the number one marketed product in the united states, and they were not going to give it up. and it 3113 did not matter to them how many people they killed or how many people they harmed. they did not care. they were going to do whatever it took. the frank statement says, "there is no proof smoking causes lung cancer. we accepted interest in the people's health as a basic responsibility paramount to every other consideration in our business." we know that is a lie from their internal documents. it says, "we believe the product we make are not injurious to health." lie. they know that they did. here it is. "we will always" -- "we always have and will always cooperate closely with those whose task it is to safeguard the public health." like the surgeon general calling them demagogic, calling them irresponsible. is that how they cooperate with the surgeon general, every -- preempting him? is that how you cooperate? is that how you put people's interest in health first? "we accept an interest in people's health as a basic responsibility paramount to every other consideration of our business." well, let us look at what the documents say. 1954, "if any one of believe that the product we 3114 are making and selling was in any way harmful to our customers' health and our own as well, we would go voluntarily out of business." that is what they are telling the world, right? this is -- this is a speech that they gave; right? this is what they are saying. they go out and they say, "if our product is harmful, we," this is james bowling, he says, this is the vice president, "we would stop making it." right? and they go on tv, these are the things, they go out in the public and they tell people, hey, we do not believe this. if we believed this, we would stop doing it, we would change. they are telling people this, people believed them. millions and millions of americans after the surgeon general's report, half of the -- half the smokers, over 25 million smokers believed. look what they said in 1964. go ahead, play it. (video clip played as follows:) mr. howard cullman: i do not think the industry admits there are any bad elements. if there are bad elements, through our laboratories, through the surgeon general, through the ama, through acts of god and luck, we hope we may find 3115 them, and if they are found, they will be removed. but at this point, we do not know. (video clip stopped.) mr. alex alvarez: that is what they were telling the people. we do not know, we do not believe, if we find something, we will change, do not worry about it, we are looking into it. okay? but there was no doubt internally. no doubt internally. "the individuals we met believed that smoking caused lung cancer. carcinogens are found in practically every class of compound in smoke. obviously, the amount of evidence accumulate to indict cigarette smoke as a health hazard is overwhelming. the evidence challenging such an indictment is scant." scant, meaning very little. "cigarettes have certain unattractive side effects, they cause lung cancer." well, that is an understatement. "they may be truly causative in emphysema," et cetera, et cetera. and they knew that. this is 1963, causative of emphysema. they did not come out and say to people, hey, listen, smoking causes lung cancer, smoking causes emphysema. they said the opposite, when their own research, their own -- their own scientists are telling them this. 3116 "bronchitis and emphysema. these are serious diseases involving millions of people. the cigarette industry may be in greater trouble in this area than in the lung cancer field." 1963. he is just started smoking on a regular basis. he is a young man. all they had to do is reveal and not conceal. change history for this man. oh, sorry. you know, john started smoking in 1956, 1957, shortly after the conspiracy began. he was ten years old. they could have changed. the suffering that this man is suffering every day to gasp for breath. for the last 17 years, he is been attached to an oxygen bottle, breathing through a -- through these plastic cords that he sticks in his nose. he cannot even take a shower without labor. he cannot walk from there to here without stopping. he cannot enjoy the simplest pleasures of life. and all the time, if this could -- this is what they care about. patting themselves on the back. "if this committee had not been formed, the cigarette industry by now would have been in a deplorable position." yeah, deplorable. saving lives is a deplorable position? telling people the truth? helping people? not causing death and 3117 suffering is a deplorable position for them? "we must in the near future provide some answers which will give smokers a psychological crutch and self-rationale to continue smoking." let us keep it going. let us keep perpetuating. obviously, the key word is confusion. "anything we could do to confirm such a situation would work to our advantage." "doubt is our product since it is the best means of competing with the body of" -- quote, "body of fact that exists in the minds of the general public. it is also the means to establish a controversy." why would you want to establish a controversy when you know your product is killing people and harming them? a reasonable corporation does not act that way. "the most important story is one which create -- casts doubt on the cause-and-effect theory of disease and smoking. the ctr and the industry have publicly and frequently denied what others find as truth" -- quote, "truth. let us face it, we are interested in evidence which we believe denies the allegations that cigarette smoking causes diseases." 1970. that is what they cared about. that is why they 3118 spent hundreds of million of dollars. they spent over $600 million funding the tobacco institute, the ctr and tirc. over $600 million. and they got what they wanted. people believed. john believed. if everyone knew, why would this company spend $600 million creating a campaign of doubt and confusion? and this is what they were saying. please play it. (video clip played as follows:) mr. joseph cullman: i do not believe that most people who smoke get lung cancer. we are now in an era, as you know, of moderation. we have smoking habits, which incidentally are today changing the type of cigarettes from regular cigarettes to filters. we do talk to the question of whether or not cigarettes are hazardous. we do not believe that cigarettes are hazardous. we do not accept that. because when, as, and if any ingredient in cigarette smoke is identified as being injurious to human health, we are confident that we can eliminate that ingredient. mr. mintz: do you believe that cigarettes are safe? have they been proved to be safe, 3119 mr. cullman? mr. joseph cullman: i believe they have not been proven to be unsafe. (video clip stopped.) mr. alex alvarez: they have not been proven to be unsafe, creating doubt, confusion, controversy. when he said that, he knew that that was not true. you know, the confidential polls that they -- they knew their campaign was working. they knew it. they knew it. and this thing was working. they would poll people, they would do these confidential polls, they would ask the smokers, they would ask the smokers do you believe, and they found that half of them, half of the smokers in 1964, after the surgeon general report, after the surgeon general report, did not believe or had doubts that smoking caused lung cancer. they got what they paid for. it was working. they -- in fact, the conspiracy got greater, got more funded, they put more money into it, they put more resources into it, they put more time into it. they created this whole filter myth. the word "filter," what is it supposed to filter out? they told people that it was safer. people believed it. people started switching. and they knew all this 3120 time that it was not any safer. "filter tip smokers, health reasons are apparently the primary reason, at least the stated reason for smoking filter tips. the tabulation reveals the highest interest in trying filter tip cigarettes is shown among the younger smokers. health factors again show up as the basic reason for people trying them." this is their internal documents. "health filters may be some prestige value. the public has been conditioned, conditioned to accept the filter effects of charcoal in other fields, and when charcoal was added to cigarette filters, filters improved" -- "proved to be an effective advertising gimmick." i mean, these guys did not stop. they went from almost no -- almost no filters in 1950 to almost all filters a decade later or two decades later. they did that on purpose. "the sale of filter tip cigarettes making use of therapeutic claims is a purely merchandising and sales promotion." this is 1953. this is american tobacco. they knew it. they knew that it did not do anything. "as we know all too often, the smoker who 3121 switches to a hi-if cigarette," meaning filtered cigarette, "winds up smoking more units in order to provide himself with the same delivery which he had before." "we say here is our triple, quadruple quintuple filter capable of removing whatever constituents in smoke is currently suspect while delivering full flavor and incidentally, a nice jolt of nicotine. the illusion of filtration is as important as the fact of filtration. in most cases, however, the smoker of a filtered cigarette was getting as much or more nicotine and tar that he would have gotten from a regular cigarette." so the whole time they are telling people switch to filters, it is safer for you, people believe it, and they know this whole time that it is not -- not only is it any safer, it could probably be worse for you. what reasonable corporations do that? "for nearly 20 years, the industry has employed a single strategy to defend itself on three major fronts, litigation, politics, and public opinion. while the strategy was brilliantly conceived and executed over the years, helping us win" -- "helping us with" -- "helping us win 3122 important battles, it is only fair to say that it is not, nor was it intended to be, a vehicle for victory." they wanted victory. "on the contrary, it has always been a holding strategy consisting of creating doubt about the health charges without actually denying it." conceal rather than reveal. an admission by -- you know, they use their money to hide the truth and to pay for lies. that is how they use their money. not to help people. they use their money to hide the truth and to pay for lies. "an admission by the industry that excessive cigarette smoking is bad for you is tantamount to an admission of guilt with regards to lung cancer problem. this could open the door to legal suits in which the industry would have to" -- "would have no defense." this is 1978. 1982, "i stated that one of the elements of our legal defense was that there was no dose-response relationship between cigarette consumption and lung cancer and that what he was saying seemed to contradict that position." he said -- this is them talking amongst themselves internally. now they are talking about 3123 their -- "our medical and scientific witnesses will say whatever we want them to say, clearly implying, if not stating, that they lack credibility and integrity." they knew that when they put these scientists out, they were lying. 1987, it talks about "at least some lawyer be looking over our shoulder, i do not concede that even one person dies of a chronic disease that is caused by smoking a cigarette." and that was their position in 1953 to 2000. 2000. too late for john hackimer. too late for him. "historically, the joint industry funded smoking and health research program had not been selected against specific scientific goals, but rather various purposes such as public relations, political relations, et cetera. in general, these programs have provided some buffer to public and political attack of the industry." it was set up, the ctr/tirc was set up as an industry shield in 1954, and it acted as a front. "tobacco money ain't so dirty anymore. cheapest insurance the industry could buy and without the industry" -- "and without it, the industry would have to invent ctr or we would be dead." 3124 conceal. they did not reveal. if important -- and, you know, they destroyed documents. they destroyed documents. they hid the ball. "if important letters and documents have to be sent, please send them to" -- "please send to home. i will act on them and destroy." "remove certain reports. once such actions is necessary for the successful defense of our present and future suits." conceal, not reveal. "if, however, the results with nicotine are similar to those gotten with morphine and caffeine, we want to bury it." when they do research and it comes out bad, they bury it, they destroy it, they conceal it, they do not reveal it. "ctr should work largely by means of contract thus reserving the right to control, control publications which might be detrimental to the industry. the long-term scientific program should be carefully planned such that the results obtained should not be able to harm the industry. subjects to be avoided, attempts to relate human disease to smoking." conceal, not reveal. and they went on tv, they went on radio. play 3125 some of these. (video clip played as follows:) speaker: a california doctor said, "as a scientist, i find no persuasive evidence that cigarette smoking causes lung cancer." a new york doctor told congress, "to claim there is now sufficient scientific evidence to establish that cigarette smoking causes disease is, in my opinion, unjustified." mr. dwyer: turning a significant health question into a publicity stunt is an insult to serious science. speaker: on emphysema, dr. levine. dr. levine: there are large numbers of us who have some background in this field who do not believe the evidence is sufficient for the statements that have been made. ms. browder: the case is still open. the jury has not come in. mr. stossel: it may not be harmful, you are not convinced? ms. browder: it may be or it may not be. we do not know. mr. dwyer: so insofar as the correlation between lung cancer and cigarette smoking are 3126 concerned, no one knows. it may, it may not. how can cigarette smoking be a cause of lung cancer if the cause of lung cancer is, as yet, unknown? in fact, no one knows what causes lung cancer. no one who values scientific evidence should assume that cigarettes cause cancer of the lung. mr. koppel: cigarette smoking does not cause lung cancer, yes or no? mr. horrigan: it is not known whether cigarettes cause cancer, has not been causally established. mr. koppel: cigarette smoking, no causal relationship between cigarette smoking and emphysema? mr. horrigan: despite all of the research to date there has been no causal link established. speaker: do cigarettes cause cancer? mr. merryman: i do not know if they do or not. (video clip stopped.) mr. alex alvarez: stop it there. the man you just saw before, that was 1984, that was the president of r.j. reynolds. he went on tv on nightline, told the american public that smoking does not cause copd/emphysema. that is what he said in 1984. 3127 but they want you to believe that before may 5th, 1990, john hackimer, a man with a high school education, a man who grew up in maple shade, a man who had a blue collar work -- who went to work every day, knew more about what causes emphysema/copd than them. that is what they want you to believe. that is what they want you to believe. (video clip played as follows:) ms. banks: i'm not in a position to give you a does or does not answer. mr. tisch: the data that we have been able to see has all been statistical data that has not convinced me that smoking causes death. mr. campbell: we do not know what causes cancer in general right now, so i think that we may find out what causes cancer and we may find out some relationship, which has yet to be proven. (video clip stopped.) mr. alex alvarez: and, you know, they perpetuated this whole fraud with the light cigarettes and ultra-light cigarettes, you know, because filters was not enough. let us now introduce lights and let us tell people if they smoke low tar and nicotine 3128 cigarettes, light cigarettes that they were safer, and use ultra-lights for the same reason. they perpetuated this fraud and the whole time they know it is not true. how do people stop smoking. "we might then design products to intercept people who are trying to give up smoking. those who are currently smoking lights do so because they are better for you than the full-flavored cigarettes, although some perceive they actually smoked more lights. they perceive that they are cutting down and it is an alternative to quitting which most cannot accomplish. "most smokers can be the considered nicotine seekers for the pharmacological effects of nicotine. if the industry introduction of an acceptable low-nicotine product" -- "products does it make it easier for dedicated smokers to quit than the wisdom of the introduction is subject to debate." so they are even thinking about, listen, if we do this and people quit using these -- these -- this is not good for us. this is not good for us. i mean, these guys want to catch you on every end. the industry wants to catch a smoker at every 3129 end. they want to find that sweet spot. what is that sweet spot that we could say something, do something, put something out there to get them to continue to believe us so that they continue to smoke. let us give them a rationale, a crutch, so they can continue to smoke. these are very smart people. these are very smart people, well funded, permeated every aspect of americana. this message got out. millions of people believed them. he believed them. these are the evidence of it. we are not making it up. these are their words, not ours. "they switch brands to find one that would not cause irritation, coughing, and to find one that would reassure them that they are doing the right thing for health reasons." they knew that. "to discover ways to exploit the benefit of smoking, the advantage and profitability of our major companies, switching to low-delivery cigarettes, more illusory than real in effect" -- "effective intake reduction since they will likely compensate with large and more frequent puffs and more cigarettes." what they say is listen, this is going to be perfect for us, we are going to double up here 3130 because if we produce a low-tar, low-nicotine cigarette, people will smoke more, right, because what they want is the nicotine and we will sell more cigarettes. and they are pedaling more death and disease and they know it. and it worked and it was not just john, it was millions of people. millions of people believed them. (video clip played as follows:) speaker: it has not been proven in black and white. speaker: they come and out and really say well, you are going to get it, i'll stop then, but when they just keep on saying some say you do, some you do not, i'll just keep on. speaker: you know they say it causes cancer and heart disease, do you believe that? mr. gaines: no, i do not. not in my heart i cannot believe it. i look back at the peoples that makes the cigarettes, and i feel like that the one that make the cigarettes should know what they are doing. (video clip stopped.) testimony alex alvarez: 3131 q. did you hear or read statements about the tobacco companies, about the harms of smoking, what they thought? a. q. yes. what did you hear from them about the harms of smoking, what they were telling you? a. they said there was no proof, it has never been proven. q. a. q. and did you believe that? oh, yes. and when you read newspaper articles in the '70s that talked about the harms of smoking, was the tobacco companies still at that time disputing the harms of smoking? a. q. a. q. a. yes. and did you believe them as well? yes. did you believe those statements as well? yes. alex alvarez: he was just one more person of the millions and millions of people that believed it. just one more. and they stood before congress and the american people and told lies 3132 knowing that they would intentionally be harming smokers. (video clip played as follows:) representative wyden: let me begin my questioning on the matter of whether or not nicotine is addictive. let me ask you first, and i would like to just go down the row, whether each of you believes that nicotine is not addictive. i heard virtually all of you touch on it and just yes or no. do you believe nicotine is not addictive? mr. campbell: i believe nicotine is not addictive, yes. representative wyden: mr. johnston. mr. james johnston: congressman, cigarettes and nicotine clearly do not meet the classic definitions of addiction. there is no intoxication. representative wyden: we will take that as a no. and again, time is short. if you could just -- i think each of you believe nicotine is not addictive, we just would like to have this for the record. mr. taddeo: i do not believe that nicotine or our products are addictive. mr. tisch: i believe nicotine is not 3133 addictive. mr. horrigan: i believe that nicotine is not addictive. mr. sandefur: i believe that nicotine is not addictive. mr. donald johnston: and i, too, believe that nicotine is not addictive. (video clip stopped.) mr. alex alvarez: reliance. did he rely? did he believe? did he rely to his detriment on any statement of material fact by the defendant that concealed or omitted material information? but for the reliance, the copd/emphysema would not have occurred. he would have acted differently and avoided his copd had they stopped, had they stopped the lies. he believed them. he relied on them. you heard it from him. let me talk to you a little bit about some of the material that was concealed from him. you know, he did not know that there was a controversy. he did not know that they formed a conspiracy to form a controversy. he did not know all the ingredients, that there was polonium-210, cyanide, radioactive polonium, arsenic in cigarettes. 3134 he did not know that fifty percent, that if you threw up -- if you flipped a coin, if you were a smoker, you had a fifty percent chance that you were going to die from smoking. no one told him that. he did not know that nicotine was a heavily addictive drug. he did not know that filters and low-tar cigarettes were not any -- any safer. in fact, they were more dangerous. no one told him that. they concealed. they did not reveal. so let us talk about that. because this is the question. that they concealed or omitted material information. did they conceal or omit material information? this is what he said about lights and ultra-lights. testimony of john hackimer played as follows:) by mr. alex alvarez: q. a. q. a. q. a. q. you smoked winston lights? yes. kent iii lights; right? yes. how were light cigarettes being advertised? they were advertised as being safer. and did you switch to light cigarettes because 3135 you thought they were safer? a. q. yes. and how were ultra-light cigarettes being advertised? a. q. safer yet. more safe. and did you switch to ultra-light cigarettes because you thought they were even safer than light cigarettes? a. q. yes. was it the taste or was something else the reason you switched to winston lights? a. it was they were advertising lower tar and nicotine, i figured they were safer. (video clip from cvn stopped.) mr. alex alvarez: action speaks louder than words. why would he go from filtered to light to ultra-light if he did not believe that they were safer? why would he do that? why would he keep going from a unfiltered to a filtered to a light to an ultra-light if he did not believe that he was trying a cigarette that was actually safer as it was being marketed? why would he do that? he relied on them. that is the fraud that was perpetuated on him. you heard it from his own voice sitting there, he told you why he did it. 3136 in fact, another part of this question says, "did john hackimer reasonably rely to his detriment on statements of material fact made by this defendant?" did they make statements of material fact to him that concealed it? did they actually make statements? let us look at some of the things that they said to him that he believed. testimony of john hackimer played as follows:) by mr. alex alvarez: q. were you aware from the things that you saw and heard, were you aware that the tobacco companies were saying that smoking had not been proven to be harmful? a. q. a. q. on tv? a. q. yes. did you read about it in -- in newspapers? yes. and did you see it on tv, statements like that yes. and did you believe those statements? that cigarettes had not been proven to be harmful? a. q. yes. yes. and did those statements that you saw and 3137 heard or that you read and saw and heard, did you believe it? a. q. yes. now, you were in the courtroom for this entire time when dr. proctor was showing us advertisements, statements from tobacco executives on tv and in newspapers and magazines. were those some of the types of statements that you heard and saw? a. i recognized them. yes, i recognized them, yes. q. and did you continue to believe those statements? a. q. yes. and did you continue to believe those statements and continue to smoke? a. yes. alex alvarez: that is evidence that the conspiracy worked. it worked. notice that i asked him what you believed, not what you were aware. it is what you believe in your heart. and he believed in his heart what they told him and he continued to make decisions about switching and switching and switching and believing them the 3138 whole time. the clerk: counselor, one hour used. mr. alex alvarez: thank you. and now he is suffering the consequences from that reliance. now he is suffering the consequences of believing them. let us talk about some of the information that was withheld from him that he did not know. testimony alex alvarez: q. were you aware that reynolds and other tobacco companies formed a conspiracy in 1953 to conceal the harms of smoking and their addictive nature? mr. furr: objection, argumentative. the court: overruled. by mr. alex alvarez: q. a. q. were you aware of that? no. did you know that there were scientists and doctors that were hired by the tobacco companies to talk about the -- that there was no harms of smoking or it was not proven, did you know that? a. q. no. did you know about the number of deaths from 3139 smoking? a. q. no. did you know that half of all regular smokers would die from a smoking-related disease? a. q. no. did you know that nicotine was a highly addictive drug? a. q. no. did you know what type of chemicals were in cigarettes, like arsenic, cyanide, radioactive polonium-210? no. mr. furr: objection, leading, argumentative. a. q. by mr. alex alvarez: in smoke? the court: overruled. no. a. by mr. alex alvarez: q. did you know that there was over 70 cancer-causing constituents in every puff of smoke you inhaled? did you know that? a. q. no. did you know that light cigarettes were no safer than regular cigarettes? a. no. 3140 q. a. was that important information? yes. alex alvarez: those are all things they concealed from him. we know that they told him it had not been proven, he believed it. we know they told him to switch to filters, switch to lights, switch to ultra-lights, and he believed them. and they concealed all this information, the whole time knowing it was not true, for one reason and one reason only, because they wanted to keep their customers, they wanted to keep people smoking, and they wanted to keep profits up, and they did not care who they hurt, who they harmed. so when you are asked this question, the answer to both these is yes. both of them are yes. the first question is about reynolds, and the second one is about their co-conspirators. because they are responsible for the acts of their co-conspirators, whether it is philip morris, whether it is the tobacco industry research committee, whether it is the council for tobacco research, it does not matter. they are co-conspirators. they are co-conspirators. they are 3141 all responsible for the acts. so if it was a statement or something said by the tobacco industry, they are responsible for it as well. that is why the answer to 4 is yes. let us talk to you a little bit about percentages of responsibility, because we have to compare the fault of reynolds and the percentage of responsibility for john hackimer. they are not on an even playing field. they are not on even -- because if two people go into an agreement, they both know the same information, then maybe it can be 50/50; right? because both people go into it knowing the same thing. but when one side goes in and lies to the other side, deceives the other side, withholds material information from the other side, it is not 50/50. it cannot. they are not on equal playing field. this young man, when he was ten years old, did not have the information that they had. did not have availability to the internal documents and the scientific research that they had. how can they be equal? how could it be 50/50? now, he admits partial responsibility, but less than a hundred percent for causing his 3142 copd/emphysema. and what he admits, just so you know, is that he could have tried harder to quit. he could have tried harder to quit. that is what he -- but he did not know what they knew. he could have quit earlier if the conspiracy would have ended. it would have avoided him getting the disease. "30 to forty percent of smokers either did not believe that smoking increased their risk of cessation" -- "or cessation reduces the risk. these propositions correspond to 15 to 20 million smokers in the united states. clearly, our efforts to educate the public on the health hazards of smoking and the benefits of quitting are not yet complete." this is from the 1990 surgeon general's report. this is 1990. he is still saying, look, there is 15 to 20 million americans who still do not believe. "smoking is more addictive than using heroin, hooking two-thirds of the people who ever smoke. we cannot defend continued smoking as a free choice if the person is truly addicted." so when you compare responsibility between what they knew and what john knew, it is not equal. 3143 it is not even close. and, you know, you put down whatever figures you want. you can put down whatever figures you want. it is up to you. no one tells you what to put down on this verdict. you as a collective jury decide this, your unanimous verdict on each one of these counts. and what i would propose is 5 percent for john and 95 percent for reynolds because they had an overwhelming amount of information that they concealed and did not reveal. okay. so this is probably the most important question i think on the verdict form, which is punitive damages are warranted in this case. okay? because if you say yes to this -- if we get through the verdict form and you have said yes to all our claims except for number 2, which he is going to tell you you should say no to, which is for the defense, we get to go to a punitive damage phase. but let us talk about that. you have read the instruction. and i'm going to focus in on this one here, the last one here, that says, "defendant's conduct was so reckless or wanting in care that it constituted a conscious disregard or indifference to the life, safety, or rights of persons exposed 3144 to such conduct." okay? that is gross negligence. that is what they did. not only did they intentionally make those statements knowing it was going to harm people, but they were reckless and wanting in care. they knew, they knew what they were doing. they knew what they were doing. i mean, this was a broad, massive conspiracy that needs to be punished. they need to be punished for the harms that they caused this man. you can also consider harms to others suffered by other persons not party to this lawsuit in assessing how reprehensible their conduct was. okay? "the defendant's conduct must be based on the same or similar conduct which has been shown by clear and convincing evidence to have caused mr. hackimer's copd/emphysema." they caused disease, destruction, and death to millions of americans just like john hackimer. they did it intentionally, did it purposely, and did it for money. that has to be punished. corporations cannot do that. they cannot be allowed to purposely, intentionally lie and harm people so they can make a profit. that is not what 3145 america is about. your job is to uphold the law. "we deliberately downplayed the role of nicotine, hence the nonsmoker has little or no knowledge of what satisfaction it may offer him, and no desire to try it. instead, we somehow must convince him with wholeheartedly irrational reasons that he should try smoking in the hopes that he will for himself then discover the real satisfaction obtainable." you know, and here it is, let us look at some of these documents that talked about how they perpetuated the ritual of smoking to kids. you know, this whole thing about the candy cigarettes, they knew that -- they knew that candy cigarettes were being sold. they told the meyner -- they told, in a letter to governor meyner, who was in charge of regulating this, they said, look, we do not -- we do not authorize our consent to use our markings on these cigarettes, they are doing it on their own. that was a lie. here are the documents that says, "we have never raised any objection to use our label and it is not bad for advertising." okay? "we would raise no objection if you 3146 wish to" -- "if you wish" -- "and wish you good luck" -- "good fortune with it." "we would raise no objection and wish you all good fortune with it." selling candy cigarettes to kids that look like real cigarettes so they could perpetuate the ritual, that is what they were about. they knew they had to hook these kids. fourth graders, they are writing to fourth graders and they are lying to these people saying -- these kids, saying there is no medical evidence, scientific evidence established that smoking directly causes lung -- human disease. they tell fourth graders, second graders. i mean, they go on and on and on. you know, it is estimated by the surgeon general that 45,000 -- 4500 youngsters begin smoking every day. every day. the clerk: counselor, five minutes. mr. alex alvarez: very good. "the base of our business is the high school student." "increase education programs to prevent young nonsmokers taking up practice." "listed below are our future problems." 3147 this is what they saw as a problem. educating our kids is a problem. is that revealing or concealing? is that showing that they care? is that showing that they care about people? this is why they need to be punished for what they did to him. "today's teenagers is tomorrow's potential smokers. young adults, a critical factor in the growth and decline of every major brand in companies over the last 50 years. just as our population" -- "just as a population which does not give birth will eventually dwindle." that is all they cared about. they studied 12-year-olds, what percent of 12-year-olds are smoking. "who ain't for more money?" "our basic proposition in the cigarette controversy is subject to the charge, and may be subject to the finding, that we are making false or misleading statements to promote the sale of cigarettes." punitive damages? this case screams for punitive damages. screams for punitive damages. that is what this case is about. punishing them for what they did to him. 3148 the answer to that is yes. and this is the last -- i want to close by talking to you about compensatory damages. and this is question number 6, which is, "what are the amount, if any, you find with respect to john hackimer's pain and suffering, disability, physical impairment, mental anguish, inconvenience, aggravation of a disease or physical defect, and loss of the capacity for the enjoyment of life sustained in the past and sustained in the future as a result of his copd/emphysema?" so it is up to you. there is no book. there is no standard. you guys decide what is fair, right, and reasonable in light of the evidence and what he suffered. he has suffered for the last 17 years. he is reminded of his illness with every breath he takes, with every step he cannot master. life connected to a tube with a lifeline of oxygen, fearing and knowing the fear that he will die, that he will probably suffocate to death. that is his fate. that is his fate. so it is a huge loss. it is an enormous loss. and the only way that the law allows people to compensate -- to be compensated is through money 3149 damages. and we would suggest -- and you may think it is too low or you may think it is too high, you decide. but we would suggest $15 million as reasonable, fair compensation in this case for the enormous loss and destruction that this man has suffered for the last 17 years and for whatever time he has left knowing that he will die for what they did. mr. alex alvarez: may it please this honorable court. the court: yes, thank you. mr. alex alvarez: i have 24 minutes, not 25. i am going to do my -- 24 minutes, i'll do my best to get it all done. i have a lot to cover. mr. furr told you that we have to earn every point of the comparative fault. remember that? he said you have to earn every point. all right, well, let us talk about that. okay? well, i think the plaza hotel meeting is good for a few points; right? how about the frank statement, that is good for a few points; right? how about "doubt is our product"? that is good for some points; right? how about marketing to kids? that is got to be worth a lot of points. how about manipulating nicotine to keep smokers smoking? that is got to be worth at least ten points. how about the filter frauds? how about the lights fraud? how about the ultra-lights fraud? how about writing school letters to kids telling them that smoking does not cause cancer? how about those points? he talked about america and that this is 3275 america and let people make choices. right? but in america, corporations, corporations have to act responsibly. right? they cannot lie, they cannot cheat, they cannot deceive people, and they cannot cause death and suffering to people. they cannot do that. he talked about how today, it is 15 percent now of the population are smokers. but that is not what it was when he was smoking. you saw the statistics in the early '60s. three-quarters of all kids in high school that were juniors and seniors smoked. that is the world he was living in. that is the world they shaped. that is not now. you have to punish them for what they did to him. for what they did to him. this is not about a case that happened in 2016. it is what they did to this man. he said that a cigarette did not jump into john's mouth. and that is true. right? it was all part of the big marketing scheme. he did not pick up a banana and decide to smoke it. right? he picked up a cigarette, a carefully designed device made by them to addict you. okay? so, no, it did not jump into his mouth. it was 3276 purposely placed there, strategically, by them. and the money did not jump into their pockets. what they did is they purposely, intentionally lied to people to get it there. and that is why punitive damages, that is why punitive damages are appropriate in this case. because corporations cannot do that. they cannot lie, mislead, deceive people. mr. furr: objection, your honor, that is not the legal standard for punitive damages. the court: well, i do not think that is what he is arguing. overruled, you can continue. mr. alex alvarez: and cause harm to him. they cannot do that. let us talk a little bit about the statute of limitations. i'm going to jump around, by the way. i may come back to it in a little bit, but these are my notes, so they are not in any particular order, okay? so i'll do my best. they have to prove that -- let us talk about may 5th, 1990. nothing happened in his life on may 5th, 1990, that is just the statute period about when the lawsuit was originally filed in the class action. they have got to go back five years, and 3277 that is the cutoff date. that is all that means. okay? but before may 5th, 1990, he was never ill that he went to a doctor. he did not miss any work. he did not have any restrictions. he did not have a productive cough. he did not have any shortness of breath, okay, only when he ran from first to third. okay? he never visited a doctor. he never had a pulmonary function test which tells you if you have copd. it is the gold standard. all the doctors said that. he is never had one. and there was no diagnosis of copd. and no one ever told him he had copd. not a single person. can you do this, put this one up? so, you know, this is a -- a knockoff of one of their boards. okay? so they gave you -- they said no one spoke about -- you know, no fact witness talked about when he started smoking, brands, amount, when he knew, what he knew, when he knew, whether he tried to quit, all those things. you know, but i do not need to bring any of these people. you know why? because i have the man that was there that happened to him. he testified to all that. he testified. i do not need 3278 anybody else. you have it from the horse's mouth. you have it from the horse's mouth. you do not have to get it from anybody else. and with respect to addiction or expert in industry conduct, we have -- we brought proctor. an expert in nicotine addiction, we brought henningfield. and proctor talked about nicotine addiction and the impact it has on people. so, you know, we brought witnesses. the other one i want to talk to you about is -- let us do this one. okay, they said that we did not bring witnesses this or we did not bring this person here. well, let us talk about that. in the plaintiffs' case about john hackimer and r.j. reynolds and its co-conspirators, we played -- mr. furr: objection, your honor, i have no burden of proof to bring a witness. mr. alex alvarez: i'm saying what we brought. the court: sustained. just slightly rephrase. mr. furr: i think the slide should be taken down. 3279 mr. alex alvarez: no, i'm going to -- i'll -- the court: the slide is fine, just indicate that it is plaintiffs' view of the evidence. that is fine. mr. alex alvarez: they do not have to do anything. right? we have the burden of proof. but let me tell you what we brought. okay? we brought two corporate representatives that -- by video deposition. we brought dr. proctor. we introduced over 200 internal documents and advertisements of the tobacco industry. we played numerous video clips and played statements of employees and many of the co-conspirators. okay? and when you were shown the verdict form, you said this is all about john hackimer, and that is the only name on the verdict form, well, that is not quite true, because this case is about both of them. this is about two converging lines, right? two converging lines, the tobacco company and john hackimer. and they purposely went after john hackimer and millions of others just like him. and if you look at the verdict form, you know, once you get past class membership, it is about both of them. it is about both of them. defendant that concealed or omitted material 3280 information. defendant agreed to conceal material information. when you do the percentage of the fault, the defendant, r.j. reynolds. when you talk about punitive damages are warranted against the defendant. let us talk about the dsm. one of the interesting things about the statute of limitations is that they have to prove that he knew or should have known through the exercise of reasonable care that he had copd. right? that is one of the things that we have to prove. right? their own expert, their own expert, their addiction expert, says he does not meet criteria number 9, which is "tobacco use is continued despite knowledge of having a persistent or reoccurrent physical or psychological problem that is likely to have been caused or exacerbated by tobacco." their own expert says, look, he did not know he had copd, he had anything -- any problems from smoking, that is why he does not meet this criteria. so their own expert blows them out of the water on the statute of limitations. their own expert. mr. furr: objection, your honor, this misstates -- dr. giakas never addressed this 3281 criteria. the court: i'll sustain the objection. mr. alex alvarez: could we approach? the court: sure. of course. mr. alex alvarez: yes, he did. he said -- mr. furr: why do not you wait till i get up there? you know i cannot hear from back there. (the following proceedings were had before the court at the bench and out of the hearing of the jury.) the court: go ahead. mr. alex alvarez: he said that the only two criterias that he did not meet was number 10 and number 11. he did not meet any of the other criterias. that is what he said. mr. furr: he did not say anything about why he did not meet that criteria. he never addressed that specifically. he is making that up. he never said that. the court: i do not remember where -- mr. alex alvarez: judge, he said that he reviewed every single one of the criteria. the court: right. mr. alex alvarez: and the only ones the plaintiff met were 10 and 11. that is what he said. the court: he said he actually reviewed that? 3282 mr. alex alvarez: yes. he went through every single one of them. mr. freidin: otherwise his testimony would have no meaning. mr. alex alvarez: right. the court: do you have his testimony? mr. alex alvarez: dude, i'm right about this, judge. i'm right about this. mr. furr: no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no. that is not what he said. here is the problem. he said -- he told the jury why dr. giakas said that he did not meet number 9. that did not happen. he never addressed number 9. he cannot make up why dr. -- the court: does someone have the testimony? mr. furr: yeah, what he just said. mr. alex alvarez: judge, he testified, he testified, he went through the criteria clearly. they put up the criteria, and he -- he went through some -- and he said the only two he met, the only two he met was number 10 and number 11. he claimed he said that. mr. furr: that is not what i objected to. not what i objected to. he said their own expert says, look, he did not know he had copd. he had not 3283 anything -- any problems from smoking. that is why he does not meet this criteria. that did not happen. he never talked about why he does not meet it. the court: okay. that is fine. mr. furr: so that is just not -- that needs to be stricken. the court: okay. that is fine. (the following proceedings were had in open court before the court and the jury.) the court: all right. let us continue forward, mr. alvarez. mr. alex alvarez: use your collective memory. many of you took notes. right? when dr. giakas testified, he said that the only -- the only two, the only two that he met, that john hackimer met, was number 10 and number 11. right? those are the only two that he met. well, look at number 9. "tobacco use is continued despite knowledge of having a persistent or reoccurrent physical or psychological problem that is likely to have been caused or exacerbated by tobacco." that -- if he would have said, look, he meets this criteria, they would have legs to stand on on 3284 the statute of limitations, but they do not because he says he does not meet this criteria. let us go to richard seidelman's testimony, treating physician. here is what he -- here is what he said. he said, "it is hard to know without knowing how much diesel fume" -- "diesel and fume exposure there actually was to assign a percentage of cause. i also do not have the pack-year smoking well documented. "none of the medical records that you created during the course of your treatment of mr. hackimer discussed the cause of his copd; correct?" answer: "i would have -- i would have to review all the records, but it was implied. the operating notion was that it was smoking related." question: "was that an assumption that you made? "yeah, it is -- i think it is a reasonable one. i -- i did look at alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency. he did not have that many respiratory infections. i do not believe he gave me a history of that. so the working presumption -- presumptive cause was smoking related, which i think statistically would be a correct assessment." 3285 and the reason -- let us go to this. they talked about how the defendant -- the plaintiff did not prove reliance and legal cause. and, you know, they showed this with a chain being broken. well, the agreement to conceal and the concealment, what did they reveal to him in 1956 when he was 10 or 11 years old and before -- mr. furr: objection, your honor, it is not revealing. it is reliance. the court: sustained. mr. furr: the standard is reliance. the court: sustained. okay. mr. alex alvarez: it is on the reliance. on the reliance. on the reliance. okay? on the reliance. it says, what did they -- what did they reveal to him in 1956 when he was 10 or 11, the conspiracy had already started, and before he was addicted? nothing. mr. furr: objection, your honor, that is not the standard. the court: reliance. sustained. mr. furr: it is reliance. the court: concealment. it is concealment. 3286 mr. alex alvarez: that is fine, robert. it does not matter. let us do this one. so i took out him and put the tobacco companies because they are part of this world, too; right? they are part of this equation. what is the matter, they were not -- they did not have friends and family members who were getting ill and getting smoking-related disease? they did not know? they were not -- they did not go to school and see the schoolbooks? they -- they did not see the psas? they did not have friends that were telling them that smoking was bad? they were not watching tv? they -- they did not see newspapers and magazines? they were not paying attention to the surgeon general's warnings? they were not seeing the warnings on their own packs of cigarettes; right? but they expect this man to know more than them. mr. furr said -- quoted one witness who made a statement, and i want to put it in context, because they said, well, you had to have been living under a rock; right? well, let us put that in context; right? why do you think they spent $600 million; right? why 3287 do you think they spent $600 million on a campaign of doubt, confusion, and controversy if everyone knew. okay? why would they hire -- why would they waste their moneys on scientists and doctors to lie for them? why would they plant false stories in magazines and newspapers if everyone knew? and the reason is because not everyone knew. and their own polls told them that at least half of americans, half of the smokers, over 25 million of them, did not know. and one of them is sitting right there attached to oxygen. they spent this money. they got what they wanted. and now it is time to do justice. they spent that money to get him, they got him, and now they have to own up to him. you know, you heard a lot about gambling. he probably mentioned it a dozen times. he said gambling is a metaphor for this entire case. right? but they gambled with people's lives. they gambled with people's lives. but they have won. right? they won. they won, and people lost. and when they -- and when people lost, all they would do is replace them with another teenager. 3288 that is the gambling that they did. it is a roulette wheel where they always win. it is a slot machine that always pays off for them. the clerk: counselor, 15 minutes. mr. alex alvarez: you know, if you look at the evidence about productive cough, because that is one of the hallmark signature symptoms of copd, he did not have it. there is not one medical record, even after he is diagnosed, that shows that he had a productive cough. we did a subset of the medical records that are in evidence, and i want you to look at them. every single one of them, and you were shown many of them during dr. seidelman's deposition, they all say no productive cough. none. mr. furr said this is a case about choices and personal responsibility. and that is true. i agree. the corporations made choices, too. and when you chose for 50 years to lie to your customers, to manipulate the levels of nicotine, to market to kids so that you could make money and cause harm to others, then it is time to take responsibility for that. mr. furr: objection, your honor. 3289 the court: sustained. mr. furr: i make a motion. the court: denied. mr. alex alvarez: if actions speak louder than words, why did he switch from filters to lights to ultra-lights? and here is the big thing. i want to -- i want to address this whole notion that he knew or should have known he had copd before may 5th, 1990; okay? the fact that he never quit before 1990 is evidence that he did not think he had a disease. because the first time he was diagnosed with copd was 1993, and what did he do? he quit. if he would have known that he had a disease, the copd, which they have the responsibility, the burden of proof to prove that he had it before 1990, he would have quit, like he did when he was diagnosed. but he did not because he did not know. you heard a lot about calling mr. hackimer's character in question. and the way they -- it was done was very artfully -- mr. furr: objection, your honor, to characterizing -- the court: sustained. 3290 mr. furr: i move to strike, and i make a motion. the court: sustained. deny the motion. mr. alex alvarez: here is what he said. he said before a lawsuit was ever filed, so-and-so said this, and so-and-so said that. before a lawsuit was filed, he said this, and this person said that. the inference to that is that he is saying something today in this trial, in this litigation, that is not true. that is the inference. that is the inference. but the only evidence you have heard in this case about lies and deceits is from r.j. reynolds and their co-conspirators. they are the only ones that there is proof that they lied. and i can go on and on and on, but i think you have got it. i want to leave you with the surgeon general in 1988 and his words, because i think they are important for you to hear one more time. okay? (video clip played as follows:) mr. rather: surgeon general c. everett koop has issued two major reports on smoking; one on the dangers of secondhand smoke, the other on nicotine addiction. the tobacco industry disputes both 3291 reports as more political than scientific. surgeon general koop: we have been told so frequently by the cigarette industry that smoking is a matter of free choice, you start when you want and you quit when you want, but anybody who has ever smoked knows that is not true. mr. rather: what does the record, the longtime record say is the most dangerous age to get hooked on tobacco? surgeon general koop: the indications are very clear that the people who are most heavily addicted to nicotine and have the greatest trouble quitting are those who began smoking when they were 14 to 16. i think the studies done all over the world, in every country and every culture, the younger you start, the greater the addiction and the more difficult it is to quit. mr. rather: now, you said that you considered tobacco as addictive as cocaine or heroin. is not that an overstatement? surgeon general koop: no. i think the evidence is very clear if you understand what we are talking about. addiction is a specific physiologic problem. and the manner in which you become 3292 addicted to nicotine is exactly the same manner in which you become addicted to cocaine or heroin. and that even after you have quit and you think you are clean, that there is a tremendous tendency to relapse. there is no such thing as a safe cigarette. there is no such thing as a quality death. (video clip stopped.) mr. alex alvarez: thank you. and, john, thank you for having the trust in me. i appreciate it. thank you.