mr. freidin: good morning to you. the jurors: good morning. mr. freidin: thank you as well. i'm going to change subjects, but i just want to say about what we just heard is that when one thinks about all the things that were said about millions of people, and you heard from the defense expert, dr. mcgregor, that millions of people have died from copd, millions, and john is one, imagine the frame of mind who said we will keep marketing knowing that will happen. but my job is a different job, so i'm going to talk about some other issues briefly. they have raised some issues, so i'm going to talk about them. 3150 the first issue the defendant raised was whether or not smoking caused the copd or emphysema that john had. and it seems like a pretty simple proposition at this point. we know, for example, that approximately ninety percent of all copds come from smoking. so if i had a hundred pennies down here, 90 of them start out being copd. and for some reason, they are not even contesting that. they have not had anyone come in and say smoking would not have caused his copd. they had someone come in and say, well, we just do not know because he had some railroad exposure. so we knew that was coming, and we did what -- as a responsibility to you as a jury, we decided we were going to bring in somebody who really knew what they were talking about to help you to make this decision. so we got dr. systrom. and you can see on the board his credentials. he is dartmouth and harvard, all those other things. i just want to focus on the one in the middle. you know, he is a professor at harvard. 20 years directing the fellowship program, the largest fellowship for pulmonary medicine in the world, at harvard. i'm not going to be someone who says, well, 3151 whatever is harvard is great. but i'm kind of impressed that harvard decided to let him run their program for training pulmonary physicians for 20 years. so we wanted to have somebody who you could have confidence in. and so let us just talk about some of the things he said. "without doubt" -- these were his words. "without doubt, smoking was the cause." it was not even based on reasonable medical probability. "without doubt." and as i said, ninety percent or something like that of all copd cases are caused by smoking. another percentage are caused -- there are some by industrial or environmental hazards, no doubt. and then another bunch are caused by genetic deficiencies, which we know that john was tested for and did not have. we know that john was exposed to some issues at the railroad. we know, by the way, that he had no asbestosis. that was one of the things that their expert said, "well, we just do not know." well, that is not evidence in a court. "we just do not know" is like saying we do not have anything. there is no mineral dust exposure, the dusts and all that. she did not seem to know, and i say 3152 that not critically, they decided to choose an expert who operates from a private office in plant city, florida. no criticism there except to say if you really wanted to get to the bottom of it, i think as a defendant, you would want to bring in somebody who has a lot -- mr. furr: objection, your honor, this is improper attacking -- mr. freidin: i'll withdraw it. the court: sustained. mr. furr: i would move to strike it. the court: sustained. we will move forward. mr. freidin: okay, yeah. here is the point. we brought in a professor of pulmonary medicine, and they brought someone in who has a history of primarily primary medicine, working for the phosphate industry, working for -- doing workers' comp physicals, and who has testified to the tune of close to $900,000 for tobacco cases. over a hundred different cases they have called upon her to come forward. and, of course, you did not hear any of that with dr. systrom. so the real question is where do you want to put your beliefs? 3153 now, going down this list, we have a smoker who smoked really -- it says 40 to 60 packs. he could be 60 to 80 packs. you know, it is hard to be clear. that is an enormous amount of cigarettes. and alex put up the chart earlier for you which was the millions of puffs and hundreds of thousands of cigarettes day in, day out; day in, day out. you know, it strikes me if someone was going to do something that much, i think any normal person -- any person would say that is an addiction. so in any event, he was diagnosed with pneumonia, that was something dr. systrom talked about. and i'm going to get to it in a couple of minutes. but i want to point out to you that i think that is one of the most important facts in this issue -- mr. furr: objection as to mr. freidin's opinion. mr. freidin: pardon me? the court: i did not hear the objection. mr. furr: as to his personal opinions about -- the court: sustained. mr. freidin: well, it is an important fact, i think. can i say that? 3154 the court: that is fine. but you cannot say i think it is one of the most important facts. mr. freidin: okay. and then dr. systrom said he is never seen a patient with copd from diesel exposure alone. and again, no doubt. and, of course, more likely than not, he will die from the copd or the emphysema. it is really emphysema is what he has. so let us play a bit from dr. systrom. testimony of david m. systrom, md, played as follows:) the overwhelming majority of emphysema cases a. are caused by smoking. and i have testified several times in different ways, more than ninety percent. the other reasons are minor. they do include some occupational exposures as contributors. and i've tried to frame what our classic teaching is about fumes and gases contributing a tiny decrement in fev1 per year, measure is 20 -- .25, a quarter of a percent per year. so even if we gave mr. hackimer 20 years of intense exposure, which i do not believe he had, from his deposition testimony, then even -- we are talking about 5 percent over 20 years. he realized about a 75 percent decline from normal lung function to what he has 3155 currently. that was smoking. that was not diesel fumes, in my view. stopped and the following is in open court.) mr. freidin: and let us compare that or contrast that with dr. mcgregor, who the defense called. of testimony of can, played as follows:) by mr. freidin: q. now, do you agree that copd is overwhelmingly and predominantly caused by smoking? a. yeah, looking at the large population of the us and looking at the large number of cases of copd, smoking is the number one risk factor. q. a. q. give him 60 pack-years? yes. okay. that is more than enough to cause copd; correct? a. q. a. q. yes. way, way more than enough? yes. a lot of patients have copd, but do not know it; correct? a. correct. they have not been diagnosed by their 3156 primary care. freidin: i guess the argument they are making is if there is another contributing factor, they do not add up -- they do not add together, they do not -- you just cannot tell. but clearly, the scientific evidence in this case is that the diesel fumes -- which, by the way, are -- it was dr. mcgregor who said -- she quoted a study that said 16 or more years of direct exposure to diesel fumes, as an engineer, which he had about 4 years. 16 years, and she said that study -- that is a study she told us about. and let us compare, we have some comparisons between smoking versus diesel and we can just go through those. you have got 30-plus years of smoking. it might be 35. you have, again, 60 cigarette pack-years, 438,000 cigarettes, it may be more than that. and remember, he has copd, but he also has -- what he had is emphysema, according to dr. seligman -- seidelman, who was his treating doctor, and he also had -- and dr. seidelman said, and dr. systrom both said, you would not get emphysema from railroad 3157 fumes, you would get chronic bronchitis. and john does not have chronic bronchitis. his treating doctor said he has emphysema. so that would be that point. and, of course, his final opinion was it was a substantial contributing cause, he said he had no doubt about it. and again, that point about the majority of time on the electric trains. and the diesel exposure, if you multiply it out, you can take that 20 to 25 percent of the time that john said and described when he was exposed to diesels -- and again, these are diesels from the '70s and '80s, not the diesels from the '30s and '40s that were part of the study that was referred to by dr. mcgregor. so they were a lot worse. and if you multiply that either way with the 2.5 -- .25 times 20 years or 1 year or 5 years, it comes out to a very insignificant amount. so let us talk about now -- so i think it is pretty clear, that part of the issue that -- in terms of causation is really very, very clear on this, there is not a lot to talk about. i do want to talk about the statute of limitations defense, which says, this is the second 3158 question, "state whether john knew or should have known in the exercise of reasonable care before may 5th, 1990, that he had copd or emphysema and that there was a reasonable possibility that his copd/emphysema was caused by cigarette smoking." so let me show you a chart that we prepared, kind of lays out the issues. these are all things the defendant must prove. why do i say that? because this is what we call an affirmative defense. that means the burden of proof is on them. you will hear, and you have heard, the plaintiff has the burden of proving the case against r.j. reynolds in all the other areas that we have talked about. and you are going to hear it from mr. furr when he speaks, he is going to talk about the burden of proof. well, the burden of proof on an affirmative defense is on them. very important. so if you are not satisfied -- john does not have to prove a thing about this defense. and the answer to that question should be no, but first he has -- they have -- they must prove that he had copd before may 5th, 1990. and while there was some speculation about 3159 whether he did or he did not, we do know, and i mentioned this thing about pneumonia, we know that he had a diagnosis of pneumonia in 1991, and the doctor who diagnosed him did not diagnose copd. i think that speaks to that issue. it is not dispositive, but it is a point. but let us get to the next thing. did he have symptoms before may 5th, 1990? well, what are the symptoms of copd? a productive cough of sputum three months in a row for two years in a row and a shortness of breath not based upon some exertion where you run bases or you sprint, but a regular shortness of breath. and he had none of that. so the question is did he -- did they prove that he had emphysema before that, that he had symptoms from copd related to that that were not related to either his age, his weight, or being out of shape? did they prove it? and the evidence is they did not prove it. what did they prove? they proved that he had coughing in a 1973 camping trip. they proved -- put it down. i'm going to -- i'm going to skip those things. they proved that he had shortness of breath running the bases maybe one time, maybe two times, 3160 in a sprint running the bases. in what year? 1983? 1982? they proved that he coughed when he laughed. now, dr. seligman and dr. systrom both said -- seligman. i keep calling dr. seidelman seligman. i'm sorry. so dr. seidelman said -- and i could put it up on the board, but i want to try to save time, save some time. i've got a -- i do not want to use up alex's remaining time. dr. seidelman said laughing and coughing is not necessarily anything, not necessarily copd. it might be, it might not be. dr. systrom said that is not a copd symptom. shortness of breath when you sprint and you are 40 years old or 45 years old and you are out of breath, sprinting, that is not a sign of copd. so let us go through the list. i have a list of -- i do want to put up that list of -- well, i'll tell you what. i'll go back to the plan for a minute. let us show what we have for -- what -- what was said. again, the irony of this or the inconsistency of this when you have mr. horrigan speaking. (video clip played as follows:) 3161 mr. koppel: cigarette smoking, no causal relationship between cigarette smoking and emphysema? mr. horrigan: despite all of the research to date, there has been no causal link established. (video clip stopped.) mr. freidin: so i think alex said it to you, the inconsistency of them taking the position that while they are telling everybody in the world that there is no connection, at the same time, john hackimer, who is a high school graduate and working on the railroad, is supposed to know what they are telling him is not true. at the same time. there is an inconsistency there. there is also -- let us go to this one. this is -- this is one of the documents, one of the internal documents. "for nearly 20 years, this industry has employed a single strategy to defend itself on three major fronts: litigation, politics, and public opinion. while the strategy was brilliantly conceived and executed over the years, helping us win," i think it should be "win important battles, it is only fair to say that it is not nor was it intended to be a vehicle for victory. it was a holding strategy creating 3162 doubt." three major fronts: litigation, politics, and public opinion. so while they were -- the clerk: counselor, five minutes. mr. freidin: okay. while they were making the strategy of litigation and politics and public opinion, they are now saying he should have known better. mr. furr: objection, your honor, i need to approach. the court: sure. counsel, sidebar. (the following proceedings were had before the court at the bench and out of the hearing of the jury.) the court: yes, mr. furr. mr. furr: i knew this was coming. what mr. freidin has just done now is argue that the defense of this case, that our position that he should have known is a continuation of the strategy outlined in the document that is on the board which outlines what they called the planks of the conspiracy or the way the conspiracy was executed. so he has essentially just argued that the defense of this case is a continuation of the conspiracy. that is expressly -- everyone knows 3163 under gafney and other opinions, you cannot do that. it is an attack on the defense. i move for a mistrial. the court: well, that is denied. i do not see that, mr. furr. i did not -- i just looked at the transcript as it was scrolling. i did not hear it and i did not see that. mr. furr: he just turned around and pointed his finger at us and said, "and they say he should have known while they are doing this." mr. alex alvarez: he is talking about the corporations at the time in the '80s and '90s, that is when he is talking about, when those documents were written. that is what he is talking about. the court: we can even read it from the record. it says litigation -- can you hear me, nancy? okay. litigation, politics, public opinion. the strategy back then is brilliantly conceived and executed over the years, helping us win. i think he is reading from the document. it was not intended for legal victory. it was a whole -- right now, he is just quoting from the document. 3164 mr. furr: it is the next statement. the court: okay. three major fronts. that is also from that document. mr. furr: well, keep reading. the court: so while they were -- mr. furr: they are now saying he should have known better. he turned around and pointed at counsel and said we are now here in this courtroom saying that he should have known better. mr. alex alvarez: judge, that is not -- the court: and i just do not think he is trying -- i think he is just saying that that is your -- he is just saying that your defense is he knew or should have known. so i'm going to deny your motion. and i do not think mr. freidin did anything -- tied it to current defense of the case. mr. freidin: right. the court: and i'll just caution him. mr. freidin: yeah, okay. the court: so the motion is denied. mr. freidin: how much time do i have? mr. alex alvarez: she stopped it. the court: she stopped it. correct? mr. freidin: yeah, i just know -- how much is 3165 it? the clerk: i stopped it. the court: yeah, she stopped it. how much more time? i'm sorry. the clerk: five minutes. the court: five minutes. (the following proceedings were had in open court before the court and the jury.) mr. freidin: so i'm going to pick and choose some of the things. i am going to have to ditch some of my arguments because i'm running out of time. we had testimony that there was never -- by the witnesses that the defense read, that is nellany, ivonne, the sisters-in-law, all of whom said they never saw a productive cough, all of whom said they never saw shortness of breath. and the only place you are going to hear that where those things happened is when you are going to hear with dr. klein, the expert that they hired, assumed things that were not in evidence. he assumed the productive cough. he assumed that they were -- well, we can show that, yeah. testimony of william p. klein, md, played as follows:) 3166 by mr. freidin: q. doctor, is it your testimony that are you basing your opinion on these witnesses testified that there was coughing up sputum? a. i'm basing it on the fact -- ms. lehman: objection, your honor. by mr. freidin: q. a. yes or no, are you basing it on that? the court: he can answer. go ahead, doctor, you can answer. i'm basing it on the fact that these fact witnesses described his coughing incessantly, his panting when he tried to run the bases, and that he had a cough. i have assumed that cough was productive of sputum. q. a. you have assumed that? yes. stopped and the following is in open court.) mr. freidin: now let us play -- let us show the testimony of jeanette white and thomas white, please, and dennis nellany. sorry to take you out of order. mr. philipson: that is okay. mr. freidin: you said -- this is jeanette 3167 white. "you said you do not remember john ever having any shortness of breath? "no, i do not. "you were asked questions about if you ever remember john having shortness of breath, and you said no? "not back in the old days, no." dennis nellany. "describe for me the occasions he would get short of breath. "if he went from first to third playing softball. "any other occasions? "no." and then he talks about they played golf. he never had shortness of breath. "and do you ever remember him having shortness of breath?" and, of course, even dr. klein conceded there was no copd in the 1970s. we have -- and then there is -- is there one more? yeah. "would you describe a productive cough, coughing up? "no." 3168 let us show the one on dr. seidelman, please. "is shortness of breath only a symptom of copd? "no. "could it be a symptom of just being out of shape? "yes, being overweight. "you were also questioned about deep cough. would that -- when he laughed. would that only be a symptom of copd? "no." could be others. "many people do not know they have copd until they are diagnosed? "that is correct, many do not. they do not appear -- does not appear to be a chronic bronchitis component." he did not have chronic bronchitis. that is the part about the railroad stuff. "and what kind of copd would you expect to see due to diesel? "same thing." so let us do the assumptions were wrong, please. of 3169 testimony of william p. klein, md, played as follows:) by mr. freidin: q. we know that thomas white testified that he never saw a productive cough and he never saw -- observed mr. hackimer coughing up anything; right? a. q. a. q. that is correct. you know that? yes. we know that dennis nellany, his friend, never saw a productive cough; right? a. no, but he is the one who saw him bending over, catching his breath. q. a. one time running the bases? and told him to stop smoking and he could do it much faster. freidin: stop. so i want to go -- you are going to hear an expression in the charges about the words "some evidence." i want to talk about the evidence in this case. no medical person was ever seen by john for -- john was never seen by a medical person during this -- up until he was diagnosed -- or actually 3170 pneumonia, 1991. no one ever said to him that he had copd or a disease. his sister-in-laws and his friend dennis never said to him that. neither of them had -- none of them had medical training. he never had a diagnosis. he never missed any work. he never had a sick day. the clerk: counselor, you have one minute left. mr. freidin: oh, thank you. no shortness of breath outside of running the bases a couple times or one time. no sputum. and then in 1991, this pneumonia thing where a doctor's obviously examined him, obviously found him to have pneumonia, and did not find copd. so those are the pieces of evidence. and let us go to manifested destiny. you are going to hear the word when did it manifest itself. and that is in the charges. i'm not all that familiar with that term "manifested" or "manifest". it is not a word that i hear used a lot. i only remember it from high school civics or history where the manifest destiny -- mr. furr: interesting, but not relevant. mr. freidin: pardon me? the court: sustained. sustained. go on. 3171 mr. freidin: because my history is wrong or -- the court: no, your history is perfectly fine. mr. freidin: okay. all right. well, i think that the last thing i'm going to say before i sit down is this. just imagine this -- john consulting with a lawyer, because the whole context of this is it is a statute of limitations case defense. he should not be able -- they are saying he should not be able to make this claim, he is out, if you believe he should have made a claim before may 5th, 1990. that is the claim -- mr. furr: objection, that is not the legal standard. the court: sustained. mr. furr: move to strike. the court: knew or should have known. sustained. mr. freidin: well, i am saying, he should -- they are saying -- can i say this? that they are saying he should have -- should have known to make a claim before that time. the court: just use the jury instruction, if 3172 you want to, if you have it handy. mr. alex alvarez: knew or should have known. the court: knew or should have known. mr. freidin: did he know or should have known enough to make a claim, not that he would know or should have known -- mr. furr: objection. not the standard. the court: sustained. knew or should have known that he -- i'll get the jury instruction. mr. freidin: well. the court: that is okay. you can continue. mr. freidin: okay. the court: i'll sustain the objection. mr. freidin: all right. the last thing i'm going to say is it does not say he should have suspected. it says he should have known. so i'm going to sit down now and let mr. furr begin. mr. furr: thank you. may it please the court. the court: please. mr. furr: good morning, everyone. the jurors: good morning. mr. furr: the judge has told you, the plan is 3174 that i will find a breaking point when your lunch gets here, so we can take our break as usual and then we will come back after lunch and i will finish. i am going to have to begin the same way mr. alvarez did and thank you for your service. you have been excellent jurors. you have paid attention throughout the trial. nobody is going to sleep. nobody is playing with their phone. everybody has been paying attention. everybody comes dressed professionally. you have taken this matter seriously. you have been diligent in every way, and it has been an honor to appear before you as a lawyer. i know mr. alvarez feels the same way. so thank you very much. well, mr. alvarez and i agree on something, and that is you need to your eye on the ball in this case. because no matter what sport you like, one of the most important things that we teach kids when they first start playing sports is keep your eye on the ball. it does not matter whether your sport is lacrosse or baseball or my favorite, football, you have got to keep your eye on the ball. let us think about what that means for this case. the class action is over. this is not a case about smokers in general. it is not a case 3175 about tobacco company conduct in general. it is not a case about anything other than mr. hackimer. anything other than mr. hackimer. the case is about his smoking, what he knew, when he knew it, what he did with that information, what diseases he developed, when he developed those diseases, whether he should have quit smoking sooner, whether he kept smoking because he enjoyed smoking. those are the types of issues that the evidence has been about in this case, and that is what i'm going to focus on in my closing. i will say that mr. alvarez made a lot of serious claims about tobacco company conduct in the past -- mr. alex alvarez: objection, judge, attacking the way -- the court: sustained. mr. furr: we take very seriously the engle findings. we are not here to dispute those findings in any way. you were shown a lot of documents that said some stupid, awful things. and i'm not here to defend those documents either. those thoughts should have never been thought, those thoughts should have never been written down, but that is not 3176 why you are here. you have to keep your eye on the ball, because what you are here for is to see whether the plaintiffs can prove their case and connect that historical conduct with mr. hackimer, utilizing the instructions that the court has given you. because, as you know, this case is about one smoker and one smoker only. it is about mr. hackimer. so i'm going to focus all my time today talking about the evidence regarding mr. hackimer. and how do you know it is about one smoker and one smoker only? as we have told you at the start of this case, you are going to get a verdict form. you have it now. you saw it read and you saw -- i have condensed it into one page here. you saw that every single question on the verdict form that you have before you asks you a question about mr. hackimer except for the last question, which actually uses his name twice. so the case is about mr. hackimer. and plaintiffs have to prove their case. how do they have to prove their case? they have to prove their case with evidence about mr. hackimer. they cannot prove their case by playing on your sympathies for mr. hackimer. i've -- 3177 mr. alex alvarez: objection, judge, about playing -- you know, it is improper. the court: sustained. mr. furr: we acknowledged up front that we and everyone else in this courtroom feel sorry for mr. hackimer. he is very sick. he is very limited in what he can do. i'm sure he does not feel well most of the time. and everybody here feels sorry for him, but as you are going to hear before you retire for your deliberations, you cannot base your decision in this case on sympathy. in fact, everybody promised us during jury selection that you would not base your decision in this case on that. the case is not about lawyers' rhetoric. it is not about argument. you cannot prove this case by raising your voice and yelling and pointing your fingers over at defense counsel. you cannot prove your case about mr. hackimer that way. mr. alex alvarez: objection. that is an inappropriate -- objection. the court: sustained. mr. furr: you have to prove mr. hackimer's case with argument -- excuse me, with evidence. you cannot prove it with argument. you cannot fill 3178 in the gaps in the evidence with argument. you have to do it with evidence. and as i am going to show you, the plaintiff has failed to meet his burden of proof with respect to the claims that mr. hackimer has in multiple ways throughout this case. in fact, what i'm going to do as i begin is i am going to show you some of the most significant ways that there are gaps in the plaintiffs' evidence that prevents them from failing to meet their burden of proof. and, you know, we had a -- a lot was said about dr. proctor as a witness and how much he knows and how much time he spent studying tobacco. i'm not challenging any of that. he could be a great witness in a case that he knew something about. he could be a great witness in a class action case, or in a case about tobacco company conduct in general, or in a case about smokers in general. but what kind of witness was he in this case about mr. hackimer? we had sort of a -- we had one of those moments in time that are extremely revealing in this case. and that is when i asked dr. proctor how much -- excuse me, when i asked dr. proctor 3179 what the plaintiff's name was in this case, and he did not know. and i had to tell him that the plaintiff's name was john hackimer. you know, a lot was said this morning about the amount of money that the defense witnesses have been paid. well, when you live in a glass house, you should not cast stones. mr. alex alvarez: objection, judge. the court: overruled. mr. furr: when you live in a glass house, you should not cast stones. mr. alex alvarez: same objection. the court: overruled. mr. furr: dr. proctor has been paid significantly more, almost twice as much as all the other witnesses in this case put together to testify in tobacco cases. he is been paid $4.2 million. most of it, as you saw during cross-examination, in the past five years, about $3 million of that in the past five years to testify in these type of cases. he was paid $52,000 for his work in this case and he did not know mr. hackimer's name. he did not know mr. hackimer's name. same situation with dr. henningfield. 3180 dr. henningfield, the only addiction witness that the plaintiffs called, he did not come live, you saw his video, was a generic witness. he told you he was a generic witness. he told you he did not know the name of the smoker in this case. what is this case about? this case is about mr. hackimer smoking, when he began, why he began, what he knew and what he did with that information and whether he was able to quit and whether he tried to quit and what his experience was when he tried to quit. those are the issues that you are going to be discussing when you look at the verdict form questions. and you cannot prove your case on those issues with witnesses who know nothing about mr. hackimer. think about it. dr. proctor and dr. henningfield knew nothing about when mr. hackimer started, what brands he smoked, how much he smoked, what he knew, when he knew it, what he did with that information, whether he tried to quit, when he quit, nothing. they knew nothing about mr. hackimer. in fact, plaintiffs did not call a witness in this case other than mr. hackimer that even knew mr. hackimer. no one who even knew mr. hackimer. 3181 the plaintiffs brought you zero witnesses in their case who knew mr. hackimer. the defense, r.j. reynolds, we brought you five different witnesses that either knew mr. hackimer from their personal relationship or had been his physician or at a minimum had interviewed him as part of forming their opinions in this case. we brought you two family members. we brought you a friend and neighbor. you know, these are the people that knew him best, these are people that loved him, who cared about him. they certainly had no ax to grind against him. they had no -- there is no reason they would have testified in a way intentionally to harm his case. these were his friends and neighbors and family members. we brought you his treating pulmonologist, the doctors that mr. hackimer entrusts his health to, who he trusts, who he relies on, who in turn told you that he likes mr. hackimer, and he is proud of the job that he has done taking care of mr. hackimer. that is dr. seidelman. you might remember we read to you his deposition. my colleague, antonio, sat up there and read to you dr. seidelman's portion to you. 3182 and even dr. giakas, and we are going to talk about dr. giakas's credentials and why they are important in this case. dr. giakas, before he came here and testified, conducted an independent medical examination of mr. hackimer. you heard him discuss the couple hours of interview that he did with mr. hackimer so he could understand what? mr. hackimer's smoking before he provided you opinions about mr. hackimer. so, again, continuing to look at some of the gaps in the plaintiffs' case and why they cannot meet their burden of proof. the number of doctors that plaintiff brought to you who had ever treated or examined mr. hackimer is zero. we brought you his treaters. we brought you the addiction expert. they brought you nobody. the number of his treating physicians who testified that his copd was caused by smoking, think about this, his treating physician, dr. seidelman, who has been treating him for several years now, who sees him on an ongoing basis, again, the doctor that mr. hackimer trusts to take care of his health did not tell you that his copd was caused by smoking. 3183 this is a case, as you know, the class membership case -- question, the class membership question has multiple parts. one of the parts is medical causation. that is what we just addressed. the second part is, has to do with addiction, is as to whether he was addicted and whether his addiction was a cause of his copd. so whether he was addicted and whether his addiction was a cause of his copd is front and center in this case. let us look at the gaps in plaintiffs' evidence on those issues. the number of doctors or medical records that diagnosed mr. hackimer as addicted in this case, zero. before this lawsuit, nobody ever said mr. hackimer was addicted, and mr. hackimer never told anybody that he was addicted. that never happened outside of this lawsuit. the number of addiction experts who diagnosed mr. hackimer as addicted or found that his addiction caused his copd, core parts of the class membership test, zero. the plaintiffs brought you no expert to tell you that he was addicted or that his addiction caused his disease. instead, you have got dr. proctor. dr. proctor, 3184 their main witness, spent almost two and a half, going on three days, of trial in this case, showed you over 170 exhibits from internal tobacco company documents during his direct examination, but did he even try to link those to mr. hackimer's decision-making about smoking? no. the number of times that dr. proctor showed you a document and told you that it had any impact on mr. hackimer was zero. now, one of the tasks you are going to have before you as you evaluate the evidence in this case and which part of the evidence you find most credible and most persuasive is you are going to have the opportunity to consider the source of that evidence and how that evidence came into being, was this evidence that existed outside of this courtroom independent of this lawsuit, or was this evidence that came to be only in the context of this lawsuit. and one of the things i'm going to suggest to you is that when you consider mr. hackimer's testimony in this case, that you think about that, because what you will see is when we compare the testimony he gave in this case compared to what was going on in the real world outside of this lawsuit, 3185 you will see that before this lawsuit, mr. hackimer never told anyone that he was addicted. you heard from his friends and family members, you heard from his doctor. before this lawsuit, mr. hackimer never told anyone that he had ever tried to quit before 1993. a lot's been said about mr. hackimer having doubts and becoming confused and relying on industry statements. where did that evidence come from? you heard the testimony of his friends and family members. before this lawsuit, mr. hackimer never expressed to anyone that he had doubts about the dangers of smoking or that he was confused about the dangers of smoking or that he was relying on something that the tobacco companies said in making his decisions about smoking. that evidence came into existence for this lawsuit. and, in fact, on all those issues, he said almost the opposite outside of this lawsuit, and i'm going to show you that evidence. before this lawsuit, when people would confront mr. hackimer about his cough, or the risks that he was taking about smoking, or his need to continue smoking, including when his mother looked 3186 at him while she was sick and on oxygen and told him he needed to quit, before this lawsuit, he never told anyone, no, i do not, it is okay for me to continue, because i'm smoking filtered cigarettes or light cigarettes. again, that was a position that he never took with anyone anywhere before this lawsuit. enough of those gaps in plaintiffs' case. let us look at the other side of the coin now and look at what the evidence that came into this case actually showed you. what did you learn about the evidence in this case about mr. hackimer? i've got a board here, i think. is this on the board, cliff? i'm going to put this up because we will refer back to it a couple different times as we go forward today. the same board as what you see on the screen, your honor, mr. alvarez. the court: okay, thank you, mr. furr. mr. furr: you were told this morning to focus on what mr. hackimer believed. and as i'm going to show you when i -- that is in your way again, is not it? are you 3187 okay? i'm going to show you that mr. hackimer testified under oath in this courtroom that he believed that cigarette smoking was hazardous to his health in the late 1960s. and at that time, in this case about copd, about his smoking and his breathing problems, he is testified to you under oath, and we are going to look at his testimony, that he was concerned that smoking would cause him to develop breathing problems all the way back in the 1960s. the evidence was that mr. hackimer enjoyed smoking. he knew the risks that he was taking. but instead of deciding to quit, his plan was always to continue smoking until he got sick, and then stop smoking before the disease got too bad. that was his plan. and we are going to show you that testimony. mr. hackimer himself. by the way, you know we talked about mr. hackimer liking to gamble. that is okay. nobody is criticizing him for that. it is a legal form of entertainment. it is america. he had the right to do that. remember, we showed you he said, yeah, i knew that the cost of my entertainment might be that i 3188 might lose. that, you know, sometimes you win, sometimes you lose. i was willing to place my bets and take my chances. and he told you that that is the same way he felt about his cigarette smoking, because he knew that he was taking those chances and that he might lose. and you might remember what he also said was, "yeah, but, you know, my view was if it happens when i'm 80, i'm 80 years old, i'll deal with it." the problem is it happened when he was younger in life. that is really the main complaint he has. the evidence has demonstrated that mr. hackimer quit the first and only time that he got serious about quitting and was committed to quitting and was motivated to quit and went 24 hours without a cigarette. the first time he did it, he quit smoking. and, yeah, he had a patch. and, yeah, he decided to finish the pack of cigarettes that he already had at home. he never bought another pack. he finished a pack of cigarettes that he had at home that had six or seven cigarettes in it. once in a while, he would reach for one in that first week when he was quitting. and then after 3189 that pack was gone, he never smoked another cigarette again, despite, and we will talk about this at some length, despite living in a home with a wife who smoked every day and who had cigarettes in the house. and as you heard, mr. hackimer admits responsibility for not quitting sooner. and we are going to talk about what that admission means when you parse it out in this lawsuit. again, i'm going to say it multiple times because it is so important, you have got to keep your eye on the ball. you have got to keep your eye on the ball in this case. mr. hackimer was not a smoker who smoked in the '20s or '30s or '40s or '50s, before the dangers of smoking were as widely publicized, as they began to be in the mid '50s. he was not someone who began smoking on a regular basis until the 1960s. and when he began smoking on a regular basis in 1960s, very soon thereafter, not only had he heard that cigarette smoking was dangerous, hazardous to your health, but he believed it. he believed it. here was his testimony. of 3190 testimony furr: q. you first believed that cigarettes were hazardous to your health in the 1960s; right? a. q. late '60s, yes. and you recall when the warnings were put on cigarette packs in 1966, do not you? a. i -- yes. furr: the language matters. he said he believed it in the 1960s. and he believed it when the warnings went on the pack. he did not say i was confused about what the warning -- whether the warnings were correct, or i had my doubts, or yes, but the tobacco companies were saying it had not been proven. he did not say, yeah, but i could not quit, or it was okay because i was smoking filters or lights. he said he believed it. he believed it. and, you know, one of the very important things to keep in mind in this case are the pack warnings and the warnings and advertisements. because again, he is not somebody who smoked very much, if at all, on a regular basis before the 3191 warnings went on. and the warnings went on in 1966. he had been smoking, on a regular basis, at the most, for four or five years by 1966. and so he is really a smoker who spent his whole time smoking getting his cigarettes out of a pack that had a warning on them. here is what the warnings said throughout his life. from '66 to '70, it says, "cigarette smoking may be hazardous to your health." that is when he believed that statement, as we just saw. from '70 to '85, it said, "warning: the surgeon general has determined that cigarette smoking is dangerous to your health." from 1985 on, you got one of four rotating warnings, including the warnings "surgeon general's warning: smoking causes lung cancer, heart disease, emphysema, and may complicate pregnancy" and the "surgeon general's warning: quitting smoking now greatly reduces serious risks to your health." you might remember when we cross-examined mr. hackimer, he said, "yeah, i knew that first warning was on there. i never looked at them much anymore. i knew what it said." he did not 3192 challenge it. it told him all that he needed to know. and, you know, he made his decision to gamble with his health despite knowing that the warning was on the pack. and from 1972 on, it was in every advertisement he looked at also. and as he told you, he knew that that same warning, that very same warning was on every pack of cigarettes, whether they were unfiltered or filtered, light, ultra-light, it did not matter, they all carried the same warning, and he never thought any of them were safe, he told you he never thought any of the cigarettes were safe. and we will look at that. not only did he tell you that he believed cigarettes were hazardous, critically important for this case, he knew and was concerned that his smoking would cause him, what, breathing problems. here is his testimony. of testimony furr: q. question: "and when you heard that cigarette smoking could be hazardous to your health, you did not include lung cancer?" 3193 answer: "no." "as one of those things" -- question: "as one of those things?" answer: "no, i did not." question: "what did you think that meant?" answer: "breathing problems of some sort." did i read those questions and answers correctly? a. yes. furr: that was one of those times when we went through that exercise that we all -- that lawyers refer to as impeachment, where a witness would say something that was inconsistent with his prior sworn testimony in his deposition and the court would allow us to present to you his prior sworn deposition testimony so you would get his prior sworn answer. despite believing that it was hazardous to his health and being concerned about cigarette smoking causing breathing problems, what did he do? did he try to quit? no. he told you, he never went 24 hours without a cigarette, from the time he became a regular smoker until 1993. 3194 of testimony furr: q. sir, is not it true that after you became a regular smoker, that you never quit for a period of 24 hours or longer in an effort to quit smoking until 1993? a. correct. stopped and the following is in open court.) mr. furr: we are going to look next at mr. hackimer's sworn testimony where he agreed that his smoking cigarettes was no different than him gambling, knowing that he could lose. and the question he is asked is really important, because the question he is asked includes whether he believed that he was gambling with his health when he smoked filtered cigarettes. filtered cigarettes. and here is the question and answer. of testimony furr: q. you knew that you were taking a risk of losing when you were gambling, but you considered that to be the price that you paid for your entertainment; right? 3195 a. q. yes. sir, you do not see any difference between the risks that you took when you were gambling at the casino and the risks that you took with your health when you were smoking even if you were smoking a filtered cigarette, do you? a. q. a. that is right. yes. you do not see any difference, do you? no. furr: think about where we are, members of the jury. mr. hackimer knew that he was gambling with his health when he smoked. it turned out badly for him. and he is now asking you to compensate him for his loss. that is where we are. and he is asking you to compensate him for his loss even though, even though he admits that he is responsible, that his choices are responsible -- that his not trying harder to quit is responsible for causing any smoking-related disease that he has. testimony furr: 3196 q. and you accept responsibility for your emphysema because you could have made a stronger attempt to quit; right? yes. you accept responsibility because even after you knew that smoking was not good for you, you should have tried hard harder to quit smoking; right? a. q. a. looking back, yes. furr: he knew that it was not good for him, he admits he should have tried harder to quit. ladies and gentlemen, there has been a lot thrown at you the past couple of weeks, but it is a pretty simple case if you keep your eye on the ball. it is a case about the choices that mr. hackimer made with respect to his smoking and his personal responsibility for the choices that he made. and, your honor, i think it is -- the court: perfect timing. mr. furr: -- perfect time to stop for lunch. the court: absolutely. and lunch is here as well. so ladies and gentlemen, let us go ahead and 3197 take a lunch recess. we will take about 20, 25 minutes. your lunches are in the jury room. please i want to quick go over the instructions. do not start discussing the case during the lunch. enjoy your lunch. just leave your notes in the chairs as well. thank you, everyone. enjoy your lunch. (the jury left the courtroom at 12:00 p.m.) the court: all right, thank you, everyone. we will be in recess for about 25 minutes. (recess taken from 12:00 p.m. to 12:33 p.m.) the deputy: all rise, court is back in session. the court: all right, everybody ready? mr. furr: yes. the court: mr. furr, are you ready? mr. furr: i am, thank you. the court: all right, let us bring the jurors in, please. the deputy: jurors entering. (the jury entered the courtroom at 12:33 p.m.) the court: all right, welcome back, everyone. thank you so much. hope you enjoyed your lunch. please take your seats. and we are going to continue with mr. furr and his closing argument. 3198 mr. furr: thank you. may it please the court? the court: yes, thank you. mr. furr: welcome back, members of the jury. hope you had a good if a short lunch. you are on the home stretch. one more afternoon of this. but thank you again for your diligence. before i go on, let us just boil this case down to the simple truth. mr. hackimer was one hundred percent in control of whether he smoked and whether he quit. no one else had any control over those issues. cigarettes do not light themselves and jump in your mouth. nobody held a gun to his head and told him to smoke cigarettes. he knew they were dangerous by the late 1960s, but he chose to gamble with his health, knowing that he might lose. he hoped it would not be until he was 80. unfortunately, and sadly, and i mean that, sadly, it happened much earlier than 80 years old. but now he wants you to compensate him with $15 million. use your common sense. use your common sense. i wish i could stop now, but i cannot, because 3199 your verdict form has seven questions on it. and my obligation as an attorney to my client is that i walk you through what the evidence shows and what we suggest to you your answer should be on each of those questions, even though, as you will see as i go through those questions, along the way, there is a couple times that when you answer that question, that should be the end of your deliberations and your foreman should sign the verdict form and return the verdict and we would be done with this case. but in any event, i'm going to turn to that, and i'm going to start with this threshold issue of class membership. as we told you in opening statement, the plaintiff -- and remember, the plaintiff has the burden on all these issues to prove class membership. this is question 1 on your verdict form. and when you read the question, when you break it apart mentally, you will see, and as you saw from the plaintiffs' presentation this morning, they agree with me that there are actually three separate elements or three separate things that they have to prove, they have to get over the 3200 hurdle to prove these elements. they cannot prove one of them. they cannot prove two of them. they have to prove all three. if they have not proven to your satisfaction all three of these elements, then mr. hackimer is not a class member, and as you will see on your verdict form, you check no and you sign your verdict form and you return it and the case is completed. but those elements are as follows. and i'm combining the verdict form question with some of the instructions you are going to get. because the instructions are really, really important, and i'm going to try to highlight for you as we go along some of those important instructions that we would suggest to you should be used to guide your deliberations. but the first part of class membership that he has to prove is that but for smoking cigarettes, he would not have developed copd. but for smoking cigarettes, he would not have developed copd. second, he has to prove that he was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine. and finally, he has to prove, and this is kind of an odd concept, so i'm going to talk a little bit about what it means, he has to prove addiction 3201 causation. and what that means, he has to prove that his addiction to nicotine was a legal cause of his copd. and like i said, it is very important to remember he has to prove all three of those. talk about the engle findings for a minute, because we have told you the engle findings were important. they are serious, but you have to follow your instructions and use them in the way they are intended to be used in these cases, because they can play an important role, but it is a limited role. and the instructions will tell you the limited purpose for which the engle findings are to be used. and the first thing they will tell you in instruction number 6, you will see that you may not consider the engle findings in determining whether mr. hackimer was a member of the engle class. was a member of the engle class. so this very first verdict form question you decide without reference to the engle findings in any way. okay. let us talk about the first hurdle on class membership, and that is, have plaintiffs proven to you the burden that they took on, which 3202 is but for his smoking of cigarettes, he would not have developed copd. and not only is this the first hurdle, this is the first part of the test where their claim fails, because they cannot prove to you that it was the copd. mr. hackimer had two independent risk factors for copd. smoking. nobody disagrees. we all recognize, understand, admit that smoking is a risk factor for copd, but so are railroad occupational exposures. and i'm going to suggest to you that one of the ways to understand the role that smoking played versus the role that railroad occupational exposures played is to make sure you focus on the timing and sequence of events. make sure you focus on when he developed symptoms, what he had been composed to at that point, and what happened when different exposures were removed. so if you follow the sequence of events, it is very informative as to what was actually going on with his copd. first, his expert, dr. systrom, admitted that mr. hackimer had not smoked sufficient cigarettes in the 1980s to cause copd. he had not smoked 3203 enough yet to cause copd. but dr. systrom will also admit that mr. hackimer's -- excuse me. i'm getting ahead of myself. let me go to the second point first. however, his 24 years of railroad occupational exposures would have significantly increased his risk for copd. you are going to see that he developed symptoms at a time when he did not have enough cigarette smoke exposure, but he had the occupational exposures. in addition, you might remember we talked at length about the different pfts, pulmonary function tests, that were administered to him at different points in time. when you look at the sequence of results of those pfts, you will see the following: everybody agrees that smoking causes a decrease in lung function, but that after you take that smoking away, within a couple years, that decrease in lung function from smoking returns to the same decrease that we all experience as a result of aging. however, in this case, after mr. hackimer stopped smoking in 1993, his pulmonary lung function continued to decrease at an accelerated rate, faster than you would expect to 3204 see in a nonsmoker. what was going on in his life? what was going on was he continued to be exposed to occupational exposures, continued to have those railroad exposures at his workplace, and that is what was causing his decrease in pulmonary function. dr. systrom, plaintiffs' own expert, told you that he was experiencing symptoms consistent with copd in the 1980s, but that he did not have sufficient pack-years of smoking by the 1980s, so that begs the question as to what was causing that. well, dr. mcgregor provided the answer to you. now, dr. mcgregor explained to you that not just diesel fumes, but the occupational exposures that mr. hackimer had of diesel fumes, vapors, gases, silica, mineral, and metal dust, asbestos and particulate matter, not that asbestos caused asbestosis, but all these things for 24 years were significant risk factors for copd. for copd. now, we have gone back and forth about was mr. hackimer exposed to fumes for a short period of time or a long period of time, and you have heard the lawyers argue. forget what the lawyers say, forget what i say, forget what mr. alvarez says. look at what 3205 mr. hackimer said, look at what mr. hackimer said about his exposures. you will have in evidence his vocational records that spanned his entire employment history with the railroad in which in his own handwriting you will see mr. hackimer circling for each job, for each time period that he was exposed to fumes or noxious gases, and in most of these, he also wrote in diesel locomotives, et cetera. diesel locomotives, et cetera. so you can look to mr. hackimer's -- what mr. hackimer said outside this courtroom when he was filling out his vocational records as to the extent of his exposure to workplace exposures. it is also important, i would submit to you, to look at what his doctor said. not the experts that were brought here, but look at what his doctors, who were doing what? trying to treat him for his pulmonary disease, look what they said outside the context of litigation. because you will see in the 1997 record the following: "mr. hackimer has persistent shortness of breath at times." when? "especially when he is at work and he does work in the train yard." where? 3206 "with exposure to a lot of fumes from diesel engines." remember, this is four years after he stopped smoking, four years after his decline in lung function from smoking would have returned to the same rate that we all experience as nonsmokers. dr. keller in 2011 wrote the following in his medical records, "he was a locomotive engineer and he was exposed to diesel fumes for some time." so the doctors who were treating him, who had no dog in this fight, what they wrote was unrelated to any litigation, were all concerned about his history of diesel fume exposure and how it related to his copd. both dr. mcgregor and dr. systrom told you that a few years after someone stops smoking, their lung function returns to -- the decrease in lung function we all unfortunately experience as a result of aging, seems a little bit more unfortunate with every year with me right now, but the decrease in lung function we experience will be the same as nonsmoker. you might remember this psa from the american cancer society. (video clip played as follows:) 3207 speaker: the moment you stop, in most cases, the effects of smoking will begin to reverse themselves until your lungs are nice and clear again. (video clip stopped.) mr. furr: okay, do you remember i suggested to you that it is important to try to keep in mind the sequence of events in this case as to what was happening to mr. hackimer's lung function and what was going on with him with respect to his exposure to cigarette smoke or diesel fumes. and what you will see is that his lung function was decreasing and then he stopped smoking in 1993, when he continued being exposed to fumes in the railroad and his lung function decreased as measured by fev1, which all the pulmonologists explained to you is the way to look at this thing, when measured by fev1, continued to decrease at an accelerated rate above and beyond what you would expect in a nonsmoker. why? because he continued to be exposed to diesel fumes, and that is what was causing his copd and his decrease in lung function. you have a -- one of the tasks you have before you is to sort out which expert to believe. because on this issue, for example, both sides 3208 called in experts. we called dr. klein, dr. mcgregor. they called dr. systrom. the experts had different opinions. and you have to decide, it is a battle of experts, who do i believe. i think you should believe dr. systrom in this way. you should believe dr. systrom when he tells you who he turns to when he has a difficult problem with an occupational exposure and whose advice he seeks out. he was asked: "and you often call in a consultation from an occupational medicine expert if one of your patients has a significant occupational exposure?" answer: "that is correct." that was during ms. lehman's cross-examination of dr. systrom. so dr. systrom tells you that with respect to evaluating this railroad exposure, who should you turn to? an occupational medical specialist, and we had one, we had dr. mcgregor. you got to see dr. mcgregor. yeah, she is not a credentialed -- she is not someone who writes books and makes speeches and works at harvard. what is she? you saw she is a compassionate, caring doctor who spends her life helping workers 3209 with problems they have developed as a result of their occupation. she tries to help them get well. she tries to keep them well. she gets consulted by the state of florida, among others, to help them do that kind of job. she is a doctor who is devoted to improving the occupational health of workers in this state. and dr. systrom acknowledged that is the kind of doctor you turn to to understand this type of issue. here is what she said. even if mr. hackimer never smoked, his risk of developing copd was increased for each of the 24 hours [sic] that he worked on the railroad. take a step back. you have got smoking, railroad exposure. both of them risk factors. so we asked her which one caused his copd? which one caused his copd? because that is plaintiffs' burden of proof. and she told you that the evidence does not support a determination of what caused mr. hackimer's copd because you have two independent risk factors, two independent risk factors, and you cannot tell which of them did what. now, she did not tell you that they both did it, that they were working together. she did not 3210 tell you that one of them caused the copd and the second one aggravated it. she did not say anything like that. she said you cannot tell. you know what, forget all the experts, forget the lawyers, forget the experts. rely on his treater. rely on what dr. seidelman told you about whether you can tell what caused his copd. dr. seidelman, the doctor he relies on, who he goes to when he has a problem, when he got that exacerbation. who came and got him out of the woods? who took care of him? who sat up here when antonio was reading dr. seidelman's testimony and told how proud he was of the good care he is given mr. hackimer? dr. seidelman. here is what he told you. it would be purely speculation, purely speculation, to say if smoking or diesel caused mr. hackimer's copd. you cannot meet your burden of proof with speculation. you cannot do it. so i suggest to you that the plaintiffs have failed on the very first element of the very first question. and the answer to the question number 1 on the verdict form should be no, and as the directive below tells you, that after you answer 3211 no, you sign the verdict form and do not go any further. but they also failed the other parts of the test. excuse me. so let us turn to the second part of the test, which is addiction. the plaintiff has to prove to you that mr. hackimer was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine. we submit to you that they should have to prove that he was -- mr. alex alvarez: objection, judge. can you take that down? the court: sure. counsel sidebar. (the following proceedings were had before the court at the bench and out of the hearing of the jury.) the court: what is the objection? mr. furr: can you keep it on the screen up there, cliff? the court: yes. mr. alex alvarez: i object to this. "plaintiff have failed to prove that mr. hackimer was medically addicted to nicotine." i do not have to prove that. that is not -- that is not the instructions. i do not have to prove that he was medically addicted to -- the court: just use the jury instruction. 3212 mr. alex alvarez: right, that is -- mr. furr: no, no, no, your honor. whoa, whoa, whoa. he was permitted to say, oh, you can do a self -- you can use a do-at-home diagnosis to decide what addiction is. i am permitted to argue to them they should require -- because they do not have a definition of addiction, i am permitted to argue to them that they should require him to be medically addicted. that is my theory of the defense. that is my factual theory. i got it right in -- on the law. the court: he has an issue -- mr. alex alvarez: i have an issue with this because that is not the law that you gave them and that is not the requirement that i have that -- mr. furr: he can argue that. mr. alex alvarez: no. you cannot give them this -- you cannot give an instruction that is wrong on the law, that says that i failed to prove -- the court: just -- i'll sustain plaintiffs' objection. just clarify that. mr. furr: your honor, that is not the instruction on the law. i did not say that. mr. alex alvarez: it says has failed because he -- 3213 the court: the jury might just be confused that that was part of the jury instruction. i think that is mr. alvarez's -- mr. furr: i'll clear it up. i'll say you will not see this in the instruction, but this is what you should require. the court: that is fine. mr. furr: okay. the court: that is your view of the evidence. that is absolutely fine. (the following proceedings were had in open court before the court and the jury.) mr. furr: can you put it back up, cliff? including the -- okay. the instructions will tell you that he has to prove that he was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine. and i will submit to you that in the case where you are asking for $15 million, because of an addiction-related injury, you should require they prove to you that he was medically addicted to nicotine. mr. alex alvarez: objection, judge. improper instruction. the court: overruled. mr. furr: you should require that in a case 3214 like this. dr. giakas came to you and told you how you do that. he is the only witness who came to you and told you how to evaluate whether he was medically addicted and he told you that you do it with the dsm-5. he told you -- i mean, this is not a case, this is not a -- this is not ikea furniture, this is not a buy something and take it home and put it together yourself case. this is a case where the parties have an obligation to prove to you, plaintiff has to prove to you he was addicted. in this case, dr. giakas told you that you cannot prove someone is medically addicted without the training and education that he and other qualified psychiatrists have. it is not a checklist for deciding whether someone was addicted. it is a medical diagnosis that requires training, experience, and expertise. and here, the plaintiffs remarkably, they failed completely to prove to you with evidence that he was addicted. think about it. mr. hackimer's treating doctors never diagnosed he was addicted. doctor -- you will not see it in their 3215 records. in fact, you will not see in any medical record that mr. hackimer was addicted. mr. hackimer never went to the doctor for treatment of addiction. there is no evidence in the case that before this lawsuit mr. hackimer told anybody he was addicted. there is no evidence that before this case anybody ever told mr. hackimer he was addicted. and remarkably in a case where addiction and addiction causation are front and center parts of plaintiffs' burden of proof on class membership, they brought to you no expert, no expert to testify that mr. hackimer was addicted. they want to ask you for $15 million for an addiction-related injury, and they do not bring you an expert. mr. alex alvarez: objection, judge, that is an improper argument relating damages to failure to prove a liability case. the court: slightly clarify that. sustained. mr. furr: okay. in this case where they want for you to find whether he had an addiction-related injury, they did not bring to you a medical expert. instead, they want you to go do it yourself with common sense. dr. giakas told you it requires clinical 3216 judgment and expertise to determine whether someone is addicted to nicotine in cigarettes. and as i said, we will keep going back to this, remember to think about where this fact came from, because before this lawsuit, mr. hackimer never told anyone he was addicted. never told anyone he was addicted. okay, so it was suggested to you that all you have to know is that somebody is a daily regular smoker to know whether they are addicted or not. well, here is what the evidence is, dr. jack henningfield told you that not all smokers are addicted, and dr. giakas told you that more than 50 percent of regular smokers are not addicted. so if all you do is know that somebody is a daily regular smoker and you are asked whether they are addicted, then you might as well flip a coin because that is not enough information, because people smoke for reasons other than addiction. you were told this morning that mr. hackimer's favorite cigarette was his first cigarette of the day and that that was an important factor for you to think about in deciding whether he was addicted. let us look at what mr. hackimer told me on cross-examination. 3217 i asked him, "sir, you did not really have a favorite cigarette of the day. every cigarette you smoked was a" -- "was your favorite; right?" and he said, "yeah." he said, "yeah." dr. giakas is the only addiction expert to testify in this case who knew anything about mr. hackimer. and he did not learn it just by reading the depositions and by looking at the interrogatories and the other information. because you remember, he went and did, our request, an independent medical examination of mr. hackimer where one of plaintiffs' lawyers was in the room, one of the plaintiffs' lawyers was in the room while he conducted it, and dr. giakas asked him questions for a couple of hours so he would get the information he needed to testify in this case. again, plaintiff has the burden of proof in this case, and they did not bring you an addiction expert, they did not have anyone go talk to mr. hackimer about these issues. they want you to rely on a do-it-yourself addiction diagnosis. dr. giakas was very clear that under the dsm, mr. hackimer was not addicted to cigarettes. not 3218 addicted to nicotine -- cigarettes containing nicotine. plaintiffs' position is you do not need a dsm diagnosis, that you should just use your common sense, that you should just use a common sense diagnosis of addiction. let us think about that. let us talk about what that would tell you. if you decided to evaluate whether mr. hackimer was addicted, just using a common sense definition, using your common sense, what would someone look like, what would a smoker look like who was addicted to nicotine. i suggest to you that this is what an addicted smoker would look like. an addicted smoker would be tortured by their smoking. they would hate their smoking. their smoking would be out of control, they would tell people that they are addicted. they would seek help. they would try multiple times to quit smoking. they would experience horrendous withdrawal symptoms and relapse and return to smoking over and over. they would reach out and seek medical help. they would try quit aids. and ultimately, once they were free of cigarettes, they would avoid cigarettes at all 3219 cost. they would stay away from environments where other people were using the substance they had been addicted to for fear of relapsing. that is what an addicted smoker would look like using a common sense definition. is that what mr. hackimer looked like? of course not. he was the opposite. here is what mr. hackimer looked like. he did not want to quit. he did not want to quit, he enjoyed smoking, he liked the taste, he especially liked the taste of winston and winston lights, he smoked because he wanted to, it was under control. when he was in an environment where he was not allowed to smoke, he would either leave that environment or not smoke. never told anybody he was addicted. and he quit the first time he was motivated. and he quit immediately after his diagnosis. never relapsed. smoked a few cigarettes, but never relapsed after he quit. he did not need any other aids. you know, he chewed regular gum, apparently. he never smoked after 1993. and, you know, he did use a patch when he was quitting, but after that was done, he never relapsed. and think about it. think, he lived in a house with a wife who was a smoker and who had cigarettes present. 3220 now, if he had been addicted, he would have relapsed. now, can you imagine someone who was a serious heroin addict or serious opioid addict breaking their addiction and then going to a home and living in a home where someone else was using that same substance, heroin or opioids, living in a house with them, knowing what the substance was, and never touching it for 23 years. of course not. that defies common sense. and for those reasons, the plaintiffs have failed on a second ground to prove class membership, because they have not proven to you that he was addicted. they just have not proven. even if you thought they had proven it, they have to do a step further, they have to prove that addiction was a legal cause of his copd. so let us look at addiction causation. plaintiff has to prove to you that addiction to nicotine was a legal cause of mr. hackimer's copd, but they have brought you no expert, they brought you no expert who told you that addiction caused mr. hackimer's copd. the only expert in the case that knew mr. hackimer, that evaluated the facts of this case, dr. giakas, told you the opposite. he told 3221 you that addiction did not cause his copd. let us take a step back and let us look at what we know about nicotine and smoking cigarettes to evaluate whether or not mr. hackimer's addiction, if he was addicted, was the actual cause of his copd. let us start with plaintiffs' expert, dr. henningfield, who he did not know anything about mr. hackimer, but he was able to tell you this. nicotine addiction does not interfere with a smoker's ability to make an effort to quit. so all these years that mr. hackimer did not want to quit, did not try to quit, was not because of nicotine addiction, it is because that was his choice. he told you that nicotine addiction does not prevent smokers from quitting permanently and that nicotine addiction does not prevent heavy smokers or even highly addicted smokers from quitting. he told you that while he believes that a large percentage of the 60 million smokers in this country who have quit were addicted, they all quit anyway. it did not prevent them from quitting. look further what the experts told you. not only can heavy smokers quit, dr. proctor did tell 3222 you that tens of millions of heavy smokers quit in the '50s, '60s, '70s, and '80s without pharmacologic quit aids during those same decades that mr. hackimer made no effort to quit. dr. giakas told you that anyone can quit. let us look a little closer at the quitting that occurred in this country and compare it to what mr. hackimer did. because as dr. proctor told you, millions of heavily addicted smokers quit while mr. hackimer chose to smoke and not try to quit. dr. proctor told you that before mr. hackimer was a smoker, back in the 1950s, the mass quitting began because of all the publicity about the epidemiology studies and the animal studies, and that was all coming to light, and millions and millions of americans were making the decision, that is it, i'm not going to gamble, i'm not going to take that risk, i'm done. they put their cigarettes down. he told you between '60 and '65, 9 million people quit, which brought the total to 17 million. between '66 and '70, another 13 million quit, brought to 30 million quitters. and by the end of 1975, when mr. hackimer had made no effort 3223 whatsoever to quit, 45 million people had quit in this county. thousands of smokers were quitting every day. well, mr. hackimer was exercising the right that he had to choose that he did not want to quit, that he wanted to continue gambling with his health by smoking. that was his choice and his right to make that choice. it is also his responsibility. let us think about whether addiction to nicotine was a legal cause of mr. hackimer's disease. and i'm going to suggest to you a commonsense way. you will not find this in your instructions. i'm going to suggest to you a commonsense way to think about this question of addiction causation, because it is kind of an odd term. before you came in here to serve as jurors, you probably never thought about this concept of addiction causation too much, but now it is before you on your verdict form, so you have got to think about it. i suggest to you a commonsense way to do it. you can think about it like this. was mr. hackimer a tortured smoker who was unable to quit despite desperately wanting and trying to do so? if he 3224 was, that would be a very different case. or did mr. hackimer enjoy smoking and plan to smoke until he got sick, plan to smoke until he got sick? let us look at what the facts, the evidence of this case has told us about how to answer that commonsense way of looking at this question. again, before this lawsuit, mr. hackimer never told anyone he tried to quit before 1993, and that included his friends and family members, his buddies, his family members, people that loved him, the people that hung out with him, the people that certainly have no ax to grind about mr. hackimer, certainly would have no reason to want him to lose this lawsuit. we asked them all this and read the depositions to you. they all told you, ivonne ervin, mr. nellany, tom white, they all told you in the years they were around mr. hackimer, despite how much they were around him, that he never quit or even tried to quit. they all confirmed that. why? because he was not motivated to quit. because he is already made his decision, i'm going to smoke until i get sick. as soon as i get sick, i'm going to quit. 3225 the clerk: counselor, one hour. mr. furr: thank you. and that is what motivated him to quit. here is what mr. hackimer told us. testimony of john hackimer played as follows:) by mr. furr: q. sir, is not it true that before 1993, you do not recall ever waking up in the morning and deciding i'm not going to smoke today and not have any cigarettes that day? a. no, i did not. stopped and the following is in open court.) mr. furr: on direct examination, mr. hackimer told you he tried many times to quit. on cross-examination, he told us he never made the decision before 1993, he never woke up a single day and said i'm not going to smoke today. he told dr. giakas the same thing. dr. giakas, this is unchallenged, unrebutted testimony, dr. giakas told you that "in my ime when i examined him, it supported that he was not making quit attempts because he said to me very directly, 'before 1993, i never gave it a thought. i never 3226 gave it a thought to quit.'" unrebutted testimony. mr. hackimer did not get back in here, up in the rebuttal case for the plaintiffs and say, "i never said that to him." this testimony from dr. giakas was unchallenged. unchallenged. mr. hackimer himself told you that he was not motivated to quit until 1993. here is what he said. testimony furr: q. sir, when you quit smoking in 1993, you were truly motivated to quit, were not you? a. q. yes. you were not as motivated to quit smoking before you were diagnosed with emphysema, were you? a. q. no. when the doctor told you you had emphysema, that motivated you to quit; right? a. q. yes. and you became more motivated to quit than you had ever been in the past, did not you? a. q. yes. and when you finally became motivated and 3227 serious about quitting, you put them down and quit, did not you? a. after two months. furr: he was not motivated to quit until 1993. that is the only thing that changed. dr. giakas told you other than his motivation, his ability to quit in 1993 was no different from what his ability would have been in the 1960s, '70s, '80s. in fact, apparently, according to mr. hackimer, he was smoking three packs a day in 1993. if that is the case, he actually quit smoking when he was smoking the most cigarettes per day that he had ever smoked in his life. but what changed is he became motivated to quit. let us look at this issue of what his plan was. what was mr. hackimer's plan? well, we know what his plan was. dr. giakas told us that in his deposition, mr. hackimer said that his mother got ill as an older woman and that he was okay with that concept. and he said that "if i get -- if i get ill when i'm 80, then i'm 80, and it is okay." 3228 he recognized that the gambling he was doing could result in a loss of his health, but his hope was it would happen when he was older, when he was 80. i mean, it is sad. it is awful he got sick at 52. it is awful. but he knew it could happen. he was hoping it would happen later. he was hoping it would happen later. and let us look at what he told us about this conversation with his mother. testimony of john hackimer played as follows:) by mr. furr: q. later on in time, your mother told you that you should quit smoking, did not she? a. q. yes. and you told your mother, "i'll know if i have to quit;" right? yes. a. stopped and the following is in open court.) mr. furr: mom's sick. she is on oxygen. she is looking at the son that she loves and tells him that he needs to quit. he does not say, "why?" or "smoking's safe. mom, you do not understand, the 3229 tobacco companies say it is not proven." or "i just do not think that it is quite right because i've got doubts." or "i'm confused." he does not say, "no, mom, it is different, it is okay because i'm smoking filters," or "i'm smoking lights," or "i'm smoking ultra-lights." he does not say anything. in this moment between mother and son, when they are sick on oxygen, and she is warning him about his health, imagine the gravity of that moment between them, he does not say any of those things. he says, "i'll know if i have to quit. i'll know if i have to quit." and what we know, as dr. giakas explained to us, that what he meant was if i get sick, then i'll quit. if i get sick, then i'll quit. you know, an easy -- we talked about gambling a couple times. we are going to talk about it another time or two because it is such an easy way to understand this case. gambling is sort of a metaphor for the whole case. gambling was a way that the american cancer society described what a smoker is doing when they smoke cigarettes. gambling is a way that dr. proctor described what a smoker is doing when 3230 they smoke cigarettes. of course, you have now seen that is how mr. hackimer thought about it, too. dr. proctor told you that smoking cigarettes is like playing russian roulette with your life. and you might remember this psa where the american cancer society said the exact same thing. (video clip played as follows:) you lose. (video clip stopped.) mr. furr: easy way to understand the case, easy way to understand the case is when you smoke cigarettes, you know the dangers, you are gambling with your health. and mr. hackimer admitted that he was responsible and that he should have tried harder to quit smoking. testimony furr: q. okay. and you accept responsibility for your emphysema because you could have made a stronger attempt to quit; right? yes. you accept responsibility because even after you knew that smoking was not good for you, you should a. q. 3231 have tried harder to quit smoking; right? a. looking back, yes. furr: let us think about what the underlying circumstances would have to be before somebody was willing to accept responsibility for having harmed their own health by not quitting. number one, you would never accept responsibility for not quitting sooner if you did not know it was dangerous. so by admitting that you should have quit sooner means you knew that you were taking a chance. number two, you would never accept responsibility for not trying harder to quit if you could not quit. if you could not quit, then that would be a waste of time, and you would not take responsibility for that. so it is also an admission that, yeah, i could have quit. and last, you would never accept responsibility for not trying harder to quit if it would not have made any difference in the outcome. the only time you accept responsibility for not trying harder to quit is if you knew you should and you could have and you could have quit at a 3232 time that would have changed the outcome, i.e., in this case that means no copd. if you did not believe those three things, you would never accept responsibility for not trying harder to quit. ladies and gentlemen, i assume -- that is the third strike of why this case should end with class membership. they did not prove medical causation. they did not prove addiction. they did not prove addiction causation. and we only need one red x here for the answer to this question to be no, because they have to prove all three. they failed to prove any of them. okay. let us turn to -- i'm going to skip also, like mr. alvarez did, question 2 on your verdict form is the statute of limitations question. i'm going to skip to question 3 and 4, which are the concealment and agreement to conceal questions, just like mr. alvarez did, not for the same reason, however. as much as ms. lehman would like to get up here and argue to you the statute of limitations, she is not going to do it today. i am going to handle that issue. but i am going to skip it for this reason. as you will see as i go forward, a lot of the evidence 3233 about concealment will have to do with what mr. hackimer knew at different points in time. and you will see when we go back to the statute of limitations questions, as your jury instructions tell you, what he knew at different points in time is relevant to that question, also. so i'm going to do this question first so we will have the advantage of having looked through that evidence and have it in mind when we go back to the statute of limitations question. okay. what is the concealment and agreement to conceal? and i'm going to do them together. i'm going to do them together, because plaintiffs' claim fails for the same reasons on each of these claims. what plaintiffs have to do is -- look, the findings say concealment and agreement to conceal. we are not contesting that, and we cannot contest that. we are not going to fight about that. that is not what this issue is about. the issue is about whether plaintiffs have been able to link with evidence the concealment and the agreement to conceal to mr. hackimer's copd. and what they have to do to link that up is this. they have to prove that but for his reliance 3234 on a statement by reynolds concealing or omitting a material fact not otherwise known or available, mr. hackimer would have acted differently and avoided copd. well, that is a mouthful. so we have broken that down into the elements or parts of that burden that they have assumed in this case. this is jury instruction number 7. when you go to the jury -- that is the jury instruction that relates to these claims. when you work through that, you will see that they have to prove the following things. they have to prove that he relied on a statement. they have to prove that the statement concealed a material fact, and this is really important, not otherwise known or available to mr. hackimer. why? because you cannot harm somebody by concealing information from them if they already know it. you can conceal information from somebody, but if they already know it and believe it, you have not harmed them by doing so. third, they have to prove that had they concealed infor- -- if mr. hackimer had the concealed information, that he would have acted 3235 differently. what is that mean in this case? that he would not have smoked. and finally, that mr. hackimer developed copd because of his reliance on that statement. that is the burden they have taken on to prove to you. and this claim fails on the very first part also about him having relied on a statement. now, he said different things at different times during his direct examination about having -- "i saw statements by tobacco companies. i read them in the newspaper." he said all that. i'm not disputing he said all that. but when we got up on cross-examination, we tried to get a little more specific to find out what he actually saw, what statements he heard or read and could have relied on. and here is what he told us. he told us that he did not hear or see any statements from reynolds or anybody in the tobacco industry. testimony of john hackimer played as follows:) by mr. furr: q. other than advertisements, you never heard or read any statement by the r.j. reynolds tobacco company, did you? 3236 a. q. no. and other than advertisements, you never heard or read any statement by the lorillard tobacco company, did you? a. q. no. other than advertisements, you never heard or read any statement by the brown & williamson tobacco company, did you? a. q. no. other than advertisements, you never heard or read any statement by the american tobacco company, did you? a. q. no. and finally, other than advertisements, you never heard or read any statement by the philip morris tobacco company, did you? a. q. no. okay. before you got involved in this trial, you had never heard of the ctr or council for tobacco research, had you? a. q. no. and you would never heard or read any statement by the council for tobacco research, did you? a. q. no. before you became involved in this trial, you 3237 had never heard of the tobacco industry research committee, the tirc, had you? a. q. no. and you did not -- you had never heard or read any statement about the tirc, had you? a. q. no. before you got involved in this trial, you had never heard of the tobacco institute or ti, had you? a. q. no. and you had never heard or read any statement by the tobacco institute, had you? a. q. no. you had never heard of or relied upon in any way something called the frank statement, had you? a. no. furr: he told you on direct that he heard or read something in the newspaper, but who -- those were all the tobacco companies and all the related entities. he just told you that he never heard or read anything that any of them ever said other than advertising. instruction number 7 in your instructions is going to tell you the manufacturing, selling, and 3238 advertising cigarettes are lawful activities, therefore, defendant cannot be held liable merely for manufacturing, selling, or advertising cigarettes. that is -- that deals with the issue of whether he relied on a statement. mr. alex alvarez: objection, judge, that is inappropriate. the court: do you need to come sidebar? mr. alex alvarez: yes. (the following proceedings were had before the court at the bench and out of the hearing of the jury.) the court: mr. alvarez. mr. alex alvarez: judge, you cannot use it the way he used it. this is to say that selling and manufacturing is a lawful activity. he is trying to weave it, he is trying to weave it for -- of the fact of reliance. look what he said. the court: sustained. mr. alex alvarez: okay. (the following proceedings were had in open court before the court and the jury.) mr. furr: okay, remember i told you the second part of this concealment test has to deal with whether the statement that he relied on, if there had been one, concealed a material fact not 3239 otherwise known or available to him, not otherwise known or available to him. so we need to look at what he knew and when he knew it to evaluate whether it was otherwise known or available to him. dr. proctor told you, i'm going to have to go a little quicker, because surprise, surprise, i'm behind on my time, dr. proctor told you, i will not belabor this, mass quitting started in the '50s, people were fleeing for their lives, they were scared to death that their smoking was going to kill them, all before he ever became a regular smoker and that people were quitting, they were being driven by people's fears and concerns about the dangers of smoking. in 1964, the surgeon general's report came out. this is actually a copy of an exhibit mr. alvarez showed you in opening statement. "the relationship exists between cigarette smoking and emphysema." and then we have a surgeon general's warning come on later in '85, smoking causes emphysema. all this information was known or available to mr. hackimer, and he knew it and he believed it, as he told you already, he believed. 3240 and the first time i showed you this, i showed you his answer, here is the transcript. question: "you believed that cigarettes were hazardous to your health in 1960s? "late '60s, yes." question: "when you heard that cigarette smoking could be hazardous to your health, you did not include lung cancer? "no." we asked him what it meant, he said, "breathing problems of some sort." so by the late '60s, he believed that smoking was hazardous to his health and he was concerned about breathing problems. exactly the issues in this case. that information was available to him. he knew it and he believed it and any concealment of that information could not have harmed him because you cannot harm somebody by concealing something from them that they already know. pretty common sense. and your instruction says so. your instruction says so. you will see it. look at that instruction. okay. not only did he know it, all his friends, his buddies, the guys he hung out with, he 3241 played ball with, they knew it. his relatives knew it. dennis nellany told you that news stories and public information about cigarettes being deadly and dangerous and addictive, it was known, everybody saw it on the tv or heard it on the radio. mr. nellany told you it was common knowledge. his sister-in-law ivonne ervin told you, "we knew it was bad for us, we knew that smoking caused disease including emphysema. i think we all heard that." obviously, mr. hackimer had heard that. dr. proctor told you that dr. daniel horn, the guy in charge of the national clearinghouse on smoking and health in 1968 said, "you could stand on a rooftop and shout 'smoking is dangerous at the top of your lungs' and you would not be telling anyone anything they did not already know." including mr. hackimer, who believed that smoking was hazardous to his health and caused breathing problems when he was a 22-year-old young man deciding to gamble with his health, even though 8,000 americans per day were making the opposite choice and choosing health instead of gambling. mr. nellany might have said it perfectly, 3242 better than anybody else could have said it. mr. nellany told you "you would have to be living under a rock not to have heard that smoking was deadly and addictive in the 1970s." mr. hackimer was not living under a rock, he was a smart man, he was a savvy man, he was an informed man. his friends were telling him, he already knew by the late 1960s. but it went on. his buddy, mr. vilary who worked on the railroads, who had also played softball with him, part of that neighborhood gang that they all drank together and smoked together and played ball together, had a good time together, told you that -- you heard that he told mr. hackimer, "it is a filthy habit. it is going to kill you." "it is going to kill you." and mr. hackimer just laughed. again, i will not go through the whole litany. he did not deny it, but he did not say he doubted it, he did not say i was skeptical of it, he did not say the tobacco companies say it is not proven. he did not say no, no, that is for other people, it is okay for me, i'm smoking lights or ultra-lights. none of that. he just laughed. and again, i'm going back to this because it is 3243 said so well, mr. white, his brother-in-law, testified, "nobody can say no, they did not know that they were hazardous to your health." and he asked a good question in his testimony. he said, "how many warnings do you need?" "how many warnings do you need?" mr. white warned mr. hackimer that he was going to end up like his parents with emphysema. mr. hackimer said, "i know. i know." "i know. i know." that is what he told mr. white. he did not say -- he did not go through the litany of denials or explanations about the brands he is smoking or the tobacco company statements or anything else. he did not say i'm skeptical. he said, "i know. i know." his choice. and before this lawsuit, mr. hackimer never told anyone, there is no evidence that before this lawsuit he ever told anyone, when they confronted him about the dangers he was taking, the risk he was facing, and the need to quit, he never expressed any doubts about the dangers of smoking outside of this lawsuit. all right, you were told that several times, mr. hackimer told you that the advertisement for cigarettes said that they were safe or safer. what 3244 dr. proctor told you on cross-examination was that no advertisement ever said that filtered cigarettes were safe or safer. what mr. hackimer did admit was he knew that filtered cigarettes, all light cigarettes and ultra-lights all had the same warnings. these are warnings. we have already looked at them. he knew they were on every pack including the lights and ultra-lights. it is important, though, to look at what mr. hackimer -- remind you what mr. hackimer told you about what he saw on advertisements because that was a focus of what you heard this morning. mr. hackimer admitted on cross-examination with respect to winston lights that the ads never said they were safe and that he never thought they were safe. with respect to the kent iiis and the kent ultra-lights, mr. hackimer told you that he does not remember even seeing any advertisements for those products before he started smoking. so this testimony about having relied on advertisements, you know, this is what he told us here. he told you -- you might remember the story of why he began smoking kent iiis because his uncle was smoking kent, he tried them, they were too 3245 harsh, and so he picked up a brand extension of kent cigarettes, kent iii, found out he liked the taste. in fact, dr. proctor told you on cross-examination that kent iii advertising and kent ultra-light advertising they never said they were safe or safer. they never even used people. he told you they used light colors and pastels and clean imagery, but they never said anything like safe or safer. we have looked at this, but we are going to look at it one more time, because again, it is an easy way to understand the whole case. dr. -- excuse me, during cross-examination of mr. hackimer, these questions and answers were given. "sir, you do not see any difference between the risks that you took when you were gambling at the casino and the risks that you took with your health when you were smoking, even if you were smoking a filtered cigarette?" "even if you were smoking a filtered cigarette, do you?" answer: "that is right." i wanted to make sure that the answer was not ambiguous. i clarified with him. 3246 "you do not see any difference, do you?" answer: "no. no." it was not restricted when he was smoking unfiltered. he thought about filtered cigarettes the same way. the same way. so again, go back to the second -- one of key ways that the concealment and agreement to conceal claims both fail, that is because you cannot hurt somebody by concealing from them information they already know. let us remind ourselves about how mr. hackimer was bombarded with information about the dangers of smoking throughout his life. this is a board we showed you in opening statement. i'm not going to go through it all again. but mr. hackimer certainly knew about the warning labels, he told you in '69, he believed that smoking was hazardous. you know, both his mother and father got sick from emphysema, and he knew it, and he believed that their emphysema was caused by smoking, he accepted that, he understood. his friends, as we just indicated, were warning him all over the place, telling him things like smoking can kill you. that was just the personalized, personal warnings he got. like everybody else in society, he was being 3247 exposed to warning labels and public health things, newspapers and magazines and surgeon general's warnings, tv news and media in new jersey and philadelphia, and psas. and as mr. nellany said it perfectly, you would have to be living under a rock. you would have to be living under a rock not to have known all this. so because the plaintiffs have not pointed you a statement -- you to a statement that mr. hackimer relied upon, a statement that concealed information not otherwise known or able to, a statement that had he just known that information, he would have quit. their claims on concealment and agreement to conceal failed. think about that final part of it. he knew they were dangerous in '69. tried to -- decided to gamble and not quit anyway, and plaintiffs are here to tell you that if only he had more information, if only he had more information that had not been concealed from him, he would have quit and changed the outcome. what more do you need to know that it is hazardous to your health and that it may cause you breathing problems and that your mom and dad developed emphysema related from smoking, 3248 including, you know, it is an awful, sad fact, but his dad died in the early 1980s from smoking-related emphysema, and mr. hackimer believed that the death had been caused by his smoking. how could it conceal of -- how could any more information have made any difference? it would not. because he decided to smoke until he got sick. that was his plan all along. it was not lack of information. he had all that he needed to know, but he decided that he was going to smoke until he got sick. so when you get to these last two questions, questions 3 and question 4, not the last two questions on the verdict form, the plaintiff simply have not been able to link, they have not been able to prove the elements that they have to prove to show that concealment and agreement to conceal caused mr. hackimer's copd. they have not been able to do that. and so we submit to you the answer on both of these questions should be no because the plaintiffs have not met the burden of proving to you what they have to on these claims. okay, now we will go back to question 2, 3249 question 2. how much time do i have? the clerk: you used a -- an hour and 29 minutes used. the court: 30 minutes, gina. mr. furr: i have 30 minutes left? the court: 30 minutes. the clerk: 31 minutes, actually. the court: 31 minutes. mr. furr: 31. let us go back on the statute of limitations. because this is an important question, question number 2, that also is another question. we would suggest to you that the answer to this question should also be the end of the case. because his claim is legally barred if it falls outside the statute of limitations. here is the test. his claim is barred if he should have known that he had copd before may 5th, 1990, and that there is a reasonable possibility that it was caused by smoking. that there is a reasonable possibility it was caused by smoking. so we are going to break that down, we are going to look at the evidence, both on what he was experiencing before may 5th, 1990, to answer the question should he have known. second, that is why 3250 we just we went through all the information we did about what he knew to answer the question of should he have recognized that there was a reasonable possibility that what he was experiencing was related to his cigarette smoking before may 5th, 1990. and remember, this is a gentleman who both parents had emphysema that he believed was caused by their smoking. he believed was caused by their smoking. the instructions will tell you that the critical event is not when he was actually diagnosed with copd. no dispute that happened later, in 1993. but that is not the critical event. instead, instructions tell you that it is when his copd first manifested, manifested. the instructions tell you what that means. so let us look at whether he was having -- whether his copd was manifesting before 1990. and the instruction will tell you further than in the -- in instruction number 5, what you will see, is that "his copd and emphysema manifested itself to him in a way that supplied some evidence," he did not have to know with a hundred percent certainty, he just had to have "some 3251 evidence of a causal relationship to cigarette smoking." so the question becomes did he have copd and did he have some evidence of a causal relationship to cigarette smoking. the last part's easy, because we know that he already believed that smoking caused copd/emphysema because of his parents' experience. all right. so let us look at the -- let us look at what the evidence is with respect to what was going on with him. because before may 5th, 1990, he had symptoms of copd. and his friends and family members had connected those symptoms to his smoking. and he had some evidence of a causal connection. let us look at that. four fact witnesses testified in this case, dennis nellany, tom white, ivonne ervin, and you also heard jeanette white's testimony on some of this through the expert testimony. all four of them, the only four fact witnesses who testified, said that he had symptoms of copd in the 1980s. mr. alex alvarez: objection, judge, mischaracterizes his statement. he never said anything about copd. the court: sustained. 3252 mr. furr: i said he had symptoms, your honor. the court: symptoms. symptoms. sustained. mr. furr: the number of fact witnesses who testified that he did not have symptoms of copd was zero. nobody said that. the experts in this case all agreed that he was experiencing what they called the linchpin symptoms of copd in the 1980s. klein, seidelman and systrom all told you that he had shortness of breath on exertion and that he had chronic cough. but again, let us put the experts aside. let us look at dr. seidelman, the witness that had no -- nothing to do with this lawsuit, his treater, his caretaker, the guy that really likes him, the guy that mr. hackimer trusts. let us look at what he said about when mr. hackimer had copd. because here is his testimony. question: "based on sort of rounding all that out, you expect that mr. hackimer had copd, detectible copd by the time he was 40 years old?" answer: "correct." excuse me. answer: "yes." question: "and that is based on your training, education, and what you know about mr. hackimer?" answer: "yes." "are you offering that testimony to a 3253 reasonable degree of medical certainty?" answer: "yes." okay, when was mr. hackimer 40 years old? he was born in 1946. he was 40 years old in 1986. and his treating physician testified with a reasonable degree of medical certainty based on not only his general training, but also what he knew about mr. hackimer, that he had detectible copd by the time he was 40 years old. detectible copd by the time he was 40 years old. i'll try to sum up the evidence in this case. the fact witnesses told you that he had shortness of breath, cough, including chronic cough. there is testimony that he had chronic cough before 1990. dr. seidelman told you that he had detectible, diagnosable copd. in 1986. and you might remember the back-extrapolation, that is, if you looked at how his lung function was decreasing and when he was diagnosed with emphysema -- which i should not have skipped that. dr. -- dr. systrom testified that mr. hackimer had stage iv, the very severe stage of copd, since at least 2001. and so we asked him a bunch of questions about how long people stay in those stages and how 3254 people's lung functions decline. and here is what he told you. you know, it varies. everybody agrees it varies. stage iii, people stay in that five to ten years, stage ii, five to ten years, stage i, five to ten years. even if you tighten it down like that, no matter how you look at it, mr. hackimer had copd before 1990, because he would not have gone from no copd to stage iv in the space of 11 years or less. and that is what dr. systrom, their expert, told you, that he had stage iv copd in 2001. so if you look at what had to have happened in order for him to get where he was in 2001, he had detectible copd before 1990. and as we know from everything we just looked at -- well, here is your instruction that tells you, you may properly consider what he knew before may 5th, 1990, regarding the health risks of smoking. i will not belabor this. we talked over and over about what he knew about his parents' experience in the '80s, how he knew smoking caused emphysema/copd. so of course he had some evidence that what he was experiencing was related to his smoking. 3255 he told you himself that when he knew that his parents had emphysema caused by smoking, he was quite concerned because emphysema was a serious disease. tom white told me he warned mr. hackimer he was going to end up like his parents. and he said, "i know. i know." he did not deny it. so, of course, he had some evidence that what he was experiencing was from his smoking. his sister-in-law told you that everybody teased him, that among them all, he is the one that should quit because he was coughing so much. and she is told him, "you in particular should quit among all of us." "you in particular should quit among all of us." so he had detectible copd before 1990, he had some evidence that he should quit before 1990. and so when you get to this question on your verdict form, this question about the statute of limitations, the answer should be yes. and if the answer is yes, again, that is the end of this case. you sign your verdict form, and the case is over. but as i've said before, my obligation is to go through all seven questions. we have looked at 1 through 4, so i'm going to continue going through the questions and talk with you about the evidence 3256 of all of them. and i'm next going go to the comparative fault question, question on your verdict form. the first point to make is like all other issues, the plaintiffs have the burden of proof on this, on all of their case. they have to prove to you each percentage point of fault. it does not start at 50/50. reynolds starts at zero. mr. hackimer has admitted fault, but reynolds starts at zero, and they have to prove to you his fault. i mean, it is -- they have to prove to you 1 percent, 2 percent, ten percent, twenty percent. they have to prove all of that to you with evidence. so let us look at what the evidence is about where responsibility lies for mr. hackimer's smoking. the evidence is that mr. hackimer was a hundred percent responsible for any smoking-related injury he developed. here -- and these are just the facts. he knew that smoking was dangerous and could cause breathing problems no later than in the 1960s. he chose to smoke despite knowing that cigarettes were dangerous because he liked the taste of smoking and enjoyed smoking. he always planned to quit when he developed a 3257 smoking-related disease. he never tried to quit until he got sick. you know, we -- again, it is because it is so poignant and powerful way to understand the case. this gambling testimony of his is he knew he was gambling with his health. and nobody made him do that. i mean, cigarette smoking is a voluntary act that people engage in. no one makes you do it, and no one can make you stop. no one can make you stop. that is a choice you get to make. there is really no evidence that r.j. reynolds did or said any -- that r.j. reynolds did or said anything that caused him to start or caused him to continue. i mean, where is that evidence? you know, they have talked a lot about what r.j. reynolds did, but where is the evidence linking that, linking that to the choices mr. hackimer made about whether to smoke and about whether to continue smoking? you know that mr. hackimer admitted that he is responsible for copd. he should have made stronger attempts to quit smoking, that he should have tried harder. but that he enjoyed his smoking. he told you he liked winston and winston light especially. and, you know, the evidence is that his choices are 3258 the sole cause of any smoking-related disease he has. the only, only legal cause of mr. hackimer's copd was his choice to smoke in the face of the knowledge that he had and his personal concerns about breathing and the consistent repeated warnings that he got from everybody starting in the 1960s, but instead of heeding those warnings, he decided to gamble until he got sick, and nobody could have done anything to change the outcome of what he did because he knew what he was doing and he chose. he had the right, i'm not being critical, he had the right to make those choices. those choices also come with their responsibility. only he could have stopped. i mean, you know, it sounds trite, like i said before, his cigarettes did not light themselves and jump in his mouth. nobody had a gun to his head. he always had the choice. every time he had got a warning on the side of a pack of cigarettes or from any of his friends and family members, or when he started having symptoms, when his parents experienced disease, when he saw a warning in the advertising, every time he got a warning, that was another 3259 quitting opportunity for him. that was an opportunity for him to say i'm done, i'm tired of taking this risk, i'm going to make the same choice that 60 million other americans made, and i'm going to quit smoking. he did. each time he said, got it, understood it, believe it. my choice is to gamble. that was the choice he made. so in this extreme case where he chose to gamble and planned to smoke until he got sick, there is really no room for fault on anybody else, no room for fault on anybody else. so i'm going to suggest to you if you get to this question, a hundred percent of responsibility in this case should be charged to mr. hackimer because ask yourself, who else could have changed the outcome? who else could have changed the outcome? nobody. only he could make the decision to quit. let us talk about damages for a second. use your common sense. use your common sense. $15 million? use your common sense. because your instructions tell you that any damages must be fair and just in light of the evidence. fair and just in light of the evidence. and this is -- you know, plaintiffs have the 3260 burden to prove to you their damages. they have to prove -- burden to prove to you every dollar of damages. their damages start at zero and they have to prove them. where is the proof of $15 million worth of damages? use your common sense. and we said it before and i'm going to say it one more time. despite the fact that everybody here feels it, you cannot let sympathy drive your decision. you cannot let sympathy drive any decision. you cannot let it inflate your damages because you feel sorry for him. and you have to remember what he is and is not seeking damages for. what he is not seeking damages for. and i'm going to point out to you, i'm going to remind you what he is not seeking damages for. he is not seeking damages for lost wages. he is not seeking damages for medical expenses. he is not seeking damages for services he could not perform. he is not seeking damages for any other disease. mrs. hackimer is not making any claim. his children are not making a claim. only he is seeking damages for the experience that he personally has had. that is what you are being asked to award $15 3261 million for. in a case where mr. hackimer chose to gamble with his health, you are being asked to compensate him with $15 million. use your common sense. now, there is a part of the instructions that has been mentioned, so i'll mention it, it is kind of complicated, it has to do with the aggravation of an existing disease or physical defect. and this really relates to how you parse out damages, if you think that both smoking and occupational exposures contributed to disease, i'm just going to remind you that the evidence demonstrates that really this part of the instruction does not have any meaning in this case as the facts have been developed because no witness claimed that mr. hackimer had a preexisting copd that was then aggravated by one of the exposures. nobody told you that. okay, i'm going to turn to the last issue on this, which is the issue that mr. alvarez told us today this is what this case is all about. he says this case is all about punitive damages and how they want to come here and ask you to award more damages on top of the $15 million they have already asked for. he says that is what this case is all 3262 about. well, punitive damages is different. punitive damages, of course, they are in addition to any compensatory damages. if you say yes to the last question, then we will come back, we will have another opening statement, we will have some evidence, another closing argument. the trial will continue, and we will address that issue, but it is different because it is a higher burden of proof, it is a higher burden of proof. and the burden of proof on punitive damages is clear and convincing evidence. they have to provide you clear and convincing evidence that convinces you without hesitation, as you will see in your instruction, without hesitation that under the facts and circumstances of this case, that punitive damages should be awarded. that is what they -- that is the burden they have taken on on punitive damages. i'll go over the instructions with you for a minute because punitive damages is a concept not many people have dealt with before, but our instructions are really useful there because the instructions are like a funnel, that if you use the instruction, they can funnel your inquiry, the 3263 question before you down to make -- to help you get to the exact question that you have to answer in this case. and the instructions tell you the following. there is the burden of proof, but the instructions tell you that number one, the engle findings do not establish that he is entitled to damages, punitive damages. so when you are addressing this last question, once again, just like class membership, you set the engle findings aside, they cannot be used in your analysis of the question, and they cannot be used in any way in determining whether they are warranted. in addition, your instructions will tell you that you may not seek to punish defendants for any harm suffered by any individuals other than mr. hackimer. you know, other people can bring their case and seek punitive damages if they want to. in this case, the only conduct that you can punish for is conduct that you find to have been causally related to mr. hackimer's injuries. see, it is not a -- it is not a decision of whether the company should be punished in general or whether you approve of their conduct or whether they have 3264 done things they should not have done. that is not the issue before you. the narrow question before you is whether they should be punished under the facts and circumstances of this case. and that means for conduct that you find to have been a legal cause of mr. hackimer's injury. let us think for just a minute about that. because the very first slide that mr. alvarez put up today, and you saw it again later, was a picture from the 1994 congressional hearings where its tobacco executives got up and testified about smoking addiction and smoking and health. and as dr. proctor told you, they were ridiculed across the country for that testimony. it actually caused more people to quit than anything else. but in any event, it was when? after mr. hackimer had quit. after mr. hackimer had already quit. so that is an example of tobacco company conduct that could not possibly have been related to causing his disease because it occurred after he had already quit. the court gives you another instruction that i want to focus you on as you look at the evidence, and that is this. "in determining whether punitive 3265 damages are warranted, you may also take into consideration any mitigating evidence." mitigating evidence. "mitigating evidence is evidence which may demonstrate there is no need to impose punitive damages against the defendant." how much time do i have? the clerk: ten minutes left. mr. furr: thank you. okay. so let us look at what the evidence is. look, if you consider punishing for the concealment and agreement to conceal, it is important to remember that dr. proctor told you, there has been no -- that reynolds has admitted that smoking is dangerous and addictive for the past 16 years, since 2000. there is no concealment, there is no conspiracy. dr. proctor also told you that, look, cigarettes cannot be made safe. they cannot be made safe. but he also told you the cigarette companies have spent a fortune trying to make less hazardous cigarettes, trying to make less hazardous cigarettes, mitigating evidence. he told you specifically about the billion dollar projects that began in the 1980s that produced the premier cigarette and later the 3266 eclipse cigarette, where r.j. reynolds spent a billion dollars developing a cigarette that heated, but did not burn tobacco, less mutagenic, less carcinogenic. dr. proctor told you it was better for health from a cancer perspective, but that it was rejected by consumers because it tasted awful, tasted like burning rubber, old fish, something like that. in any event, people would not buy it, they would not smoke it, they would not switch from the product they were currently smoking to that. he told you as a result, it could not have possibly helped public health, it was just going to sit on a shelf and be a nonissue. same for eclipse. they did not stop. when it did not work, they brought it back in, spent several hundred million more dollars trying to fix the problem, but they just could not do it. and nobody knows how to make a safe cigarette, even today, because why? the problem is combustion. as dr. proctor explained to you, if you burn a tobacco leaf, you generate a smoke with thousands of chemicals in it, including carcinogens, and nobody knows how to produce a cigarette that is safe. they cannot do it. the tobacco companies 3267 tried, and he is told you they spent a fortune trying to do it. dr. proctor also told you that r.j. reynolds has a division that produces a smoking-cessation aid. they told you that niconovum is a division of r.j. reynolds that produces a smoking-cessation aid, so r.j. reynolds is helping smokers quit. helping smokers quit. that is mitigating evidence. that is trying to solve the problem. if the issue of youth smoking is one that you consider when evaluating this punitive damage entitlement question, some of the facts you might want to remember is that -- excuse me. if the normalization of smoking, you know, you heard this morning again about normalization of smoking, how r.j. reynolds made it normal, how there was a time in the '50s where a large percentage of americans were smoking, those days are long gone. those days are long gone. dr. proctor told you that today, adult smoking is below 15 percent of adults, that we are in a period of collapse of the tobacco burning market, that he believes that cigarettes will become extinct, and that nobody will smoke tobacco-burning cigarettes. you have to ask yourself, what is left 3268 to punish. the product is on the way out. he told you it is a horse-and-buggy technology, it is obsolete, it is on the way out, it is going to become extinct anyway. and as i got ahead of myself, if youth smoking is something that you are thinking about when you are considering punitive damages, you might want to remember that dr. proctor told you that youth today are rejecting tobacco-burning cigarettes even faster than adults are, that youth smoking is at an all-time low. it has not been this low since 1920s. he told you it is decreased dramatically since 1997. he told you that while it may have been normalized at one point, but today it is stigmatized and marginalized. youth are not picking up tobacco-burning cigarettes. so ladies and gentlemen, for all those reasons, under the facts of this case, as your instructions indicate, if you get to this question number 7, your answer should be no, this case will be over. if you answer yes, we will start up the next part of the trial in the next day or so. okay. i told you, despite the fact that it has taken mr. alvarez and i each two hours to talk 3269 to you about this case, we probably could take longer if we were given longer. it is really a simple case, it is a case about freedom of choice and personal responsibility. i mean, come on, this is america. in america, we believe in letting people make choices for themselves. to each his own. but along with that choice comes personal responsibility. we all know that. our parents taught us that we are responsible for the choices that we make. we teach our children that they are responsible for the choices they make. we expect our friends and our neighbors and our coworkers to take responsibility for the choices they make. that is how this all works, and that is why we have the freedoms that we do, because people take responsibility for it. and that is how cigarette smoking is. and that is how it is always been. and that is how it is been viewed for a long, long time. and let us begin by going all the way back to 1955. (video clip played as follows:) dr. hammond: in my opinion, people should be warned of the dangers, and they are being warned. what they then want to do, whether they wish to 3270 smoke or not, is their own business. (video clip stopped.) mr. furr: dr. hammond, famous cancer researcher in 1955, people are being warned. they knew. millions quit. others continued smoking. it is their own choice. it is their own choice. 1964, the release of the surgeon general's report. (video clip played as follows:) mr. rather: in this kind of a country, it comes down to you, whether you like it or not. no one is going to forbid an adult to smoke, and it is now quite clear that no one is going to tell him it is good for him, either. the decision is his, the decision and the health that may depend on it. (video clip stopped.) mr. furr: freedom of choice, personal responsibility. that is how smoking has always been viewed in this country. and before this lawsuit, that is how mr. hackimer viewed it. testimony furr: q. you knew that you were taking a risk of losing when you were gambling, but you considered that to be 3271 the price that you paid for your entertainment; right? a. q. yes. sir, you do not see any difference between the risks that you took when you were gambling at the casino and the risks that you took with your health when you were smoking even if you were smoking a filtered cigarette, do you? a. q. a. that is right. yes. you do not see any difference, do you? in cont- -- no. furr: i'm about finished. what happens next is mr. alvarez gets to get back up. because he has the burden of proof, he gets the last word. and i do not get to stand up and respond. i would ask only one thing of you. and that is during his rebuttal, i would ask you to keep your eye on the ball. and listen carefully to see whether he proves to you that mr. hackimer did not know that smoking was dangerous. mr. alex alvarez: objection, judge, i do not have to prove that. the court: sustained. mr. furr: listen carefully to see whether he 3272 proves to you that mr. hackimer could not quit smoking. listen carefully to see whether he proves to you that mr. hackimer would have quit smoking sooner if only he had more information. listen carefully to see if he proves to you that mr. hackimer relied on a statement that concealed information that was not otherwise known or available to him. listen carefully to see whether he proves to you that addiction caused mr. hackimer's copd, not his own personal choices. think about it, if you would. you know how we would respond to that. you have heard our argument. and i would just ask you to consider the way that you know that we would respond. let me end like this. mr. hackimer did exactly what he wanted to do. he chose to smoke, and he chose when to quit. his plan was always to smoke until he got sick and then quit. and that is just what he did. but unfortunately and sadly, that gamble went badly for him. he got sick much sooner than he thought that he would. and now he is asking you to compensate him with $15 million for the gamble he took. mr. alex alvarez: objection, judge. 3273 the court: overruled. mr. furr: please, please, please, use your common sense. thank you very much for your patience with me. that is all i have, your honor.