mr. guest: may it please the court? the court: yes, thank you, mr. guest. mr. guest: counsel, ms. haliburton. good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. i would like to start off where mr. acosta and mr. gary started off and that is by thanking you for your time and your sacrifice and your service during this entire process. i know it is been a long few weeks, but you have been, as judge sasser has pointed out numerous times, extremely attentive and patient and willing to listen to both sides present their case, and i think i can speak for everybody involved in this process that we thank you very much for your time. and how mr. persons and i are going to split our closing argument is i'm going to walk through some of the issues on the verdict form, and i'm going to use some of the jury instructions that the court has provided you earlier today to kind of help you marshal through the evidence that you have heard over the past couple of weeks, and then 3889 mr. persons is going to walk you through the rest of the verdict form and help you understand some of the evidence that you have seen in light of the instructions that the court has given you. and perhaps at times during this case, it has been a little difficult to keep things straight in terms of the evidence you heard. i know you have had a lot of things coming at you probably since opening statements, and it is probably been a little difficult to sort out. so that is what our job is to do during closing arguments, is to put everything in context and to put it in the context of the questions that you-all are going to have to answer that are on the verdict form. and to answer these questions on the verdict form, you are going to have to use the law that the court has given you in light of the evidence that you have heard during this trial. and i would actually like to preview the verdict form for you. because as we told you in opening statements, this case is about mr. haliburton. and that has not changed since we began evidence. and it has not changed now. and if you look at the verdict form that the 3890 court's going to give you, you will notice that mr. haliburton's name appears on each of the questions on the verdict form. juror vance: sir, can you move that? so she can see. mr. guest: yes, ma'am. the court: thank you. mr. guest: sure. gosh, i did not even notice this. the court: thank you, mr. guest. mr. guest: sure. is that good? so as i was saying, every single question on this verdict form has to do with mr. haliburton. the first question that you-all are going to have to consider is class membership. and i think you are pretty familiar with this concept. and this is the question that i'm going to go through with you today. the second question is the issue of whether mr. haliburton knew or should have known before may 5th, 1990, that he had copd/emphysema. and there are several other questions as you go through the verdict form that you may not necessarily get to, depending on your previous responses, but nevertheless, they all have to do 3891 with mr. haliburton, whether there is a concealment claim and whether that is linked to mr. haliburton, whether there is an agreement to conceal, that is also linked to mr. haliburton. similarly, the apportionment of fault has to do with mr. haliburton, as well as the question of damages and punitive entitlement. both of those have to do with this case and with mr. haliburton's case. and the reason why i'm pointing all of this out is because the plaintiff has presented a substantial amount of generic evidence that really, if you think about it, is not really going to help you answer the questions on the verdict form. and what i mean by that, is that plaintiff presented you a generic case on several issues. and i'm going to go through these four issues that i have selected to really explain why the evidence that they presented on these topics does not have to do with this case. now, i know everybody has heard a lot about youth marketing. and i'm going to go through that in more detail. and i'm also going to discuss the addiction evidence that the plaintiff presented to you, the evidence on filter and low-tar cigarettes, 3892 and some of the evidence on design issues. but the bottom line is, for the vast majority of the evidence that was presented on these issues, there just was not a link between the evidence and mr. haliburton. in fact, there was a complete disconnect between what the plaintiff showed you and the issues that you are going to have to decide on the verdict form. now, the first topic i would like to discuss with respect to these generic evid- -- these generic issues is that of youth marketing. i know that mr. acosta throughout his closing statement today talked a lot about it and i know that mr. gary, when he was walking through his closing argument, probably spent about an hour on youth marketing issues. but when we think about mr. haliburton, it is really important to consider what the youth marketing issues have to do with mr. haliburton. there is no evidence about why mr. haliburton started smoking or became a regular smoker. in fact, the evidence that the plaintiff showed you on youth marketing occurred before mr. haliburton was born. i know mr. gary walked through a memo from 1927 in great detail. that was ten years before mr. haliburton was born. 3893 the other documents they went through occurred after mr. haliburton was born. there is no connection to anything mr. haliburton was doing in south georgia when he was growing up in the 1940s. and the plaintiff would have you think that somehow, the tobacco companies had infiltrated south georgia, that they were trying to capture the youth market down in south georgia, and that somehow, something they did affected mr. haliburton when he was an adolescent. but there is no evidence that anything the tobacco companies did occurred in south georgia, let alone any evidence that anything the tobacco companies did influenced mr. haliburton's choices to start smoking. and in contrast, the evidence that you did hear in this case is that mr. haliburton was born and raised in a community that grew tobacco. in fact, i think in south georgia, the community's biggest cash crop was tobacco. and mr. haliburton's father smoked, and his uncle smoked, and other people around mr. haliburton smoked when he was growing up. and you heard from dr. benowitz and you heard from dr. samuel that one of the most if not the most 3894 important consideration for someone starting smoking is their social environment, who is smoking around them, their parents, their friends, their family members. so when you really think about it, it probably makes most sense to think that mr. haliburton started smoking and continued smoking because he grew up in an area that grew tobacco and he grew up around friends and family who smoked. and i want to point out, you know, there has been a lot of talk about whether mr. haliburton smoked for 40 years or 30 years or 35 years. and that is all in the medical records and there is some discrepancies in there. and i think dr. samuel said it really did not matter, anyway. but the first time anyone saw mr. haliburton smoke was when he was 19 years old. and at this time, mr. haliburton had had a wife, he was a father, he was employed, he was a grown man making his own decisions at this time. and i guess i'll say a word about candy cigarettes. because there was a fair amount of discussion about candy cigarettes in the documents. each witness who came and testified on behalf of mr. haliburton's -- of ms. haliburton, excuse me, 3895 talked about candy cigarettes. and what i thought was interesting about this is that when dorothy wilson testified and when tressie haywood testified, apparently they had tried or eaten candy cigarettes when they were kids, but neither of them became a smoker and they never tried cigarettes. so i think the suggestion that somehow candy cigarettes is a gateway product to becoming a regular smoker just does not really make sense in terms of the evidence that you have heard. but the bottom line is that there is no evidence that any of the youth marketing had any impact on mr. haliburton. and let me just be clear that i'm not trying to defend any of this stuff. i'm sure some of you found it distasteful. maybe you found it shocking or appalling. and i'm not here to justify any of the evidence that you have seen. but the important thing is that it has to be connected to mr. haliburton. and maybe you need to think about when you are back there deliberating why the plaintiff presented you this evidence when it had no connection to the case and no connection to the questions that you have to answer. the next topic i would like to discuss briefly 3896 in terms of the evidence the plaintiff presented was the plaintiff's addiction case. now, somehow the issue of genetics has become a part of this case. and i'm really not sure what it has to do with the addiction issues in this case, but it is in the case. and when you think about mr. haliburton, you have to think about what it has to do with him and his smoking decisions and why he smoked. and think about his family. because we know his father smoked. we know his uncle smoked. we know his son smoked. and we know all four of them quit. and we know that mr. haliburton himself quit. so this issue of genetics and whether it makes it difficult or impossible for someone to quit smoking just does not bear out for mr. haliburton. and we heard from dr. benowitz and dr. feingold, and they talked a lot about whether nicotine was addictive, whether it changed the brain, whether it impacted dopamines and what it did to the brain. and essentially what dr. benowitz and dr. feingold did with respect to their opinions on addiction was re-prove the engle finding that 3897 nicotine is addictive. but you-all heard in jury selection, when mr. persons was going through his questioning, not even considering the engle findings, he told you that nicotine was addictive. so there really was not a reason to go through all this evidence and establish that when it was not disputed. now, does nicotine make it harder to quit? you have heard from every expert that testified on addiction that it does. and does nicotine in cigarettes cause some people to be addicted? it does. but you also know that nicotine does not make it impossible for people to quit. the experts told you that nicotine addiction does not interfere with the smoker's ability to understand the dangers of smoking. and the experts also told you that nicotine addiction does not interfere with the smoker's ability to make an informed choice to quit or continue smoking. and the three experts who testified on addiction, dr. feingold, dr. benowitz, and dr. samuel, all told you that any smoker can quit. and nicotine addiction did not prevent the 60 million smokers who have quit today from quitting, 3898 nor did it prevent mr. haliburton from quitting. the evidence that the plaintiff presented on the filter and low-tar issue in this case, i'm only going to go through this briefly, but it came up during mr. acosta's closing statement today, so i do want to address it. now, the evidence you heard about mr. haliburton and smoking light cigarettes and low-tar cigarettes, you heard evidence from his friends and his cousin that he did not like light cigarettes. and that is what mr. acosta said during his opening statement. so i'm not sure really why they spent time going through that because he never primarily smoked these kinds of cigarettes. similarly, there is no evidence that mr. haliburton ever thought filtered cigarettes were safer and smoked them as a result. mr. haliburton smoked all different types of cigarettes, and it is unclear why he did smoke the brands he did, but there is no evidence that anything anybody said about filtered cigarettes led him to smoke filtered cigarettes. the point is is that the issue of low-tar and filtered cigarettes just does not have anything to do with this case. 3899 now, the final issue, ladies and gentlemen, are the issues on design. now, dr. proctor suggested that the tobacco companies made cigarettes more inhalable or at least inhalable and more dangerous. but he also told you that since the 1800s, before the tobacco companies manufactured cigarettes, that cigarettes were already inhalable, and that it was observed that because of this characteristic of cigarettes, that cigarettes were uniquely dangerous. and also in the 1800s, ninety percent of the people who smoked cigarettes inhaled them. and this is just one of the interesting things about cigarettes is unlike cigars and unlike pipes, people inhaled the cigarettes. and that is been known since before reynolds manufactured a cigarette, as mr. acosta said, in 1913. now, we also know from the cross-examinations you heard of dr. benowitz and dr. proctor that natural tobacco as a plant is dangerous and addictive. it comes out of the ground. and if you pick it and roll it and burn it, it is going to release thousands of chemicals, and those chemicals include carcinogens and other harmful toxins. and it also contains nicotine. that is the inherent 3900 nature of the plant. so the issue of the dangers of the cigarettes because of the tobacco in them, and the addictiveness of the cigarettes because of the tobacco in them, it is really a matter of nature, it is not a matter of design. in fact, roll-your-own cigarettes are just as dangerous and addictive as manufactured cigarettes. and i know you-all heard a lot about additives, too. whether the cigarette companies added additives into cigarettes in order to make them more addictive or palatable or anything along those lines. but dr. proctor told you that even additive-free cigarettes are not any safer or less addictive than cigarettes with additives. so the key take-away here is that there is no such thing as a safe cigarette, that any type of cigarette that you smoke that has tobacco in it is going to be dangerous and it is going to be addictive. and i just want to break this down really quickly. the plaintiff brought you two generic witnesses, dr. proctor and dr. benowitz. dr. proctor sat in that chair for about 15 hours. he was here for about four days. dr. benowitz, who you saw the video of, was -- 3901 that video was played for about five hours. and during mr. persons's examination of dr. proctor, he admitted that he did not know anything about mr. haliburton. and you -- dr. benowitz, during his cross-examination on the video, said he did not know anything about the smokers who his -- where his videotape was being played. he did not know how much those smokers smoked, what those smokers knew about the risks of cigarette smoking, whether those smokers had tried to quit. there was just nothing that they knew about the individual smokers. and this generic testimony that you heard does not help you answer the questions in the case. so why did the plaintiff spend so much of your time re-proving the engle findings and going over all these issues that had already been established by a jury ten years ago down in miami in a case involving issues of general corporate conduct and that did not involve any issues of individual smokers? now, mr. gary, in his opening statement, he did not say that this case was about mr. haliburton. he said that this case was about punishing reynolds and that he was going to request 3902 billions of dollars. and maybe that is why they presented all this generic evidence to you. but i think another reason why the plaintiff presented this generic evidence to you is because they cannot meet their burden of proof in this case. their generic evidence does not make up for the specific evidence that they have to bring you for you to answer these questions on the verdict form. now, except for one question on the verdict form, the plaintiff has the burden of proof. and what that means is that the plaintiff has to bring you evidence that by the greater weight of the evidence, that is the only way you can find for the plaintiff. and like i said, the defense is bringing a defense to class membership, and we have the burden of proof on that. but apart from that issue, the plaintiff must bring you evidence by the greater weight of the evidence to prove their claims. and this is not just about tipping the scales a little bit. this is about bringing you evidence in a manner that allows you to answer for them on the verdict form. and it is also not about the amount of the 3903 evidence. it is not about how long a witness testified. it is not about how many documents or how many pages of documents are going to be in the jury room with you while you deliberate that the plaintiff introduced into evidence. the issue of the burden of proof has to deal with the quality of the evidence, not the quantity of the evidence. and the plaintiff, given the evidence that they presented to you and the quality of their evidence, has failed to prove her case. there has been a failure of proof as to whether mr. haliburton was a class member. there has been a failure of proof that the information about the dangers of smoking were unknown or unavailable to mr. haliburton before may 5th, 1982. i think you-all know the evidence in this case that establishes that mr. haliburton was well aware of risks of smoking and the addictiveness of smoking before 1982. and the plaintiff has failed to prove that she is entitled to money damages in this case. so i would like to go back, as we start going through the evidence, with where we started at the beginning of opening statements on december 3rd. 3904 mr. persons showed you this board. and what he explained to you was that these are the five key facts that you have to know to answer every single question on the verdict form. and that is still true today. these are still the five key facts, nothing has changed. mr. haliburton did not start or continue smoking because of anything the tobacco companies said or did. mr. haliburton was warned about the dangers of smoking throughout his life. despite knowing smoking was dangerous, mr. haliburton continued to smoke and did not try to quit until 1994. mr. haliburton quit smoking permanently in 1994, the first time he tried. and mr. haliburton knew or should have known that his copd/emphysema was possibly caused by his smoking before may 5th, 1990. again, these are the key facts. this is what we showed you at the beginning and this is what we are showing you now and this is what you need to know to answer the questions on the verdict form. now, the question i'm going to go through, like i said, is the class membership question in this case. and that is kind of the threshold issue that you are going to have to consider to determine 3905 whether mr. haliburton was a member of the engle class. and this is the question. "was andrew haliburton addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, and if so, was an addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine a legal cause of mr. haliburton's emphysema/copd and resulting death?" now, you may remember this from opening statements. there is actually three components to this question. there is a medical causation component, an addiction component, and an addiction causation component. now, mr. acosta said during his closing argument today that there is no dispute that mr. haliburton died from copd caused by smoking. and i agree with him, there is not a dispute in this case about that issue, so i'm not going to talk about that. what i'm going to focus on is the addiction and the addiction causation issues. and for addiction, the plaintiff has to prove that mr. haliburton was addicted to nicotine. but the -- the plaintiff did not -- well, let me say that the -- the evidence you heard yesterday 3906 from dr. samuel on the dsm-5 and his application of the dsm-5 to mr. haliburton established that mr. haliburton did not meet the clinical criteria used by psychiatrists today as being an addicted smoker. and because of that, the plaintiff failed to meet her burden of proof on addiction. now, the plaintiffs brought you dr. feingold. and i guess there was a little discussion earlier today about the money that experts have made. and i think you-all may remember that overall, dr. feingold has made $40 million for his business testifying as an expert witness, and he does not really treat patients, he is basically an expert who testifies a lot. and he went through a variety of criteria when he was testifying to determine whether mr. haliburton was addicted or not. and he actually used criteria that are not really diagnostic tools. instead, they just assessed the severity of addiction. so that is the testimony that he brought you, and he also walked through the dsm, and i'll talk about that in a little bit. now, you heard from dr. samuel yesterday. he was the only expert you heard from in substance abuse to testify in this case. he is in the 3907 trenches and he is treating people for addictions every day. and he applied the american psychiatric association diagnostic criteria to mr. haliburton and found no clinically-significant impairment or distress. now, dr. samuel was trained and educated in nigeria in the british system. and i think there was some questioning of his credentials today because he did not to go an american college. but he certainly came to america and was trained in america and has been treating patients for about 30 years in america, and i'll let you-all consider his qualifications without saying any more to that. but the bottom line is dr. samuel found that mr. haliburton was not addicted based on his application of the dsm-5 to mr. haliburton. now, i would like to talk about the issue of consumption. the plaintiff is suggesting to you that you can find a person is addicted simply by looking at the number of cigarettes they smoked. that is basically what dr. feingold's opinion was when he testified to you-all. he went through the dsm, but his fallback position was always i do not know if i'm going to give him this criteria, but because he smoked a lot, i'll say he met it. and 3908 then he went through the fagerström test which deals with how many cigarettes a person smokes. and dr. benowitz testified that if you smoke ten cigarettes a day, you are addicted. so basically, both of those experts testified that if you smoke a lot, you are addicted to cigarettes. but addiction does not equal consumption. it is a little more sophisticated than that. and when dr. samuel methodically went through the dsm, the 11 criteria and the criteria as to whether someone was clinically significantly impaired, it was his assessment and his opinion that mr. haliburton was not addicted. and i would like to point out that dr. feingold, despite his opinions that most people are addicted, and dr. benowitz, despite his opinion that most people are addicted, had to acknowledge that quitting smoking is easy for some people. in fact, dr. feingold said quitting smoking is surprisingly easy for 25 percent of smokers. and dr. benowitz said the same thing for up to 20 percent of smokers. twenty percent of smokers find quitting smoking easy. and if we look at the evidence in this case, and we heard what dr. samuel said yesterday, he 3909 talked about glendon haliburton's testimony that he reviewed in preparing for this case, and he said glendon haliburton himself found it easy for him to quit. when he quit smoking, when he had the motivation to quit, glendon testified that it was easy for him. glendon also testified that it was easy for mr. haliburton, that when mr. haliburton quit smoking, he did not even notice that he had quit, he only noticed that he was smoking. mr. acosta: your honor, i have to object. can we approach? the court: sure. of course, mr. acosta. court: objection? mr. acosta: glendon haliburton's deposition was not published or read, it is not part of the evidence given to the jury. so he is going beyond what he can do, he is telling the jury what he testified to, and that -- that was not in evidence. the court: it was the son, though, was not it? mr. guest: it was the son, and that is what dr. samuel testified about yesterday and his testimony is evidence. 3910 the court: okay. anything -- mr. acosta: he was not allowed to go that far, though, because i objected to him being a conduit for hearsay evidence. the court: say dr. -- i'll overrule the objection, just say dr. samuel concluded such. mr. guest: sure. the court: okay? do it that way. so dr. samuel concluded, because that was his conclusion -- mr. acosta: well, as long as he is not just saying what glendon testified. mr. guest: i thought i said that. i'm happy to say it. the court: just say dr. samuel concluded. mr. guest: sure. the court: okay. guest: may i proceed? the court: yes, of course. mr. guest: as i was saying, dr. samuel concluded, based on his review of the record, that glendon haliburton found it easy to quit and so did mr. haliburton. 3911 now, i want you to consider dr. feingold's generic testimony, and i say generic because he was just testifying in general on his direct examination versus what he talked about on cross-examination with mr. haliburton. now, when going through and describing what an addicted smoker feels when they quit smoking and those withdrawal symptoms, dr. feingold said that a smoker who is addicted and quits may feel stressed, jittery, nervous, they may crave a cigarette, and they may feel out of sorts. and during cross-examination, dr. feingold told us that at no time when mr. haliburton quit smoking did he feel stressed, jittery, nervous, that he ever craved a cigarette, or that he ever felt out of sorts. and based on the depositions, dr. feingold arrived at this opinion. he had reviewed excerpts of depositions. and dr. samuel also noticed that mr. haliburton did not have withdrawal symptoms after he quit smoking based on his review of the depositions. now, ms. haliburton testified in trial, and she obviously had testified before trial, and her trial testimony was a little different than her 3912 deposition testimony. i think she recalled that mr. haliburton may have been a little jittery. but the review of the record by dr. feingold and dr. samuel, they both noted that she did not notice anything when mr. haliburton quit smoking in 1994. and that is pretty consistent with the other witnesses who came into court and testified about mr. haliburton's demeanor when he did quit smoking. you heard from dorothy wilson that when her dad quit smoking in 1994, nothing had changed regarding his personality, he was the same dad. and tressie haywood basically said the same thing. these are the people who knew mr. haliburton the best. and when they saw him quit smoking in '94, they did not notice any symptoms that were indicative of any withdrawal symptoms. and dorothy haliburton basically said the same thing, mr. persons had to bring out her transcript, but what was reflected in her deposition was that she did not notice any changes in his personality other than the fact that he was quieter. so mr. haliburton does not really show the hallmarks of an addicted smoker. he may have smoked a lot of years, he may have smoked a lot of 3913 cigarettes, but he did not have any cravings, he did not have any withdrawal symptoms, he did not have any trouble not smoking after he quit, and he had no impairment because of anything that cigarettes and the nicotine in cigarettes did to him. so based on all this evidence, it is clear that mr. haliburton was not addicted to nicotine in cigarettes. and if you get to question 1 on the verdict form, which you will, because it is question 1, and you find that mr. haliburton was not addicted, then your answer to question 1 should be no. now, as i mentioned, there is a -- there is a separate component of question 1, and that is what i'm going to talk about now, and that is the addiction causation issue. now, obviously, it is the defense position that mr. haliburton was not addicted. but if you find him to be addicted, this is what you will consider, whether his addiction was a legal cause of his copd/emphysema and resulting death. and this is kind of a confusing concept. and it is a little complicated. so i would like to show you a portion of the jury instruction. and you-all 3914 have copies of these. but this is a portion of the jury instruction, it is instruction number 5. and what it says is, "addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine is a legal cause of mr. haliburton's emphysema/copd and resulting death if it directly and in natural and continuous sequence produced or contributed substantially to producing such emphysema/copd and resulting death, so that it can reasonably be said that, but for the addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine, the emphysema/copd and resulting death would not have occurred." and obviously, i've highlighted the words "but for". and the reason why i've done that is because that really puts into context this whole notion of addiction causation and what the plaintiff must prove. the plaintiff must prove that any addiction that mr. haliburton had was the but-for cause of his disease and death, his emphysema/copd and resulting death. and this basically means that it must be the main reason, that it must be the primary reason, and that it cannot just be a minor reason. and i think that is why the word "substantially" is in 3915 this instruction, that it has to be pretty much the key reason why mr. haliburton continued to smoke. so i'm going to walk you through the evidence on this issue. and where i would like to start off is the plaintiff admitted that mr. haliburton is partially responsible for his copd/emphysema and death. and the reason why that is important is because this kind of puts into context some of the evidence and where it fits when you are thinking about this addiction causation issue. now, mrs. haliburton testified in court that she thought her husband was responsible because he picked up his first cigarette and that she thought her husband was also responsible for not quitting sooner. and i think if you unpack her testimony and her admission, it kind of puts into context what this means. it means that mr. haliburton knew that smoking was dangerous while he continued to smoke. that mr. haliburton was not confused about the dangers and addictiveness of smoking. that mr. haliburton had the ability to quit smoking earlier. that he could have tried to quit smoking. and that he had 3916 the ability to quit smoking in time to prevent his copd/emphysema and death. i think all these things are true if you are going to admit responsibility on behalf of someone. and i think what this means, is that it does not have anything to do about nicotine addiction, what this goes to are mr. haliburton's choices and his decisions with respect to his smoking. so that is why i started off here with going through the addiction causation issue, because you have to determine whether something was related to nicotine as the but-for cause or whether something was related to something else like choices and decision-making and things like that. and kind of another reason -- or another way to think about this issue is to consider these two questions. did mr. haliburton have the ability to quit, but choose to continue smoking? or was mr. haliburton compelled to smoke or caught in some kind of addiction cycle, leaving him no choice, no matter how hard he tried, but to continue smoking until he developed copd and died? now, on the second question, those are not my words. dr. benowitz testified that addicted smokers are wrapped up in some kind of addiction 3917 cycle where they find themselves in the cycle because of their addiction to nicotine and they cannot break out of it no matter how hard they try. they try to quit, they are back in the addiction cycle, they try to quit, they are back in this addiction cycle. dr. feingold testified that addicted smokers are compelled to smoke, that they have this some kind of compulsive behavior that they find themselves engaging and that they try to quit this behavior, but they cannot, that they keep repeating the behavior, repeating the behavior, repeating the behavior, and that is because of their addiction to nicotine. so i'm kind of framing the addiction causation question like this, whether mr. haliburton was not compelled to smoke because of nicotine, but instead had the ability to quit smoking, but kept smoking because he chose to, or whether he was compelled to smoke and caught in some kind of addiction cycle. i would like to start off, as we go through this evidence, kind of in a big picture way. and you heard about these quitting statistics from a couple of witnesses, like dr. proctor, i believe dr. benowitz, dr. feingold got into them a little 3918 bit. but we do know that over the course of the years up until this point, there has been 60 million people who have quit smoking. and we know -- you heard from dr. proctor about what was going on in the early 1950s. there was the epidemiology studies. i think he called it the four pillars of scientific research that was going on back in the 1950s. and at that time, between 1950 and 1965, there was basically 18 million people who quit smoking. and that was around the time that mr. haliburton was starting smoking. we know that from 1964 to 1970, there were about 30 million people who quit smoking. and actually, that is supposed to be 1979, so that is a typo on our part. but between 1966 and 1970, from the time that the first warning was put on cigarette packs, until 1970, 13 million people quit smoking. 13 million people. it was the most significant period of quitting in the country's history even to today. and that is why mr. -- that was when mr. haliburton was smoking. but the point is is that millions and millions of smokers, including heavily-addicted smokers, 3919 were quitting smoking from the 1950s throughout the time that mr. haliburton smoked. and this quitting that you see, some of these people, as i mentioned, were heavily-addicted smokers. most of these people who quit smoking did so cold turkey. in fact, i think 85 to ninety percent of these people quit without any type of assistance. so the question is why is mr. haliburton different from these 60 million people who did quit smoking? was he so addicted that he could not try to quit smoking? was he so addicted that he was compelled to smoke against his will? were the cigarettes that mr. haliburton smoked more addictive than other cigarettes? no. was mr. haliburton's brain affected differently than smokers who quit? is that why he could have been different from these 60 million people who were quitting? no. was mr. haliburton exposed to advertising different than the smokers that had quit? he was not. was mr. haliburton exposed to tobacco company statements different than the smokers who quit? he was not. 3920 did mr. haliburton smoke more or longer than smokers who quit? no. was he any different from john haliburton, his brother; glendon or andrew haliburton, his sons; who chose to quit smoking and successfully quit? he was not. but did mr. haliburton choose to continue smoking because he enjoyed it and he did not want to quit? and that is what is differ about mr. haliburton from the 60 million smokers who did quit. and we are going to go through the evidence to explain this because i do not want you just to take that last sentence and my word for it. now you have heard what type of person he was. he was an intelligent man. he was a decisive man. you have heard he was a successful business owner. mr. haliburton was a guy from south georgia who came down to west palm beach and he started his own business and he worked hard and he eventually became a very successful business man in the area. he was able to provide for his family because that is what he wanted to do. he was a hard-working man. he was mentally strong. he was independent. and he was the kind of guy who did what he wanted 3921 to do. this is what the witnesses who knew mr. haliburton told us. and mr. haliburton, his smoking was his business. and this is consistent with his personality and the evidence you heard about who mr. haliburton was. and when i say that his smoking was his business, this is not a criticism of mr. haliburton by any stretch of the imagination. no one is criticizing him for doing what he did, for making the choices he did in his life, or for smoking cigarettes. he had every right to do what he wanted to do, and nobody is talking bad about him. now, mr. haliburton did what he wanted to do. he made his own decisions. and if he set his mind on something, he would follow through and accomplish it. if he was going to do something, he was determined to do it. and you heard from his daughters that he did not like being told what to do and that nobody could make him do anything. this is basically the universal consensus that people had about the kind of person that he was. so turning to the cigarette smoking. this is what we know. that mr. haliburton smoked for 40 3922 years, that is what the plaintiffs are saying, and never tried to quit. and again, the question is whether mr. haliburton had the ability to quit, but chose to continue smoking, or whether he was caught in an addiction cycle and compelled to smoke against his will until he developed copd and died. you saw some documents from mr. acosta about whether addiction eliminates free choice. this is what dr. feingold told us, the expert, on cross-examination. "well, the compulsion that you are talking about, sir, does not eliminate free choice from the equation?" and his answer was: "correct, it does not." mr. haliburton always had the choice to quit. no expert told you that nicotine addiction takes away that choice. but the first step to quitting is trying to quit. and from 1994 back until whenever it was that mr. haliburton started smoking, he showed zero motivation to quit smoking. he never used nicotine gum or patches. he never took any medication to help quit. he never cut down on his smoking. he never threw out his cigarettes or his ashtrays. he never sought assistance from anybody, from family 3923 or friends or from doctors. but the key point is that when he did have motivation in 1994, he quit the first time that he tried. up until that point, he did not take any affirmative step to quit smoking. and even putting behavior aside, putting aside the fact that he did not take any affirmative steps to quit smoking, mr. haliburton never even expressed the desire to quit smoking. he never told anyone that he wanted to quit. and the questions are, is this evidence of someone who is so addicted that they cannot stop smoking that they are so compelled to smoke because of their nicotine addiction that they can do nothing else, but smoke? is this evidence of someone who is caught in an addiction cycle that they cannot get out of? is this evidence of someone whose addiction is the but-for cause of their disease and their death? mr. haliburton never was motivated to quit until 1994. he showed no desire to quit until 1994. and he took no steps to quit until 1994. and you heard evidence that some people just want to smoke. you heard evidence that some smokers just want to smoke and that is fine. but 3924 you cannot say that any addiction that mr. haliburton had compelled him to smoke or was the but-for cause of any disease, copd, or death. because continued smoking by itself, smoking for 40 years without trying to quit does not equal the but-for causation question that you have to answer for class membership. now, you heard evidence that mr. haliburton smoked because he wanted to smoke. you heard from his wife that he was happy when he was smoking? you heard from his daughter that he enjoyed smoking. you heard from jerry miller, his cousin, that he enjoyed the taste of cigarettes. and lucius hamilton, his friend in the florida centralaires, said that to me, he enjoyed smoking. these are the people who knew mr. haliburton. contrary to what mr. acosta told you during his closing argument today, enjoyment does not equal addiction. just because you like to do something does not mean you are addicted to it. these two concepts are separate and apart. mr. haliburton liked smoking, he enjoyed smoking, and that is what he did. and that is what his wife told you. his wife told you, "he wanted to smoke and he was going to 3925 smoke." she also told you that nothing prevented mr. haliburton from quitting or trying to quit smoking in the 1950s or in the 1960s or in the 1970s or in the 1980s. assuming mr. haliburton had made a choice to quit smoking during any of that time period, there is no evidence that he could not have done it, because we know that the only time he tried, he did. the only time he tried to quit, he quit. now, ms. haliburton also told you that no one could have made that decision, but mr. haliburton. she was asked, "the bottom line is, no one else could have decided to quit smoking other than mr. haliburton; correct?" and her answer was: "no, i could not decide that for him." and she was asked, "he had to decide that for himself, did not he?" her answer was: "true." he was the only person in control of his decisions. if he wanted to make the decision to quit, he could have tried to quit. but he did not try to quit. and the evidence is that is because he wanted to smoke. the nicotine addiction that he 3926 may have had, if you find that he was addicted to nicotine, did not prevent him from quitting. he could have quit, and he could have prevented his disease had he opted to quit smoking. now, this is the evidence. now, i'm about to sit down, but i would like to leave you with this, and i would like you to think about this. because what mr. haliburton said when people told him to quit smoking was, "well, you got to die with something." and what we know is that mr. haliburton at this time knew about the risks of smoking, he had been warned about the risks of smoking, he was fully informed about what it was he was doing with his cigarette smoking. and when people told him to quit and told him that he should quit if he wanted to help his health out, he responded with, "well, you got to die with something." he did not try to quit smoking when he was told not to smoke by people. instead, he laughed off remarks, he shrugged off remarks, and he made comments like this. mr. haliburton, and the evidence has shown you, he accepted the risks and he did what he wanted to do, and he was fully informed about what 3927 he was doing. and mr. haliburton is not someone who was compelled to smoke. mr. haliburton was not someone who was caught in an addiction cycle. that is not what the evidence has shown you. maybe if mr. haliburton had repeatedly tried to quit, maybe if mr. haliburton had asked for help to quit. maybe if he had taken a single step before 1994, when he quit permanently, to try to quit, that could be indicative of addiction being a but-for cause. but he did none of those things. he continued to smoke. and this is what he said when people told him to quit. what drove mr. haliburton's smoking decisions was his desire to smoke, his enjoyment of smoking, and it certainly was not an addiction to any nicotine in cigarettes. so when you get to the first question on the verdict form that asks you whether mr. haliburton is a class member, your answer to this question should be no. ladies and gentlemen, that is all i'm going to talk to you about today. i do very much appreciate your time and attention through this process. and right now, mr. persons is going to walk you-all 3928 through the rest of the verdict form. thank you. mr. persons: may it please the court. the court: yes, thank you. mr. persons: counsel. mrs. haliburton. ladies and gentlemen. good afternoon. i'm going to talk to you, i'm going to start with question number 2 on the verdict form. and that question is -- and can everybody see this over here? "did andrew haliburton know or should he have known in the exercise of reasonable care before may 5th, 1990, that he had emphysema/copd and that there was a reasonable possibility that his emphysema/copd was caused by cigarette smoking?" the evidence to that, in support of that, is a resounding yes, that he knew or should have known through the exercise of reasonable care that he had copd/emphysema before may 5th, 1990, and that there was a reasonable possibility -- mr. chestnut: objection, your honor. mr. persons: -- that it was linked to smoking. 3929 mr. chestnut: there are no facts in evidence to support. their expert said the opposite. the court: overruled. you may continue, mr. persons. mr. persons: and if the expert testimony answered that question, you would not have to answer it. and the expert was not -- mr. acosta: your honor, objection. the court: whoa, whoa, whoa just -- sustained. just rephrase that. mr. persons: this is a question you have to answer. and you must answer it based on the evidence you have heard in this case. and the evidence is overwhelming that mr. haliburton had all of the symptoms of the disease, he knew that those symptoms were linked to smoking, and he knew all of this prior to may 5th of 1990. we are going to talk about the jury instruction that is on this statute of limitations defense. and the jury instruction does not say anything about you having to have a diagnosis prior to may 5th, 1990, in fact, it says just the contrary, but we will get to that in a minute. next slide. mr. haliburton knew or should have known 3930 before may 5th, 1990, that there was a reasonable possibility that his copd/emphysema was caused by smoking. how do we know that? next slide. mr. guest: that is my fault. mr. persons: that is okay. we are good. oops. let me see. well, they should not let me use this. "the defendant does not need to prove that mr. haliburton was actually diagnosed with emphysema/copd before may 5th, 1990 in order to prevail on this defense. for purposes of this defense," and we are looking at instruction number 8, "the critical event" -- mr chestnut: objection, your honor, this is not final instruction number 8. the court: okay, counsel, sidebar. court: what is wrong, mr. chestnut? mr chestnut: i have "if you find". i do not have as final instruction 8 "defendants do not have to prove." the court: right here. mr. guest: sure, it is. 3931 the court: it is right there in the middle. mr. persons: yeah. mr. chestnut: yes, your honor. he is omitted this entire paragraph. the court: i know. mr. persons: i can do that. the court: but they can do that. he can focus on portions just like your counsel, mr. acosta and mr. gary focused on portions of the instructions. mr chestnut: your honor, it is my understanding that you can reference the instruction, but if you are going to publish it you have to publish the entire instruction. mr. guest: no, no, no. the court: no, no, no, you can focus on the portions, so i'm going to overrule the objection. mr chestnut: thank you. persons: okay? the court: that last objection was overruled for the record. you may continue, mr. persons. mr. persons: thank you, your honor. 3932 defendant does -- oh, i'm hitting the wrong buttons here. okay. "defendant does not need to prove that mr. haliburton was actually diagnosed with copd/emphysema before may 5th, 1990 in order to prevail on this defense. for purposes of this defense, the critical event is not when his emphysema/copd was actually diagnosed by a physician, but when his copd/emphysema first manifested itself. "mr. haliburton knew or should have known that there was a reasonable possibility his emphysema/copd was caused by cigarette smoking if his emphysema/copd manifested itself to him in a way that supplied 'some evidence,'" "'some evidence' of a causal relationship to cigarette smoking. "in making that determination, you may properly consider what mr. haliburton knew prior to may 5th, 1990, concerning the health risks of cigarettes." and so when something manifests itself, it becomes apparent. well, when was it apparent? we know it was apparent long before may 5th of 1990. the evidence demonstrates it. we know that both pulmonologists agree that 3933 mr. haliburton had copd and symptoms of copd in the 1980s. both dr. feingold said it and dr. cosmo. family members and friends observed significant, progressive symptoms of copd in the 1980s. mr. haliburton was surrounded by explicit warnings that smoking caused copd. the cigarette pack talked about emphysema. in fact, used the word "emphysema" beginning in 1985. it was on the pack itself. we know that mrs. haliburton attributed his cough to his smoking. he knew that coughs were associated with smoking because she had coughs and shortness of breath when he smoked around her and she urged him not to do that and he persisted in doing it. and we know that he watched the news, jerry miller told us that, and the news was replete with psas about the link between coughing, chronic bronchitis, and emphysema, which are forms of copd. we know because of his symptoms and the information available to him in the 1980s mr. haliburton knew or should have known his smoking caused his copd. now, he might not call it chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. people use the term "heartburn". if you go to a doctor or medical 3934 dictionary, it is described as gastroesophageal reflux disorder. you do not have to know the technical term to know that you have got heartburn and the heartburn is associated with a given activity. that is when something manifests itself, that is when it becomes apparent. and that is when you know that it is linked to eating spicy food or whatever it is. there is no dispute that he had emphysema in the 1980s. dr. feingold told you, he was asked this question, "and you also think more likely than not, and i appreciate that clarification on the probability versus certainty, but you would also agree, sir, that based on the medical records that you reviewed and your experience and training, that it is your opinion that mr. haliburton probably had copd in 1988?" he said yes, he said, answer, "i think he did." both doctors talked about the manifestations of copd, the coughing, and not just any cough, but it is a cough that is loud enough and persistent enough that people, they tell you you need to do something about it, you need to see a doctor about 3935 it, you need to quit smoking. it is not just a little cough, it is a continuous cough. and it is not just a dry cough, it is a cough that produces sputum. it is a cough that is, the doctors described it as a productive cough and he had such a cough. he had shortness of breath, even in conversation, a long conversation, he had difficulty with breathing, symptom of the disease. he had wheezing, which is from the narrowing of those spaces in the bronchial tubes that dr. feingold and dr. cosmo talked about. and dr. cosmo described it as someone whose breathing is audible. most people when you are sitting in proximity to somebody, even close proximity, you cannot hear them breathing. when somebody is wheezing, it makes an audible sound or whistling sound, another symptom of the disease. manifestations of copd, the symptoms can lead a person to know they are sick. and that is basically what this instruction calls for. you know something is wrong with you, you know you are sick. you might not know the technical term for it, but you know that you are sick, you are not well, and you know that that condition is caused by your smoking, even if you have, as the instruction says, 3936 some evidence. not a whole lot of evidence, but just some evidence that what you are experiencing, these symptoms are caused by your smoking. in 1975, dr. feingold would have thought of copd/emphysema if a person -- if he saw a person with those symptoms. a smoker can have the symptoms 20 years or more before he passes away. and there is testimony that mrs. haliburton said, it could have been in the '70s that he started having this cough and 20 years before would have been 1978. here is what drs. haliburton {sic} and feingold say. shortness of breath in the early 1980s that the plaintiff attributed to smoking. he had a cough in the 1980s. difficulty with activities of daily living because of breathing problems in the late 1980s. we know that from jerry miller. jerry miller can peg it to 1989 or 1988 because jerry miller went into the army in 1989 and he was working for mr. haliburton up until the time he went into the army and he had lived with mr. haliburton. dr. feingold, shortness of breath in the early 1980s that plaintiff attributed to smoking. cough in the 1980s. difficulty working because of 3937 breathing problems in the late 1980s. all of this is before may 5th, 1990. thank you, mr. smith. thank you. i put together this little chart. and the line of demarcation is 1990. and here is what we know from the witnesses who were around mr. haliburton. betty wright, his sister-in-law, mrs. haliburton's sister, ran the mickey's convenience store and sold him cigarette. she worked at mickey's beginning in 1975 and worked there continuously until 1995. she noticed back in the -- in the early '80s cough and shortness of breath with mr. haliburton. jerry miller, who lived with the haliburtons and worked for mr. haliburton for some 16 years, said that there was a cough, shortness of breath, and wheezing. all this is before 1990. belinda thompson could not be precise, any more precise than saying it was in the '80s and '90s, whether it was the early '80s or not she could not say, but she did recall a cough and shortness of breath. just could not say when the shortness of breath was. but she remembered a cough in the late 3938 '80s. lucius hamilton, lead singer in the band, noticed cough and shortness of breath beginning in the '83, '84 time frame. he could peg it to the time they cut the album. they cut the album in '84 and the band broke up. and he certainly noticed a coughing, shortness of breath during that time. tressie haywood noticed a cough back in this time period and then shortness of breath in the '90s. mrs. haliburton noticed a cough mr. haliburton had and shortness of breath, she said it was -- it could have been in the '80s, she was not sure whether it was the '80s, but certainly it was in the '90s. glendon haliburton said that he had a cough prior to 1990, that he had this persistent cough. he links the shortness of breath, he says that was in this time frame. cannot say whether it -- when in the '80s or '90s, but in that -- in that time frame. dorothy haliburton's cough, shortness of breath in that time frame. but you can see over here on this side, there is a -- just a overwhelming amount of evidence that mr. haliburton had these symptoms prior to 1990. 3939 so mr. haliburton knew or should have known before may 1990 that he had copd/emphysema and it was caused by smoking. and, see, the legal instruction again, go to number 8, it just has to be a reasonable possibility that his copd/emphysema was caused by cigarette smoking if it manifested itself to him in a way that supplied him some evidence of a causal relationship to cigarette smoking. in making that determination, you may properly consider what mr. haliburton knew prior to may 5th, 1990, concerning the health risks of smoking. so let us talk about some of that. we know prior to may 5th, 1990, that he would have seen this or had access to -- i'm sorry. this thing is in your way. let me move it. nancy, thanks for your help. let me get this out of the way. all right. we know that they had the four rotating warnings beginning in 1985. so on one out of every four packs of cigarettes that mr. haliburton would have purchased, one of them would have had, one out of every four would have had this warning on it. and there is a specific reference to emphysema. 3940 we know that the haliburtons took the palm beach post, and there was coverage in the local newspaper about the link between smoking and emphysema. and here is a story january 11th, 1964, "smoking report seen linking many diseases, including emphysema. drop in cigarette smoking reported to health experts." here is "emphysema deaths rise." and we showed you this during mr. proctor's examination, i believe. "emphysema about 13 times more prevalent in smokers than nonsmokers, is more widespread than lung cancer and tuberculosis combined." "it is first symptom is often a long, winter cold and lingering cough, or asthmatic-like wheezing, or just shortness of breath." emphysema. and that is in 1968. here is more coverage from the palm beach post. this is in 1971 and into the 1980s, all prior to 1990. "have emphysema? stop smoking." "do not want emphysema? stop smoking." and "the benefits of not smoking." while it cannot cure emphysema, it can slow its progress, that was the testimony from both pulmonologists. 3941 and then we know that mr. haliburton received personal warnings, not just the warnings from friends and family about you need to quit smoking because it is causing this bad cough you have got, but mr. haliburton had coughing, shortness of breath, and wheezing for years in the 1980s. his health was getting progressively worse throughout the '80s. mrs. haliburton told mr. haliburton that her bronchitis was affected by his smoking. and mr. haliburton's family and friends told him that his health was being affected by his smoking. and dr. feingold. "and you also remember in the facts that you reviewed and the materials in this case that ms. haliburton told her husband that he needed to quit smoking because of his cough and his shortness of breath in the 1980s?" "yes, sir, i do remember that." so again, evidence in the 1980s that he would have known that the cough was associated with smoking. "but the bottom line is, there is testimony that you have reviewed where mr. haliburton said that his smoking was -- or that his smoking was dangerous and addictive in the 1980s?" answer: "i agree, there were testimony -- 3942 there was testimony to that effect, or something like that." where he knew not only that it was dangerous, but that it was addictive in the 1980s. "at the time of the florida centralaires," and we had this gentleman come and read lucius hamilton's deposition to you, and lucius hamilton testified as follows. question: "at the time the florida centralaires broke up, you told me that you decided that mr. haliburton was not doing well health-wise. "uh-huh (affirmative)." question: "did you notice at any -- at that time whether he had a cough?" answer: "he had a cough." question: "and because of your noticing this cough and these episodes of shortness of breath, you told him that he should go see a doctor; right?" "yeah. many times." many times. now, if your cough is so persistent and it is so bad that your friend in the band, and you have got shortness of breath, is telling you you need to go and see a doctor, then the symptoms are obviously, if they are apparent to 3943 somebody else, they are apparent to you. they manifest it from your standpoint and, therefore, you are on notice that you have got a smoking-related condition, something about smoking is making you sick. you might not know the technical term for it, but you know you have got it. and mrs. haliburton warned mr. haliburton in the 1980s about the smoking. "do you think you heard dorothy tell andy that he needed to quit smoking while the florida centralaires were still in existence? "oh, yeah." question: "do you recall her telling him that he needed to quit smoking because smoking was bad for him? "no, she would say, 'you need to quit smoking because they are going to kill you.'" she was not very -- she was not subtle about it, no, not that it was just bad for you, but it was going to kill you, and this is in the 1980s. "when do you first remember ms. haliburton saying that he was" -- that he, referring to mr. haliburton, "was smoking too much or that his cigarette smoking was going to kill him?" answer: "it was probably in the -- like i 3944 said, around '83, '84, somewhere around there, she was very concerned with him." jerry miller again. "did you ever hear any conversations like that between mr. haliburton and anyone else? "yeah. i remember hearing glen", this is glendon, his son, "tell him that, you know, 'daddy, you need to go to the doctor and see about that cough.'" question: "and when do you recall hearing glen telling mr. haliburton that he should go to the doctor about his coughing? "that was sometime around '85, '86, '86." anyway, this is prior to may 5th, 1990. here is betty wright, sister-in-law. "so since the time that you started selling him cigarettes, you recall referring to the cough as a smoker's cough with him? "yes." smoker's cough. not using a technical term to describe it, but obviously a cough associated with smoking, caused by smoking. "when is the first time that you recall mr. haliburton not being able to work because he was having coughing problems? 3945 "it was between '88 and '89, somewhere in there." he was having difficulty just laying sod, difficulty having a long conversation, difficulty walking 25 feet to his truck from the front porch to the truck on the side of the yard, without having to catch his breath. all symptoms of this disease. so to sum up on this, we know the first pack warnings came out in the 1960s warning that smoking may be hazardous to your health. second pack warning, a stronger warning, smoking -- "the surgeon general has determined that smoking is hazardous to your health." then in the 1970s, the mid 1970s through 1990, betty wright, sister-in-law, coughing and shortness of breath, "them things are going to kill you," she told him. 1980 to '89, jerry miller, coughing, shortness of breath, and wheezing that worsened during the 1980s that got progressively worse, as dr. feingold and dr. cosmo said, it is a progressive disease. 1980s, mrs. haliburton, she said he had developed a cough and shortness of breath that she attributed to smoking. 3946 somewhere in this time frame, we know it was prior to 1982 because that is when dorothy wilson graduated from high school and left home, she said her father had a nagging cough that she attributed to smoking. mid 1980s to 1990, this is lucius hamilton, said that mr. haliburton had a continuous cough, and that he told mr. haliburton to go to a doctor. mid 1980s, mr. haliburton himself attributed his coughing and shortness of breath to smoking. he referred to cigarettes as cancer sticks, obviously knowing that they are harmful. tressie haywood, the daughter, father had a cough and she associated it with his smoking. all of these people around him noticed his cough and attributed it to smoking. 1985 or '86, it was somewhere in this time frame that glendon said he told him to go to the doctor about his coughing and shortness of breath. and, of course, we discussed the rotating warnings, one of which specifically reference emphysema, that "smoking causes lung cancer, heart disease, emphysema, and may complicate pregnancy." and all of this is before may 5th of 1990. and of course mr. haliburton said, when he 30 december 18, 2014 started coughing, smoking cigarettes, "they are killing me." and that was in the early 1980s. all right, number 2, "did mr. haliburton know or should he have known in the exercise of reasonable care, before may 5th, 1990, that he had emphysema/copd and that there was a reasonable possibility that his emphysema/copd was caused by cigarette smoking?" the answer to that is yes. and if you answer question 2 yes, then your verdict is for the defendant, you do not go any further in this verdict form. and the evidence is overwhelming that he knew or reasonably should have known prior to may 5th, 1990, that he had copd/emphysema caused by his cigarette smoking. let us talk about some of what mr. haliburton knew. the next claim, questions 3 and 4 deal with concealment or agreement to conceal information after may 5th, 1982. not prior to that time, but after may 5th of 1982. but it is not enough to demonstrate that r.j. reynolds or the tobacco indus- -- institute or any of these other entities concealed or agreed to conceal, but there has to be a link between that conduct and mr. haliburton, and that is what we are going to talk about now. 3948 let me start with this premise. you cannot conceal something from somebody, something they already know. if you already know that a given activity is dangerous and addictive, then i cannot hide that from you. no matter what i do, i cannot hide it from you. mr. acosta: your honor, i have to make an objection to that, it is inconsistent with the finding, he cannot go against that. the court: the reference to findings is part of that, then, sustain the objection. mr. persons: mr. haliburton did not develop copd/emphysema and die because the information about the dangers of smoking were unknown or unavailable to him before may 5th, 1982. and we are going to talk about that. we knew that -- we know that he knew the risks of smoking. mr. haliburton's grandmother warned him not to smoke. since the 1960s, lucius hamilton, beginning in 1963, because they were in the band, that is when the band formed, lucius hamilton constantly warned mr. haliburton to quit smoking. mr. haliburton would have punished his children if they were caught smoking because he knew it was bad for them. in the 1970s or 1980s, mrs. haliburton told 3949 mr. haliburton not to smoke around her because it was affecting her bronchitis. so he knew that smoking was bad, it is affecting your wife's health when you smoke around her. that is pretty obvious. in the 1970s or the 1980s, betty wright told mr. haliburton to stop smoking because it was affecting his health. and mr. haliburton, when he would ask somebody for a cigarette when he was out, he would say, "give me one of those cancer sticks," so obviously aware of the dangers associated with smoking. and this is from jerry miller. "and what was mr. haliburton's reaction to when she told him that he was smoking too much or that his cigarette smoking was going to kill him? "he would make a joke. 'oh, we are going to die with something anyway, you know, we all going to die with something, you know, cancer or something, you know.' he would say that." so he knew that it could lead to death. "did you ever say anything to mr. haliburton about his smoking when he was at the store? "yes. "what did you say? "i said, 'well, you need to stop smoking.' 3950 "what did he say in response? "well, he said, 'oh, well.' i said, 'them things going to kill you.' he said, 'well, you got to die with something.'" question, this is lucius hamilton, "did you tell him that he needed to quit because you understood that smoking was bad for your health? "i did not never -- you know, we talked about, i think a time or two when i guess them cigarettes came out with that little warning on the pack, you know. you know, i would say, 'all you have got to do is read the pack, you know, they are going to take you out.' and that was it." "and how would he respond when you said that? "the same way. "he would laugh? "yeah, you know." "stay away from them, they are dangerous and addictive," that is what he told jerry miller in 1980 or 1981. so he knew prior to 1982 that cigarette smoking was dangerous and that it was addictive. those were his own words to jerry miller. he told jerry miller, "stay away from them, they are dangerous and they are addictive," and this is before 1982. 3951 now, dr. proctor would have you believe that no one knew about the risks of smoking until 1964, and if they did, they forgot about it. well, the evidence is to the contrary. he had to admit that for hundreds of years, people have been writing and talking about the dangers of smoking. the general public has known for over 100 years that nicotine is in tobacco. he concedes that. the general public has known that smoking can be difficult to quit for over a hundred years. and for a hundred years, schools have taught that smoking is both dangerous and addictive. question, and this is dr. proctor, "now, there were hundreds of articles or studies where they found that smoking was dangerous?" answer: "that is right. "in fact, even thousands of articles were written about it; correct? "exactly." and we are talking about the 1950s, we are talking about prior to the surgeon general's report. here we are back in the 1950s, "smoking blamed in lung cancer." and they were talking about a 3952 study that was done by three american science -- three reports done by american scientists. so not science that is done in europe or somewhere, this is being done in the united states. "surgeon general warns again on the danger of smoking." this is back in 1959, the palm beach post. "smoking again hit as cancer cause," this is the palm beach post, 1959. palm beach times, 1959, "nonsmokers live longer, expert holds." so the scientific literature was finding its way into lay publications like newspapers and magazines and things of that sort, that people were given ac- -- had access to. and here is dr. leroy burney and dr. john heller. they are charged with protecting the public health. dr. leroy burney was the surgeon general of the united states. 1957, he testified in front of congress and said that, "our position is that we have informed the public through the excellent coverage of the press, radio, and tv about the dangers of smoking." and these people are testifying in real time. this is in 1957. they are not looking back 50 years later or more like dr. proctor. these people were there. they are charged with protecting the 3953 public health and getting out information about the dangers of smoking. here is what dr. heller said, "newspapers, radio, tv, and other media have done an excellent job covering this problem, and a very objective job. this is an exceedingly valuable way of informing the public." so they were getting the word out to the people about the dangers of smoking. and this is back in the '50s, following the mouse skin painting studies and the epidemiological studies of drs. hammond and horn had conducted on behalf of the american cancer society. all of this is coming out. here is the 1964 surgeon general's report. it says, "smoking causes lung cancer. smoking is associated with an increased risk of emphysema." and then, of course, we had warnings in the news. speaker: this is a cbs news extra on smoking and health, the findings of the surgeon general's committee. mr. reasoner: almost from the moment that cigarettes were introduced, they were attacked. 3954 but the attacks took a new turn ten years ago and culminated in today's report by the surgeon general's committee. this, in summary, is what the committee says. cigarette smoking is a major cause of lung cancer in men, and data on women smokers points the same way. cigarette smoking is a significant cause of cancer of the larynx and probably the most important cause of chronic bronchitis. cigarette smoking may be related to other lung diseases. male smokers have a much higher death rate from heart disease, although it is not proven that smoking is the cause. on the question of filters, the committee says there is no evidence that they do any good, but it did not exclude the possibility that an effective filter might be developed. in short, the committee says if you smoke cigarettes, you increase your chances of dying early. the sooner you start, the more you smoke, the more you inhale, the worse your chances are. in this kind of a country, it comes down to you, whether you like it or not. no one is going to forbid an adult to smoke, and it is now quite clear that no one is going to tell him it is good 3955 for him, either. the decision is his, the decision and the health that may depend on it. this is harry reasoner. good night. persons: and so that is how things were in 1964 in this country. said we are not going to ban the product, people have a choice, they have the right to smoke if they want to, but their health will depend on that choice. knowing that it is dangerous and knowing that it is addictive, some people chose to continue that activity, and the country decided they were not going to stop them, what they did was put the label, the warning, the caution label on the cigarette pack. and there were warnings in other media. here is the palm beach post-times with coverage of the '64 surgeon general's report "smoking, cancer linked." and here is an interesting piece. this was a letter to the editor. and this is not a scientist, this is a citizen of palm beach county who wrote in and said that about -- and he is talking about the surgeon general's report in 1964. he says it is "very, very interesting, the quotes you give in 3956 your news item regarding the smoking report. but these reactions quoted are nothing new nor is a smoking report anything new. in bygone years, cigarettes were referred to as coffin nails. were that today, with full knowledge, a person will say, 'i'll never quit, i enjoy smoking.'" and so that pretty much summarizes how so people received this news of the surgeon general's report of '64, that it was very, very interesting, but it did not tell them anything new because they knew even before this report came out, that smoking was dangerous and could kill you. hence, use of the term "coffin nails." and when i showed this to dr. proctor, he was unfamiliar with the name of the author because he assumed it was a scientist. and, no, it was not a scientist, it was someone named mr. saunders, who was just a local resident. but he knew enough to know that it was dangerous. and speaking of education, we know that freddie miller, who was raised by -- he and mr. haliburton were raised by their grandmother, miss carson, miss sally ann carson, he had a third grade education, but when he started coughing and associated his coughing with his smoking, he quit 3957 smoking. so you do not have to be a phd to know that coughing associated with smoking, that it is bad for you and that you need to quit or that cigarette smoking is dangerous. palm beach post. here are other warnings. 1964, '66, '67, talking about the drop in cigarette smoking as a result of the information linking cigarette smoking to disease. and then, "smoking report seen linking many diseases," and they go on this coverage of the report. "panel warns last puffs most dangerous to smokers." so the information is out there. information is available. and that is the standard. the information has to be known or available, and this information clearly was available. here is the first of the caution labels. "cigarette smoking may be hazardous to your health." lucius hamilton told mr. haliburton on more than one occasion, "i would say all you got to do is read the pack, they are going to take you out." and that is taking you out meaning they are going the kill you. here is a psa. speaker: we receive many warnings in our 3958 life, and sometimes they can save our life. this message is brought to you by the american cancer society. persons: powerful warning. and, yes, there was advertising, but there were also these public service announcements in pretty graphic terms describing the dangers of smoking. and as a result of all of the coverage on all the media, tv, newspapers, magazines, public service announcements, public health officials, dr. daniel horn in 1968 said, "you could stand on a rooftop and shout 'smoking is dangerous' at the top of your lungs and you would not be telling anyone anything they did not already know." and he is in real time. this is in 1968 in the united states. so the public health campaign continued and it was effective in getting the word out. here is the 1970 warning, "warning: the surgeon general has determined that cigarette smoking is dangerous to your health." here is another public service announcement. play that. this is in the 1978, '79 time frame. (video clip played as follows:) 3959 girl: you see, most people have never even heard of chronic bronchitis and this pamphlet tells how a lot of people first think it is just an annoying cold. speaker: i'll see you and raise you. girl: so if you have a persistent cough -- male speaker: what did that kid say? female speaker: she said if you have a persistent cough -- girl: it may be a symptom of chronic bronchitis. female speaker: hey, are we having a medical seminar or are we playing poker? male speaker: yeah. girl: chronic bronchitis can also lead to other serious respiratory diseases, particularly emphysema. female speaker: okay, what have you got? male speaker: i've got queens and -- female speaker: chronic bronchitis, i would say. girl: so do not ignore a persistent cough that lingers on particularly if you smoke cigarettes. male speaker: now, what do you say? male speaker: first, see your doctor, and 3960 second, learn how to play poker. full house. girl: so do not gamble. write your lung association for the free booklet on chronic bronchitis. they care about every breath you take, they really do. persons: and we know from mrs. haliburton's testimony that mr. haliburton was a sammy davis, jr. fan. sammy davis, jr., did a public service announcement for the great american smokeout. ms. davis: you know giving up smoking comes easy for some people and hard for others. if you are a smoker like me, try kicking the habit for just one day on thursday, november 17th. that is the date of the great american smokeout. this is sammy davis, jr., inviting you to join me and along with a few million other americans in making thursday, november 17th truly a smokeless thursday. that means 24 hours, man, without one of these things. persons: so the word was getting out about the dangers of smoking and the need to quit 3961 smoking. and the great american smokeout resulted in a number of people quitting because the idea was you quit for one day and see if you can quit for another day and so on until you are no longer smoking. now, there is no evidence that advertising had any impact on mr. haliburton, that is been the evidence in the case. mrs. haliburton did not remember any advertising growing up in georgia. except for a marlboro billboard, mrs. haliburton did not remember any advertising from the 1950s to the 1980s. no one testified that advertising had anything to do with this case. cigarette advertising, it was legal until it was banned on television and -- and in 1971. and all advertising had warnings since 1972 because even on billboards, magazines, wherever you would see an ad for cigarettes, they would have to put whatever the warning was at that time. that was the law. and speaking of advertising we are talking about tifton and tift county, georgia, and southwest georgia and tobacco country, that is a tobacco culture. you do not need madison avenue to tell you about the properties of tobacco and how it is cropped and how it is aired or cured and how it is used. you do not 3962 need a magazine to tell you that. you do not need a radio or television to tell you that, it is something you grow up with. interestingly, though, even though he grew up in that culture, because sally mae carson -- sally ann carson forbade smoking, he did not smoke when he lived with her. you remember freddie miller said he did not see him smoking until he left to go to florida to live with his daddy and his stepmother and that was when he first saw him smoking, and that was in 1956. well, in 1956, he had gotten married in 1955 and had a son, andrew haliburton, jr. so he is a father and a husband when he is smoking. he is not a child. he is not a young teenager, he is an adult, a grown man. in other words, the grandmother said, and freddie miller's testimony was you are grown, you can do what you want to, and grown can be when you get 20 or 21 years old or grown can be when you are out of the house and have a place of your own and a job of your own. and you recall freddie miller's testimony when he was taken down to the sawmill because he did not want to go to school anymore. he was in third grade, said i do not want to go to school anymore like the rest of the children and 3963 his mother took him down to the sawmill and said "mister, do you need anybody to help you?" and he said, the manager said, "yeah, but that fellow's too -- he is too small to work here." said, "well, no. he is big enough to say he does not want to go to school, he is big enough to have a job." so if you have a job, much less having a spouse and a family, you are on your own. you are adult enough in that culture to make your own decisions. and he made his decision to smoke. and nobody's faulting him for his decision, that was his right, but with that comes certain consequences. so let us look at like father like son. before you play that -- go ahead. go ahead. yeah, stop it just one second. speaker: like father, like son. like father, like son? think about it. speaker: for information on smoking and heart disease, ask your heart association. persons: that is a far more powerful and lasting influence on a child's behavior than anything madison avenue could do or any tobacco 3964 company could do, because that is somebody that is a role model in their own house that they live with day in and day out. and when they see adults engaged in certain activities, children want to -- they want to emulate that. they long for the day when they can do what they see adults doing, whether it is drinking, whether it is smoking, whether it is driving a car or whatever, they see adults doing it, they want to engage in an adult activity and that is why one of the strongest influence on whether or not somebody will take up smoking, whether they will begin to smoke is whether they have got a peer who smokes, whether they have got a parent who smokes, or they have got a sibling who smokes. that is a strong influence. in the case of mr. haliburton, i submit to you it was when he went to live with his father who was a smoker, and he emulated, he took up that activity. it was not because of anything r.j. reynolds had in an advertising in a magazine, and the testimony was he did not even read magazines and just looked at the paper. but it was not anything about advertising. he did not need advertising to acquaint him with the experience of smoking, to engage in smoking. 3965 your honor, could we take five? the court: sure, let me ask. yeah, i see jurors are nodding their heads as well in agreement with you, mr. persons. mr. persons: thank you. the court: take a five-minute recess. mr. persons: yes. mr. chestnut: your honor. the court: yes. mr. chestnut: can you advise how long mr. persons has? the court: sure, i'll find out. let me just give the jurors a break. (the jury left the courtroom at 3:58 p.m.) the court: let me give counsel a break, that way you can check your notes and everything too. five-minute recess. mr. chestnut: how much longer for mr. persons? the court: he is going to check his notes. mr. chestnut: oh, okay. (recess taken from 3:59 p.m. to 4:16 p.m.) the deputy: all rise, court is back in session. the court: okay, is counsel ready? 3966 mr. persons: yes, your honor. the court: okay. ready for our jurors? mr. persons: yes. the deputy: you are all right. do i notice my paths are getting narrower and narrower. the court: we are piling stuff in. the deputy: jurors entering. (the jury entered the courtroom at 4:16 p.m.) the court: all right. welcome back, ladies and gentlemen, if you please take your seats. mr. persons, are you ready to continue? mr. persons: yes, your honor. the court: please. mr. persons: ladies and gentlemen, especially during dr. proctor's testimony, there was a lot about the campaign of doubt and creating a controversy and so forth and the abundance of advertising. but the public information campaign about the dangers ever smoking got through to the american public. and we know that because we can look at the rate at which people started quitting. and we know that because we had this kind of information. 1953, scientific consensus tobacco is a major cause of death. and we know that between 3967 that time frame in 1953 and '57 we had 17.6 -- i mean -- yeah, million people quit by the time of the surgeon general's report came out. and the surgeon general himself, leroy burney, said the public was informed through excellent coverage. in 1966, the warning label goes on, remember dr. heller who said you could stand on a rooftop and you would not be telling anybody anything they did not already know, if you told them that smoking was dangerous, and the warning label in 1970 is a stronger label, the warnings go on all advertising, and we know that from '64 to '79, 30 million people quit smoking, and so given those numbers, the message was clearly getting through. mr. and mrs. haliburton told their children not to smoke because it harmed her health and it was a bad habit and that message got through to them. we know that, miss dorothy wilson testified, "and you did not smoke because you regarded smoking as a bad habit?" answer: "addiction, i did, yes. bad habit, addiction, not good for you." the message got through. question: "and you would talk about this with your siblings, your brothers and sisters, when you 3968 were growing about up about your father's smoking being a bad habit; right?" answer: "right." question: "and your sisters also agreed, they agreed with you that it was a bad habit; right? and that was because it was bad for you and you had to inhale it as you have already said; right? "yes. knew that it was bad for you, a bad habit." so we talked about the consensus in '53, smoking causes cancer, and that is when we see the people start quitting in significant numbers. and we talked about the pack warning. oops. there we go. and then we know in 1968, john haliburton quit smoking, that is mr. haliburton's -- was mr. haliburton's older brother, john haliburton, he quit in 1968, and that is two years after the pack warning goes on. lucius hamilton in the late '60s, constantly urging mr. haliburton to quit. late '60s, the haliburtons forbid the children from smoking. great american smokeout is in 1977, the same year that mr. haliburton's father died of cancer, he was a -- and then in 1970s or '80s, we know that smoke 3969 from mr. haliburton's cigarettes were bothering mrs. haliburton's bronchitis. and you will recall that the testimony was late '70s, mr. haliburton has this cough, short of breath. he tells people that his -- not to smoke because it is dangerous and addictive, and that is in the 1980s. early '80s, daughters pointed out his coughing, told him to quit. and so all of this is prior to may 5th, 1982. and it would have to be something that was concealed or there was an agreement to conceal after may 5th, 1982, upon which he reasonably relied to his detriment in order for there to be a concealment claim. and we know from the evidence that he did not rely on anything that tobacco companies said or did. all the witnesses were asked about this who came in and testified. "your husband never said" -- and even some by deposition. "your husband never said that if he had known certain information, he would not have started smoking, did he?" answer: "he did not tell me." this is mr. haliburton. "okay, he never said that if he had known 3970 certain information, he would not have continued to smoke, did he, ma'am. "he did not tell me." well, of course, he knew information after 1982 and he knew certain information before then and he knew that it was dangerous and addictive before then. now the plaintiff's case is reynolds advertised and made public statements about smoking, that since mr. haliburton was in the information environment and exposed to advertising, and continued to smoke for 19 years, that establishes the concealment claim, and the agreement to conceal. but you did not hear anything from any witness that said mr. haliburton relied on anything that the tobacco companies said or the tobacco institute said or the tobacco industry research committee said or the council for tobacco research said. here we have dorothy wilson. "we have talked about advertising, and i just want to make sure that we are clear. you are not aware of your father ever relying on any statement from a tobacco company? "i am not aware, no, sir." tressie haywood, "and your father also never 3971 told you that he was tricked into smoking cigarettes; correct? "correct. "he also never told you that anything a tobacco company ever did influenced his smoking decision; correct? "correct." so here is what we have. mr. haliburton did not rely on anything the tobacco companies said or did. he did not hear, read, or see any statements by the tobacco industry. he did not see the frank statement, that was asked, no. did he see any statements from by the council for tobacco research? no. any statement by the tobacco industry research committee? no. any statement by the tobacco institute? no. any tobacco industry press releases? there is no evidence that he saw any of those. tobacco industry white papers? no. did he see any tobacco industry interviews and/or statements? no. tobacco company statements about smoking and health? no. tobacco company statements about smoking and addiction? no. none of those things, no evidence of any of those communications from the tobacco industry. as a matter of fact, mrs. haliburton 3972 testified, she was asked this question, "and nothing you could have said would have made him not want to smoke or to quit smoking; correct? "correct. "you cannot think of anything anyone could have told your husband that would have made him quit smoking cigarettes, can you? "no. not as i know." now, your wife suffers from bronchitis. you smoke cigarettes in her presence. it aggravates the bronchitis. she has shortness of breath. that does not stop you from smoking. it does not even prompt you to call a smoking-cessation clinic. it does not even prompt you to go see a doctor to try to get some medication or something to quit smoking. it does not even prompt you to get nicotine gum or to get a patch or to take any measures to stop smoking. in fact, you do not even throw out your cigarettes knowing that this is affecting your wife adversely in this fashion, in a palpable, very meaningful and significant way. now, why on earth would anybody believe that a document from r.j. reynolds tobacco company would prompt you to do anything differently? here is someone you have been married to since 1958. you have 3973 known her since 1956. you are married for 40 years. you have five children together. smoking -- your smoking aggravates her health. yet you take no steps toward cessation. so a letter from r.j. reynolds would prompt you to do something differently? r.j. reynolds would change your behavior? a list of chemicals contained in smoke, the same smoke that came from the cigarettes when you were rolling your own, not just a commercial cigarette, somehow that is going to change your behavior, that you know that there is ammonia in smoke, that is going to change your behavior, or polonium in smoke, that is going to change your behavior. and do not lose your common sense. no secret document, disclosure of no ingredients, nothing would have made a difference. that is mrs. haliburton's testimony. she lived with him for 40 years. she knew him better than anybody else who gave testimony in this case, and she said in her own words, "not that i -- as i know." nothing would have changed his behavior. he was intent on smoking and he continued to smoke despite the hazards associated with it. 3974 and not to disparage him, but his comment was often -- his response was often cavalier, at best. "you got to die with something." knowing that the consequences of continued smoking was a premature death. he did not run away from it. he confronted it and was rather dismissive of it. but yet somehow, someway, something r.j. reynolds or one of the tobacco companies, had they sent him a letter, it would have made a difference. and it -- it not only does there have to be reliance, and there is no evidence of reliance, but it also has to be something material. it would have to be something that was concealed that was material. in order for something to be a material fact, it has to be something that would have changed the outcome, something that would have caused him to stop smoking and thereby prevent his copd and his resulting death. there is no evidence of any such thing. dangers and addictiveness of smoking were not unknown or unavailable to mr. haliburton before may 5th, 1982; to the contrary. in his own words, he described smoking as addictive and dangerous. here is what he told jerry miller. "stay away from them, they are dangerous and addictive." and 3975 this is in '80 or '81, certainly prior to may 5th, 1982. so when you get to that question on the verdict form, "state whether" -- and this is question -- oops, am i doing this right? questions 3 and 4. "state whether mr. haliburton reasonably relied to his detriment on any statement or omission by r.j. reynolds tobacco company after may 5th, 1982, that concealed or omitted material information not otherwise known or available to him concerning the health effects and/or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes, and if so, whether such reliance was a legal cause of his death." the answer is no. and if you answer no to that one, you can skip the next one. so no on both of those. and question number 5, should you get that far, and i submit the evidence is such that you should not get past question number 1, but should you get this far, "state the percentage of any responsibility for mr. haliburton's emphysema/copd and resulting death," it should be one hundred percent to andrew haliburton. and this assignment of fault relates only to the actions that were a legal cause of mr. haliburton's copd/emphysema and death. defendants cannot be assigned fault for actions 3976 that were not a legal cause of mr. haliburton's copd/emphysema and/or death. and the shorthand for legal cause is but-for cause. but for something, he would not have developed copd. mr. acosta: your honor, i object, that is a misstatement of the law. the court: use the jury instruction, so that is fine. mr. persons: all right, i'm going to turn to it, your honor. i will. the court: sustain the objection. mr. persons: and smoking cigarettes -- and here is dr. neal benowitz, "does not cause a smoker to lose the ability to be responsible for their own actions; correct? "correct." and here is what we are talking about. a smoker responsible for his own actions. between 1956 and 1957, out of the 12 months out of every year, 365 days a year, over the course of that time, from '56 to '90 -- up to '94, when he finally did quit, not one single quit attempt, unless you count asking for some chewing gum and not even saying you are trying to quit smoking when you ask 3977 for the spearmint gum from your spouse. mrs. haliburton was asked did he make the choice to smoke that first cigarette? yes, he did. did he make the choice to smoke each day when he lit the cigarettes? yes, he did. each time he did it, he made the choice. nobody could make the choice for him. mr. smith: uh-oh, dropped the whole wheel off. the court: deputy, can you assist? mr. persons: oh, lost a wheel. thank you, sir. mr. crickenberger: very welcome. mr. persons: let us walk through this, mr. haliburton's choices. we know he was warned throughout his life that smoking was dangerous and addictive. we know his grandmother forbid him smoking. yet he became a regular smoker. there were warnings from the surgeon general. one of the warnings was you need to quit. it says, "quitting now greatly reduces your chance of developing a disease." he continued to smoke. warnings from television, newspapers, and magazines about quitting, good for your health. he continued to smoke. 3978 warnings on the packages of the cigarettes. we know that he was aware of them because lucius hamilton even pointed them out to him, yet he continued to smoke. john haliburton, his brother, quit smoking, 1968, yet he continued to smoke. lucius hamilton said go see a doctor about that cough. did he? no, he continued to smoke. father dies of cancer in 1977. did he quit? no, he continued to smoke. betty wright, warning, "them things are going to kill you." did he quit? not even for a day. not even for an hour. continued to smoke. mrs. haliburton warning him, "i've got bronchitis. please do not smoke in my presence. you need to quit smoking, they are going to kill you." he continued to smoke. lucius hamilton, "just read the warning on the pack." did he quit? no, he continued to smoke. warnings from his own body, coughing, shortness of breath, wheezing, all the signs and symptoms of copd/emphysema. did he quit? no, he continued to smoke. warning, multiple friends and family warned him of the dangers of smoking and the link between 3979 his smoking and his cough and his shortness of breath and his wheezing. did he quit? no. he continued to smoke. and then tragically, he passed away from copd/emphysema, all because he did not quit smoking. only mr. haliburton had it in his power to attempt to quit. r.j. reynolds could not do it for him, spouse could not do it for him, children could not do it for him, friends could not do it. only he had the power to refrain from smoking or to pick up the phone and to call the smoking-cessation clinic or to throw out his cigarettes. only he could do that for himself. nobody could do it for him. but in order to do that, you have got to be motivated to do it, you have got to want to do it, and the evidence is it is not something that he wants to do. interestingly, "he never said that he blamed the tobacco companies for getting sick, did he?" "no, he did not." "no, he did not." he is carrying around oxygen that he is using, but not once did he blame the tobacco companies for what he chose to do. he fully acknowledged that this was a distinct, a real possibility when he 3980 said on numerous occasions to people, when they got on him about smoking, "you got to die with something." there is nothing that reynolds could have done that would have prevented mr. haliburton's death. only mr. haliburton had the ability to prevent his death, and he could have done that by stop smoking. thus, mr. haliburton is one hundred percent responsible for choosing not to discontinue smoking, but choosing to continue to smoke. mrs. haliburton said that mr. haliburton's choices -- mr. haliburton's choices are the only legal cause of his copd. "you blame your husband for not trying to quit sooner, do not you?" "yes, i blame him." cannot blame anybody else for that. nobody else had it in their power to try to quit, just try. even if you are not successful the first time, try. we know that when he did try, he was successful and he quit for good. so on number 5 on the verdict form, i submit to you it ought to be zero percent for reynolds, one hundred percent for andrew haliburton. now, i'm going to talk about damages because it is on the verdict form, not because i think 3981 damages are warranted, but it is on the verdict form, so we need to talk about it. any damages must be fair and just in light of the evidence, all of the evidence. the plaintiff has the burden to prove each and every dollar of damages they are seeking. and i submit to you plaintiff has failed to prove that mrs. haliburton is entitled to money because her husband chose to smoke despite knowing the dangers. the claim for at least $16 1/2 million defies common sense. plaintiff is not seeking damages for lost wages, loss of support and services, medical or funeral expenses, mr. haliburton's children, or mr. haliburton's pain and suffering. no damages should be awarded. let us talk about punitive damages. "under the circumstances of this case, state whether you find by clear and convincing evidence that punitive damages are warranted against r.j. reynolds tobacco company." punitive damages are different than compensatory damages in several ways, one of which there is a different standard on the burden of proof, it has to be proven by clear and convincing evidence. and the punitive damages can be awarded only for concealment that was a legal cause of 3982 mr. haliburton's death. you may not punish reynolds for any harm suffered by anyone other than mr. haliburton. mr. acosta: your honor, i have to object, i do not believe this complies with what the jury instructions say. the court: we will reference -- why do not you read what the jury instructions say. mr. persons: all right, we will do that. can we get that instruction up? i've got it. clear and convincing. "clear and convincing evidence differs from the greater weight of the evidence in that it is more compelling and persuasive." this is what was instructed you. "as i have had already instructed you, greater weight of the evidence means the more persuasive and convincing force and effect of the entire evidence in the case. in contrast, clear and convincing evidence is evidence that is precise, explicit, lacking in confusion," -- oops, i keep hitting the wrong button. "lacking in confusion and has such weight that it produces a firm belief or conviction, without hesitation, about the matter at issue." so if there is any hesitation whatsoever about 3983 whether punitive damages are warranted, then the burden of proof has not been carried, because it says without hesitation about the matter at issue. another important point, the engle findings do not establish that mrs. haliburton is entitled to punitive damages. they do not. they come into play -- mr. acosta: your honor, again, i'm going to have to object, i think it mischaracterizes what the instruction says. the court: no, overruled. mr. persons: no, that is right. they do not. they do not establish entitlement to punitive damages. now, reynolds should not be punished. i'll tell you why. look at the council for tobacco research. they awarded more than $350 million in grants to fund independent scientific research projects. they funded projects -- ctr grant-funded projects resulted in more than 7,000 published scientific or medical articles and reports. more than 600 of them were cited in the surgeon general's report. now, mr. -- dr. proctor said, well, it was distraction research. well, if the surgeon 3984 general's report is on smoking and health, obviously, 600 of these articles cited had to have something to do with smoking and health. they funded ten nobel prize winners. they did not get the nobel prize for the research that they did that was funded by ctr, but they were researchers of that caliber. they funded research at virtually every major university in the country. one example of some research that was funded by the council for tobacco research appeared in the american journal of psychiatry in 1963. and in that article, the researchers reported that heavy cigarette smokers thus appear to be true addicts. this work was sponsored in part by grants from the american cancer society and the tobacco industry research committee. reynolds should not be punished. it tried to reduce the levels of carcinogens in smoke starting in the early 1950s. it started developing heat, not burn, technology. spent over a billion dollars to develop heat, not burn, technology for premier and eclipse cigarettes. premier and eclipse were less harmful than conventional cigarettes, a less harmful product. unfortunately, the consumers rejected it. you 3985 cannot force people to buy these products. they have a right to buy what they want, what they prefer. they preferred a product that burned tobacco as opposed to heating it, even though one that heated it was less harmful than the one that burned it. even after spending all the time developing premier and all the resources, they did not give up, they went and invented the eclipse, but neither of them has been commercially successful. reynolds recognized that a certain curing process resulted in increased nitrosamines, a form of a carcinogen. they published the information to the scientific community, and then they paid the farmers to retrofit the farmers' barns so that they would eliminate that process. cigarettes have carried warning labels since 1966. reynolds has not disputed the dangers of tobacco for almost two decades. punitive damages are not needed to prevent reynolds from concealing the dangers of smoking. so on this question, whether you find by clear and convincing evidence that punitive damages are warranted against r.j. reynolds tobacco company, the answer is no. 3986 best summarized by dr. e. cuyler hammond, a researcher. and this is back from the 1950s, 1954 i believe it is. and here is what he had to say. dr. hammond: it is now proven, in my opinion, beyond a reasonable doubt that cigarette smoking greatly increases the probability of developing lung cancer. in my opinion, people should be warned of the dangers, and they are being warned. what they then want to do, whether they wish to smoke or not is their own business. persons: and smoking was mr. haliburton's business. dorothy wilson. question: "you admit that no one made your father smoke, do not you?" answer: "no one made him smoke, no, sir." question: "it was his decision, was not it?" answer: "yes, sir." tressie haywood. "ms. haywood, you would agree with me that your father considered smoking to be his business, do not you?" "i believe so, yes." and mrs. dorothy haliburton. "during the 3987 '60s, '70s, and '80s, your husband made the decision each morning he was going to smoke, did not he?" answer: "yes." "no one else made that decision for him, did they, ma'am?" "no." "ms. haliburton, you said no one else made that decision for your husband; is that correct?" "that is correct. yes, sir." "so, yes, he had full control?" "yes, sir." he had full control. he made the decision to smoke, and he was fully aware that smoking was dangerous, smoking was addictive, and yet he continued in that behavior. he was fully aware of the consequences, that it could result in death. he told a number of people that. but yet he continued to engage in that behavior. so there is nothing that reynolds could have said or done that would have changed that behavior, because that behavior was in his control, and the evidence is overwhelming that it was in his control. the evidence is overwhelming that he knew or reasonably should have known prior to may 5th, 3988 1990, that he had a smoking-related disease, emphysema, that he knew this because of all of the symptoms, and he knew it was caused by smoking. i submit to you that once you go back and deliberate, you weigh all the evidence, consider all the testimony, that the verdict should be rendered in favor of r.j. reynolds tobacco company. i thank you for your kind attention.