mr. acosta: good morning, ladies and gentlemen. jurors: good morning. mr. acosta: it is been a privilege to present this case to you. willie gary, mr. gary, is going to follow me and talk to you after i am finished. on behalf of our whole team, we want to thank you. we know you have been paying close attention to all the evidence, taking notes, and so now is the time that you have to start thinking about the end of the case, that is where we are at. and you will decide who is right, who had the most persuasive and convincing evidence in the whole case, was it us or was it reynolds. reynolds claims they do not have any responsibility at all, zero. mr. persons: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. strike. the court: sustained. mr. acosta: reynolds claims -- they deny everything that we claim. they deny it all. reynolds does not want you to find in our favor. 3762 this is a company that lied to the public for years and years and years. they created a culture of smoking cigarettes that would not have existed without what they did, would not have happened except for reynolds and the other companies in the conspiracy that they put together back in 1953. but they knew long before that. and i'm going to go through some of the evidence with you and explain it. but i did want to finish my thank you, because this is mrs. haliburton's day in court. and you saw her testify. you can decide for yourself what you think of her credibility and her believability and what happened to her. but we are proud to have represented her before you. in this country, we rely on companies, corporations, to tell us the whole truth about their products, the whole truth, not just little bits and pieces of it. we rely on companies to tell us the truth about dangerous products even more. we rely on companies to tell us the truth about company -- about drugs that they sell. even more than that. in this case, their cigarettes are defective. they were found to be defective, and we presented you with the evidence of the defects in them. 3763 they put so many chemicals in them to change the form of the nicotine, while people were trying to stop smoking back in the '60s and '70s, when those warnings went on, what is reynolds doing? they are making them more addictive, that is what they are doing, making them more addictive, making it harder for people to stop. they never did anything at all to try to help people to stop smoking. what they did is tried to keep them smoking so they could keep making more money. they created this culture of cigarette smoking in this country that dates way back to when they started in 1913. now, i'm going to go through some slides, and i'm going to show you just some of the evidence. i'm going to focus more on the documents that you saw in the case. and mr. gary i think is going to focus more on some of the testimony. so there will be some similarities, but differences between the way we approach this and what we are going to talk about. but for all the time, for all the time that mr. haliburton smoked, reynolds denied that smoking caused cancer. reynolds denied that cigarettes were addictive. they denied the things that they 3764 knew. and what did people do, what did smokers do? they relied on the company to tell them the truth, and they kept buying cigarettes because of that reliance. they relied to their detriment. they relied to their detriment just the way the company wanted them to. that is one of the engle findings, and we are going to go over those again near the end of my -- my talk. mr. haliburton, i'm going to -- was -- met his wife dorothy in the early 1950s and they got married. he was born in 1937. now, he died at age 60. by age 56, in 1994, -- he died in 1998, you go back four years, obviously 1994, he is 56 years old. and he is 56 years old with severe emphysema. he has to go on oxygen. he can hardly breathe. dorothy is there to take care of him. she has to carry his oxygen bottle. mr. gary is going to talk to you about the damages as well. i'm not going to go into all the damages in the case, that is something that he is going to do. but that is just a little bit about it. you saw this, he was a gospel singer. i want to talk to you for a second about 3765 comparative fault. we have admitted some fault. we have admitted some. so the question is really going to be how much do you assign to mr. haliburton and how much do you assign to reynolds. and i'm going to show you the verdict form in a minute when we get to the end of my discussion. but basically, there is going to be two lines, and there is going to be mr. haliburton at the top and i'm going to just abbreviate this rjr for reynolds at the bottom. and then there is a percentage sign, and you put a percentage for each, it has to add up to a hundred percent. now, we have a number of claims in the case. some of them are what we call intentional tort claims. those are the fraudulent concealment claim and the conspiracy to commit fraud through concealment claim. and what that involves is the failure of reynolds to tell people what they were really doing. what they were really doing. and you saw some of the reasons why, and i'm going to go over that, why they did that. they did it for one reason only: to make more money at the expense of the health of the american public, including 3766 mr. haliburton. he was one of those caught up in this whole scheme. he was a smoker that got so addicted, he could not stop. you saw the witness yesterday, the psychiatrist, who just denied everything. he wanted to answer his own questions. if you think about somebody that had smoked over two packs a day for over 40 years, finally so sick with severe emphysema, have to go on oxygen, you cannot -- you cannot breathe. when you cannot breathe, you cannot smoke. he had tried to quit smoking twice. now, if you think about it, if you went back 20, 30 years, who would remember what somebody else was doing when there was no reason at the time to remember it? i mean, if somebody tried to quit smoking -- it is hard to remember stuff like that. but we know he smoked because a lot of people told mr. haliburton, "hey, you ought to quit. you ought to quit." in fact, a couple of them were telling him just about every time they saw him, it seemed like. well, what does that tell you? when you have to constantly tell somebody, "hey, listen, you have got to stop smoking," you know they are addicted. 29 december 18, 2014 you know that they are -- that they are -- that they are not able to quit. he said he could not quit. that was undisputed. he said to one of the people, "i cannot quit." he said, "i tried. i'm trying." so, you know, this is a man that we do not have tons of information. he died in 1998, got sick in 1994. you know, it is a long time back. it is taken a long time for mrs. haliburton to get here, and here we are. i want to tell you one thing, and that is these percentages do not reduce any -- if you make a -- a finding of -- of fraud on the verdict form, if you find that there was reliance on the concealment because he purchased his cigarettes after 1982, and you find that there was a conspiracy in which he relied upon and continued to buy cigarettes as a result of that -- mr. persons: objection, your honor, misstatement of the law. the court: sustained. mr. acosta: as a result of that, then there will not be a reduction along these percentage lines. i just want you to understand that. that reduction applies to the other claims that we have in the 3768 case that do not involve fraud. okay. we put this up before. that is just showing you some of the brands that he smoked, some of the advertising that we had. i do want to talk to you for a second about the statute of limitations, which you heard in that -- explained some of the evidence and the position that the defendant took. they do not seem to dispute that mr. haliburton had copd. they just claim that he should have known that he had copd before 1990. basically what they are saying is he should have brought his lawsuit back before 1990 and did not do it, so, therefore -- mr. persons: objection. mr. acosta: -- they are off the hook. mr. persons: objection. misstatement. the court: sustained. mr. acosta: the statute of limitations is based upon the time that you file your lawsuit. so he would have had to known that he had something called copd or emphysema, you will see that on the verdict, he -- he would have to have known that he had copd or emphysema because you cannot -- you can have a -- you can have a cough -- back then, people 3769 were saying, well, if you quit smoking, it will go away. mr. persons: objection, your honor. mr. acosta: it will go away. the court: sustained. mr. persons: misstatement of the law. the court: use this instruction, membership. mr. acosta: well, actually i'm just arguing that -- the court: okay. mr. acosta: -- people would have known, i mean, that -- that -- the court: that is fine. i'll just sustain the objection if you just want to put it in the context of the instruction. mr. acosta: okay. people -- people were being told if you stopped smoking, your lungs clear up and this, that, and the other. the fact that you have a cough or you have some shortness of breath, that is not the same thing as knowing that you have a fatal disease. that is not the same thing as knowing you have copd. it is not the same thing. so this -- the statute of limitations defense that they have, you should mark no on the verdict 3770 form when you get to that. let me go back to that for a second. dr. cosmos {sic}, the doctor that the defendants put up on the stand two days ago, i think, the guy from tampa, mr. chestnut examined him, and dr. cosmo said he would not have known, he would not have known he had copd or emphysema. dr. feingold said he would not have known he had copd or emphysema. just remember that testimony. he did not go to a doctor. he did not get a diagnosis. to manifest copd, you have to have a manifestation that you know about. what is the manifestation? if it is copd, you have to know you have copd. mr. persons: objection, your honor, misstatement of the law. mr. acosta: i disagree, your honor. the court: sustained. just put it in the context of the jury instructions. mr. acosta: i will. i'm going to go over the jury instructions with you at the end. should rjr be punished for lying to people? i mean, that is really essentially what this is about. what did this company do for so many years to children, including mr. haliburton when he was a 3771 kid? 1937, i showed you a lot of advertising, i showed you a lot of advertising back in the 1920s and '30s and '40s, '50s, just -- i showed a lot for a reason, and the reason was so you would get the idea of how much there was. it was not -- it is not like today. i mean, back then, about the only thing people had in terms of media were radio and newspapers and some magazines. that was it, you know. no ipads, no cellphones, no televisions. that is what they had. and he grew up in rural georgia, you know. so what -- what was going on was all this advertising was trying to tell people how good it is to smoke, that "camels do not cut your wind." that this cigarette is less irritating because it has menthol in it. that this cigarette is less irritating because it has some other chemical in it. that is what the advertising was doing. they were saying "more doctors smoke camels than any other brand." we will get to that in just a second. so going all the way back, we had these laws in 13 or so states saying no cigarettes. and what happened was cigarette companies worked hard, they got those things repealed through their mass 3772 marketing and advertising, convincing people it was okay to smoke. now, what do they do in 1906? here is the -- something from the florida health notes that is in evidence, and -- mr. persons: objection, your honor, misstatement of that article. the court: is this reading straight from the article, that clause right from the article? mr. acosta: no, that is just paraphrased. the court: that is fine. i'll overrule the objection. that is fine. mr. acosta: what that says basically is that cigarettes addict kids and are the worst form of addiction. well, the companies never said that. they did not agree with that. this got buried. but if you remember dr. teague, he did some research in 1953, and he found all these studies -- oops. all of these studies there on the left there, going -- by 1923, cancer researchers had really discovered tobacco tar caused cancer. cigarette companies did not warn. reynolds did not warn people. they did not say anything about that. they should have known that. they are the expert. the smoker is not the expert. the cigarette 3773 company is the expert. what do they do? 1927, 1927, they say "school days are here. that means big tobacco business for everybody." all of these documents we put on, just examples of the things they did. this is just an example of their marketing to high school kids back in 1927. and this is the way they did it. they had billions of advertisements every year. i mean, they had football players, baseball players, pros, you know, the ones the kids looked up to. kids looked up to baseball players. kids looked up to professional athletes. little -- little girls looked up to glamorous movie stars. that is what that was all about. and it was all aimed at youth. it was all aimed at youth. hardly anybody starts smoking after they are 21 years old, hardly anybody. it is all done before then. you get hooked -- not everybody gets hooked, we know that. but some people get hooked so badly that they are unable to stop, and the companies knew that. this is what the advertising for cigarettes did. that white line is cigarette sales. it just kept going up and up and up, until around the 3774 1980s, 19 -- late 1970s, somewhere in there, but for -- for kids, dr. proctor said it kept going up for youth. sales kept going up for youth until the '90s. in 1953, reynolds knew smoking caused cancer. they knew it did. it was not something that they were just guessing about. they had this guy, a phd, go out and do this research, and they knew that it caused cancer, and if you see that -- that top line there, number one, basically, that is the line where he says that cigarette smoking induces lung cancer. induces means cause. so instead of -- instead of saying, man, we have got a problem here, because our cigarettes may be causing this epidemic of lung cancer and other diseases, what should we do, well, instead of telling people the truth, they lied to them. they flat out lied to them. that should be unacceptable in this country, and you have to do something about it. mr. persons: objection, your honor, improper argument. the court: overruled. mr. acosta: and that is what we are here for, to do something about it. 3775 mrs. haliburton had the courage to come to court and do this. mr. persons: objection, improper. the court: sustained. mr. acosta: they committed a conspiracy for fraud. they lied about the danger. they lied about the health problems. and they lied about research. there is hardly anything they told the truth about. it was just a pack of lies, a cigarette pack of lies, that is what it was. okay. so i'm going to show you about a minute -- i have cut some of the clips that we showed you during the trial to only a minute or so, so it is not going to take as much time. speaker: what cigarette do you smoke, doctor? more doctors smoke camels than any other cigarette. next time you buy cigarettes, be sure you call for philip morris. singer: do not miss the fun of smoking, do not miss the fun of smoking, it is a pleasure with pall mall. speaker: try them, i think you will dig them the most. fred flintstone: winston is the one filtered 3776 cigarette that delivers flavor 20 times a pack. speaker: the flintstones has been brought to you by winston. speaker: freshens your taste. smoke salem cigarettes. salem is a pure modern filter. banker: would you like a winston cigarette? speaker: the beverly hillbillies has been presented by winston and we hope you will try winston. speaker: after the lobster, after the corn, you know what tastes great? singer: yeah, me and my winston, we have got a real good thing. acosta: so on television in the 1950s and 1960s, this is when mr. haliburton, now, he started smoking in the early 1950s, he is starting at the time some of those ads started coming on television about the doctors, more doctors smoke camels than any other brands, camel was one of his brands. what they are doing is they are basically using these kinds of advertisements to make people think that it is safe to smoke. they reassure them that it is safe to smoke. you know, supposed to taste good like lobster or corn on the cob. 3777 and many of those shows are seen by kids. and i'm going to show you some documents in a minute. we -- we have a lot of documents in evidence that you get to take back with you. there is no way for us to show you everything that is in every document. but you can skim through them when you go back to deliberate, and you will be amazed at the things that you find in these documents, some of the ftc reports. these surgeon general's reports are in evidence. and there are certain pages, you will find some stuff in there that is very interesting about what the surgeon general says these companies did and how they fooled the public health officials in this country for so many years and how they did it. that is in those reports. this is another part of their lie, back in 1955, this fellow, clarence cook little. speaker: dr. little, have any cancer-causing agents been identified in cigarettes? dr. little: no. speaker: suppose the tremendous amount of research now going on were to reveal that there is a cancer-causing agent in cigarettes. 3778 dr. little: it would be made public immediately and then efforts would be taken to attempt to remove that substance or substances. because we cannot possibly eliminate an agent that has not yet been identified or the presence of which has not yet been proved. acosta: reynolds had identified it in 1954, a year before. and their researcher, teague, had identified a whole bunch of them in 1953. you know, the thing is, there were little anecdotal things stated here and there in newspapers and magazines. reynolds did not admit it, that is what the secret was, is the companies that made the product are saying those other people are wrong, we are right. we are right. smoke our products, it is okay. it is okay. and they make it look cool, they make it look terrific for young people to get started. it is a social thing. they made cigarettes socially acceptable. a person that smokes a cigarette is almost a walking advertisement for others, especially when you are young, when you are in high school. and that is -- that is the way it gets started. and they know that. and they take advantage of that. 3779 they are taking advantage of kids knowing that one out of two of them that keep smoking are going to die. and i'm not making the one out of two up, that is in these reports. one out of two. this is from 1959. here, this scientist at reynolds had proved that smoking caused cancer. he even -- he talked about animal studies in this. that is in evidence. but he -- he writes, he knew that they could not remove them. he knew that they could not remove them. and they also knew that smokers were addicted because they required for their physiologic, not psychologic aspect, but their physiologic need for nicotine, that need is addiction. when you need a chemical and when you need a drug and it compels you to use it, it pulls you to it, that is addiction. you have to pull yourself away from it to get away from it, and most people that smoke feel that pull. a lot of people are able to overcome it, but as we saw in some of the documents, half or more are not able. that is a lot of people that have -- that have died from cigarette smoking. yeah, 60 million have quit. how many of those 3780 died? one out of two? so this is another thing they did. so they formed this tobacco institute in 1957 to take over because apparently, the tobacco industry research committee that they invented in 1954 as part of their frank statement just was not doing a good enough job fooling people, so they got the tobacco institute together to fool them some more. so they gather up all these newspaper articles, and there is a thick -- nice, thick little pile of them in evidence that you can flip through, and you will see articles from all around the place that say the opposite of what some of the articles that the -- that the defendants put up and showed you from let us say the local paper here in west palm beach and the new york times and some other papers. they put -- they put out the opposite. and the reason they did it is to create in the minds of people a controversy about smoking. they wanted -- they wanted people to think, hey, it has not been proven, just keep smoking. and, you know, by the way, we put filters on them. the filters are just put on to reassure people, they did not make them any safer. but 3781 people did not know that. they thought it did. they thought -- if you look in these surgeon general's reports, you will see that the filter had nothing to do with making the cigarette safer. it did not make it any safer. that is what the surgeon general says. and they have done a lot of research on it. you will be amazed at all the information that is in there. there was some question about when he started smoking. you know, we take the -- the medical record that is an objective record, it is not anything created after litigation began, it is not anything as a result of lawyer questions or anything like that. this is in the record, it is been there since 1998. and it said that he started smoking more than two packs a day of cigarettes for more than 40 years. it is in this record from that doctor and it is in evidence. and the reason we do that is because when you take a history of somebody, sometimes they write 30 years, sometimes they write 20 years, sometimes they write he is been a smoker for a long time. but this doctor would not have written that one if that is not what he was told by mr. haliburton. that is 3782 where that comes from. that is where it comes from. so when you back that off, he is 13 or 14, according to dr. feingold, because to get up to two packs a day, you do not -- you do not just do that overnight. when you first smoke a cigarette, it tastes awful. it makes you nauseous. makes you feel light-headed, dizzy. nobody, the first day they pick up a cigarette, can smoke a whole pack of cigarettes. it cannot be done. your body will not -- will not allow it. it rejects it. it is the drug nicotine that changes that. it changes it slowly, because your body develops tolerance to that drug. now you can inhale all you want. in fact, you have got to inhale. if you quit smoking for ten years, you go back, what happens, you just start smoking again like -- like it did not -- you never missed it. that is because your brain has figured out how to deal with nicotine. because it needs it. okay. this is a follow-up to what dr. little said. and after reynolds is -- we have got about four or five of their papers in evidence from 1956 through 1962, i believe, that show all -- some research they did indicating that they, in fact, thought smoking caused cancer. 3783 and by the way, there is another paper, and dr. proctor testified about this, they had a visitor from across -- overseas come to the united states, talk to all the ceos of the companies, what did the ceos say? yeah, we think it does cause cancer. well, why did not they tell people? there were 11 or so times where the cigarette company executive said, you know, "if we find out it really does cause cancer, we will go out of business." well, they did not. if they had, mr. haliburton would still be here, so would millions of other people. this is not a trivial thing. it is not a trivial thing. it is important. it is very important. you cannot let companies get away with doing stuff like this. and we may be the only ones that can do something about it. mr. persons: objection, your honor, improper argument. the court: sustained. strike that last comment. the court: sustained. mr. acosta: okay. (video clip played as follows:) 3784 speaker: this is cbs news extra on smoking and health. harry reasoner: mr. cullman is a third generation member of a company family. mr. cullman: there is very little evidence, if any, on the effect, if any, of filter cigarettes. i think we need a little more research. i'm convinced that eventually they will find some elements, through a filter that will eliminate the mysterious thing they are looking for. i do not think the industry admits there are any bad elements. if there are bad elements and if they are found, they will be removed. harry reasoner: among scientists one of the prime movers in the issue has been dr. cuyler hammond. dr. hammond: from a practical standpoint it means a number of agencies, government agencies who had been delaying taking any sort of action until this report came out can now develop a real program to do something about it. it can lend great impetus to the tobacco industry itself to intensify their research in order to try to develop a cigarette, which i hope can be developed, which is relatively safe. 3785 speaker: do you feel that the only practical solution is the development of a cigarette that is not harmful? dr. hammond: i have tremendous confidence in the ability of american scientists to solve almost any problem of a technical nature. harry reasoner: through the lifetimes of a lot of us, cigarettes have been an intimate and reassuring companion. the familiar slogans, the familiar packages have been a part of our lives. it is like being told that an old friend has all along been betraying you. in a case like that you give the old friend every possible chance before you finally decide to believe what you have been told, and maybe even then you give them a chance to reform. acosta: so what is going on there, harry reasoner is saying, hey, we have heard now from the surgeon general that cigarette smoking is a cause of lung cancer and it is a cause of emphysema and copd. so what is he saying, he is saying, well, maybe we give the cigarette companies a chance to fix it. we give them a chance to fix it. that is what they wanted. 3786 that is what mr. cullman on there was telling people, too. he says, you know, we do not -- we do not -- for one thing, we do not agree with the surgeon general, for another thing, we have not found anything harmful in cigarette smoke, but if we find it, we will remove it. that was a lie. they knew it was in there, and they could not remove it. and you will see in one of these surgeon general's reports, if you look, the first part of this one has a discussion, this is 2014 surgeon general's report on smoking and health, there is a discussion about what the companies did and what people thought. and there was a survey done in 1966, i think, hew, and in it, most people, it says most people needed to hear from the company before they were going to believe that cigarette smoking was harmful. it is in this report. they did not hear from the company. what instead they got was more advertising. more marketing to kids. and then they started manipulating the cigarette to make them more addictive, that is what they did. this is the federal trade commission report to congress in 1967. what do they say? that warning 3787 label that was put on there was ineffective. it was ineffective. it was overcome by cigarette advertising. and the ads targeted teens. this is in the report. it is in evidence. "the cigarette advertising denies health problems and overwhelms any concern that people have." that is what was going on. "due to ads, advertising, youngsters believe smoking is a socially-desirable activity." that is what people thought in the 1960s, according to the federal trade commission, which is the commission that sort of oversaw the advertising of all companies. "the ads," it says, "are a strong force in getting kids to stop smoking." i did not -- i guess there is a spelling error there. but getting kids to start smoking. the cigarette ads prevent teens from making an informed choice. you cannot make an informed choice if you do not have all the information. the cigarette companies are telling you it is safe. and they -- they -- they knew -- this is -- this is like 15 years later, ten years later, 1981. this is a letter on r -- you can see the letterhead is r.j. reynolds, and it is a letter indicating that 3788 they knew that people were believing their advertising. that people were believing it. and it lured many teenagers to smoke and die. and this is the sales graph that we showed you. it worked. their lies worked. they are selling more cigarettes. they just kept selling more and more. it worked. and then you saw this in 1968 about how there was a controversy. mr. wallace: good evening, i'm mike wallace the question of whether to smoke or not to smoke is one of the most hotly debated controversies in the country. speaker: from cbs news national smoking test. mr. wallace: smokers tend to believe statements which say the case is not proved. the tobacco institute, an industry association, says there is no biological proof, either experimental or clinical, that smoking is the cause of diseases. mr. benti: next, breathing the polluted air in our major cities is more dangerous than smoking a pack of cigarettes a day. the smokers tend to go along with the tobacco institute which says that certain chemicals which may be harmful are more 3789 prevalent in some polluted air than in cigarette smoke. mr. wallace: next question 3, being 50 pounds overweight is more dangerous to health than smoking a pack of cigarettes a day, but the tobacco institute believes that obesity, not cigarettes is a major factor in heart disease. it says several studies have not shown any association between smoking and heart disease. mr. benti: finally that you run a greater risk crossing busy streets every day than smoking a pack of cigarettes every day. the tobacco institute says there just is not any documentation available and they add until we know of any way in which cigarette smoking is, in fact, harmful to health, there is no way one can say this is anything more than just speculation. acosta: so if you are an addicted smoker, mr. haliburton had been smoking since early '50s, this is the late '60s, you know, does he see it? we do not know. we do not know what he saw or did not see. but this is such a pervasive issue across the whole country, you could not walk around without seeing or hearing cigarette advertising back then, 3790 without seeing other people smoking. these -- these surgeon general's reports that tell you that it took decades, decades for the public health community to turn that around, to turn it around. it was very difficult. here is another one, very short. speaker: from cbs washington, in color, face the nation, a spontaneous and unrehearsed interview with joseph cullman, iii, and chairman of the executive committee of the tobacco institute. mr. cullman: i do talk to the question of whether or not cigarettes are hazardous. we do not believe that cigarettes are hazardous. we do not accept that. and that this industry can face the future with confidence because when, as, and if, any ingredient in cigarette smoke is identified as being injurious to human health, we are confident that we can eliminate that ingredient. acosta: that is 1971. that is a lie. it is a lie to the whole country, including mr. haliburton. so when people have funny attitudes about smoking and -- they really did not know what to 3791 think, a lot of people. is the cigarette companies right? are these other people right, telling us that, you know, it is harmful, can cause cancer? they are saying it does not or they will fix it, that they have not found anything harmful in a cigarette. they have got to share this, at least, with the smoker. that is what that is for. that is what that is for. they have got to at least do that. but you should punish them for what they did, as a deterrent to others, that is what this is about. so here are some of their documents. this is one by that dr. teague, that phd that is in the research and development department, doing some planning for the company. in the 1970s, "we must continue to get kids to smoke with youth brands." that is what he calls them in this memo. "we must show kids how to get addicted to cigarettes." that is what that is saying right there. he knew that they would need nicotine. mr. persons: objection, your honor. mr. acosta: that is addiction. mr. persons: that is -- mr. acosta: that is argument. the court: no, i'm going to overrule the objection. you may continue, mr. acosta. 3792 mr. acosta: you know, he is saying that it is needed, that the nicotine is needed by the smoker once they learn to smoke. how do we get more kids to learn to smoke. they were trying to addict kids "we must appeal to the fragile, developing self-image of the young person." this paragraph talks about how they are going to take advantage of them. you saw this during the presentation. they start down at age 12. and that is a graph at the top that shows the ages that people start smoking. and vast majority of them start before they are 18. and here is another one, this is called "the crucial role of nicotine." and up there, it says "happily for the tobacco industry." happily. it is happy for them because they make a lot of money doing this, but it is not happy for the smoker that wants to stop smoking. and they knew that most people did. and they played down the role of nicotine. and it is not just reynolds. there is another document that is in evidence, just to show you, brown & williamson says the same thing. they made kools. now they are part of reynolds, but back then, they were a separate company. and reynolds 3793 is responsible for the companies it merged with. they put ammonia in there to freebase nicotine. that is how they are making it more addictive. if you read -- if you look at this book, it tells you that they were making cigarettes more addictive by putting ammonia in them. if you -- if you -- if you write down -- i think it is page 33, any of the -- all through the first 35, 40 pages of this book, it talks about that. that is what they were doing, they were making it more addictive trying to get kids to smoke. this is more proof. this is one of -- a reynolds document. they manipulate the nicotine to addict and increase sales. they knew it did. and they knew they could not take the bad stuff out. and they kept lying about it. they knew that freebase makes the nicotine absorb more quickly. and there is a graph that you saw from dr. benowitz. and by the way, if you look -- and we did not put these -- we put copies of these books in. but if you look at the beginning of this one, dr. benowitz is one of the first names listed. he is the editor, senior editor of this book. that shows you how quick the cigarette gets the nicotine 3794 to the brain compared to other things. and it is the speed that it does that that makes it so addictive. the tobacco research industry committee was a lie. they did not do honest research. this is their own document from 1978 where a bunch of their lawyers got together in new york, and they say it was a front, it was a shield to protect them and to help them win lawsuits. that is what these companies did. and look -- look at -- this is just a document that shows how they knew that cigarettes -- cigarette smoke and nicotine worked like cocaine and heroin. they still deny that today. mr. persons: objection, your honor. the court: sustain. strike. the court: sustain. mr. acosta: i think this doctor that was here yesterday said it did not work that way. the doctor they put on the stand. but yet look back in 1978. and look at what the surgeon general says about it, that cocaine and heroin do work the same way. and then he says we have got to hide it in it if it looks like it is going to hurt us from a legal 3795 point of view. they did not want anybody to know it was addictive. and that is because it impairs the choice that smokers make. it makes it very difficult to get out of the trap that they are in by being addicted. they know it affects choice. the surgeon general said that it does in these -- in these two surgeon general's reports that are in evidence. says that it does. their own documents say it does. and what are they doing back in 1969 with their legal department? their research department is saying we will destroy any of the research reports that you want us to, for purposes of the lawsuit defense. they did not want anything to get out that would affect their sales and prevent them from addicting people like andrew haliburton and others and keeping them smoking for as long as they could. they were slaughtering americans and they did not care. mr. persons: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. mr. persons: inflammatory, improper, move to strike. the court: sustained. mr. acosta: this is one of the ways they did 3796 it. 1981, another ftc report to the congress, it is a staff committee report. $1 billion was spent on cigarette advertising in 1980. a billion dollars in 1980. "unlike the liquor industry, cigarette manufacturers have never discouraged the use of cigarettes by young people." it is just the opposite. it continues to attempt to assure the public that smoking is safe. that is what this says. half of all the highway billboards -- there used to be billboards everywhere that had cigarette ads on them. half. and they are all -- they are all seen by kids. 1980, reynolds was the largest in magazines. sixty percent of smokers did not know cigarettes were the major cause of lung cancer in 1980. the majority of people did not think smoking was an addiction. 1981, millions of americans did not believe cigarettes caused lung cancer. philip morris said that all those figures were accurate. your dna explains why some people cannot quit smoking. some people have genetic set of genes 3797 that makes it really hard for them to stop. the problem is, you do not know if you have it or not. no way to find -- and back then, they did not have any kind of dna test. rjr knew most smokers wanted to quit. this is the nordine study. they knew most smokers wanted to quit, and knew most smokers could not quit. that is their words, not our words. and this is -- this is the graph that shows 70 percent want to quit. he said 80 -- i think he said eighty percent, but each year, 17 million try to quit, only 3 percent succeed. when you add up 3 percent a year for many years, you get 60 million people. that is how that works. and, of course, the people keep trying, eventually about half of all smokers do quit, they eventually keep -- keep trying and trying. if a smoker could find a way to quit smoking, rjr might have to go out of business. he says we cannot be comfortable selling cigarettes to customers that do not want to smoke them. so what are we going to do about it? one of the things that they could do about it was to figure out ways to stop smokers from quitting. that was one of their responses. 3798 they knew that hundreds of thousands of addicted smokers were dying each year, and they want -- but they wanted to sell cigarettes for as long as they could. they knew that their day would come. maybe this is it. mr. persons: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. strike. the court: sustained. mr. persons: and i -- well, may i approach? the court: sure, of course. of course, mr. persons. before the court at the bench and out of the hearing of the jury.) mr. persons: that kind of argument has no place in a courtroom. it is highly inflammatory, an appeal to prejudice, and i move for a mistrial. i do not know that any instruction would cure that type of inflammatory, improper, highly-prejudicial argument. the court: response? mr. acosta: i do not think it is inflammatory at all. they -- they knew that this would catch up to them, and it has. this is why we are here. i do not see anything wrong with that argument at all. 3799 i think it is a perfectly fair argument to make. the court: okay. i'm sustaining the objection, i'm going to deny the motion for mistrial, and i'm going to tell the jury just to disregard the last sentence. it was fine up to they wanted to sell cigarettes as long as they could. okay. all right? in open court before the court and jury.) the court: ladies and gentlemen, defendant's objection was sustained. for the record, please disregard the last statement. you may continue, mr. acosta. mr. acosta: thank you, your honor. okay, this is what they are telling congress in 1978. speaker: do you agree that people are dying prematurely as a result of smoking cigarettes? speaker: no, sir, i do not. ms. browder: cigarette smoking, we just do not know. speaker: i do not know. ms. browder: do not know what causes the elements that have been attributed to cigarette 3800 smoking. speaker: i am saying that the science to date and over a hundred million dollars of our industry indicates that there is no causal link. mr. wyden: i heard virtually all of you touch on it and just yes or no, do you believe nicotine is not addictive? (video clip paused.) mr. acosta: this is 1994. (video clip resumed.) mr campbell: i believe nicotine is not addictive, yes. mr. wyden: mr. johnston? mr. james johnston: congressman, cigarettes and nicotine clearly do not meet the classic definitions of addiction. there is no intoxication. mr. wyden: we will take that as a no. and again, time is short. if you could just -- i think each of you believe nicotine is not addictive and we just would like to have this for the record. mr. taddeo: i do not believe that nicotine or our products are addictive. mr. tisch: i believe nicotine is not addictive. 3801 mr. horrigan: i believe that nicotine is not addictive. mr. sandefur: i believe that nicotine is not addictive. mr. donald johnston: and i too believe that nicotine is not addictive. acosta: they were all lying, every one of them. they are under oath and they are lying to congress, 1994. this is dr. feingold, a couple pictures of him in his office looking at ct scans and through his microscope. he talked about -- in fact, this is from dr. benowitz's -- dr. benowitz's deposition, it is one of the exhibits, but dr. feingold talked about the same thing. the surgeon general pronounced nicotine addictive more than 30 years after reynolds knew it was. took a long time for public health to catch up. it would have caught up a lot sooner had the cigarette companies told the truth. i put this up there just so you can see, nicotine has plusses all the way down. caffeine over on the far right does not, caffeine is not addictive like nicotine. nicotine is addictive 3802 like heroin and cocaine. he showed you this graph, how the receptors are. and talk about proof that nicotine causes you to have receptors that light up with nicotine, this is it. this is the cycle of addiction that he talked about, that a smoker goes through every day, every cigarette. these are all of the hormones that are released when a smoker smokes. the problem is when you do not have a cigarette, your brain shuts down, it does not release the hormones that it normally releases, so the smoker does not feel right. so to get these going again, you have got to smoke. mr. haliburton had to do it for over six hours a day straight in time -- in terms of time. he would -- at times, he would chain smoke. you heard all that evidence. you know, 40 cigarettes a day or more? that is every few minutes you are smoking a cigarette. here is a comparison of the dsm. dr. feingold talked about that. here is the fagerström test that he applied. he did apply the dsm, by the way. i mean, 3803 that is why i put that up there to make sure that that did not go unsaid. dr. feingold applied it as well. he found him to be severely addicted. showed you this picture of the lungs. and look at the heart, you know, the -- poor mr. haliburton's heart, got what is called cor pulmonale, where the right ventricle swells up because it cannot pump the blood through the lungs due to the damage to the lungs that is caused by cigarette smoking. he had coronary artery disease caused by smoking. there is a pulmonary function test he showed you. he had 6 million doses of nicotine. now, how does a person who takes 6 million doses of nicotine, how is it that they are not addicted to nicotine? how can that be -- how is that possible? somebody that says they cannot quit, they try to quit, cannot do it. he used the heaviness of smoking index. we saw the death certificate. he had cardiac arrest. his heart stopped. lungs stopped working due to copd. this is that surgeon general's report i was telling you about. i'm not going to take the time to read to you from it right now, but there is a 3804 lot of valuable information in it. now, i want to talk to you for a second about engle class members, because engle class members are people who on or before november 21st, 1996, suffered or died from a disease or medical condition legally caused by an addiction to smoking cigarettes containing nicotine. mr. persons: objection, your honor, misstatement. the court: sustained. counsel. court: state your objection on the record, mr. persons. mr. persons: it is a misstatement of the engle finding, your honor. the court: response? mr. acosta: i do not think it is. i think i took it -- i took it from jury instructions i've used before. that is fine. the court: what is missing? mr. guest: there is no clear indication that the smoker has to be addicted, instead it just seems to suggest that -- the court: i cannot see it. 3805 mr. acosta: it says, "class members are addicted smokers who on or before november 21st, 1996, suffered or died from a disease or medical condition legally caused by an addiction to smoking cigarettes containing nicotine." the court: where does it say addicted smokers in the first sentence? mr. acosta: it is in the bottom sentence. the court: no, no, but in the first sentence. mr. guest: that is the problem. the court: that is the problem. addicted, they have to be addict -- addicted -- has to be addicted to smoking cigarettes, but they also have to be addicted cigarette smokers. so just -- mr. acosta: no, they do not. that is an accurate statement of what class membership is, judge. mr. guest: it presupposes addiction just because they smoke cigarettes. it does not say that they are addicted and that is one of the elements of class membership. the court: all you need to do is just modify the first part with addicted cigarette smokers, that is all. addicted cigarette smokers. mr. acosta: okay. all right. 3806 the court: okay, that is all. just a slight modification. in open court before the court and jury.) the court: all right, that last objection sustained for the record. mr. acosta: i have to put it in there at the top, class members are addicted cigarette smokers who on or behalf of -- or who on or before november 21st, 1996, suffered or died from a disease or medical condition legally caused by an addiction to smoking cigarettes containing nicotine. smokers would only be -- have a disease or medical condition caused by an addiction if they are addicted smokers. so that is what that says. and that is what happened to mr. haliburton. he was an addicted smoker who got a medical condition before november 21st, 1996, that was caused by his addiction. addiction causes people to smoke more. that is what addiction is. you -- people that are addicted to things enjoy it. enjoyment and addiction are the same thing. that is what it is. you do not get addicted to things you do not enjoy, that you do not like. the problem is is that it makes you like it so much that you cannot stop 3807 liking it. that is the problem. dr. feingold signed this board, which i had up here somewhere. mr. crickenberger: howard. the court: mr. acosta. mr. acosta: oh, here we go. these are the class membership requirements. did andrew haliburton have copd/chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, it is the same thing, caused by smoking? yes. was andrew haliburton addicted to nicotine? yes. was andrew haliburton's addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine a medical cause of his copd? yes. was andrew haliburton's addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine a medical cause of his death? yes. that makes him a class member. mr. persons: objection, your honor. the court: overruled. mr. acosta: that makes him a class member. mr. persons: same objection. the court: overruled. mr. acosta: that makes him a class member. 3808 mr. persons: same objection. mr. acosta: these are the findings that apply. "smoking cigarettes caused aortic aneurysm, bladder cancer, cerebral vascular disease, cervical cancer, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, copd slash emphysema, coronary heart disease, esophageal cancer, kidney cancer." all these other diseases are all caused by smoking. the defendants concealed or omitted material -- this is one of the core findings that apply if he is a class member, so you will know what we are talking about here. you have to accept these as true. they have been established in this case. okay? the clerk: counsellor, you have used one hour. mr. acosta: thank you. "the defendants concealed or omitted material information not otherwise known or available, knowing that the material was false or misleading, or failed to disclose a material fact concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes or both." now, this says that they failed to disclose information that -- it is the omission that we are -- and concealment that we are 3809 really talking about that was not otherwise known or available. they concealed -- they concealed stuff that he could not have known, that he could not have known. that is what this is about. he could not have known they were putting ammonia in the cigarette to freebase the nicotine to make it more addictive while he is trying to stop, or while he is smoking, finds that he is smoking more and more and more, when he goes from one pack a day to three or four packs a day. defendants agreed to conceal or omit information regarding the health effects with the intention that smokers and the public would rely on it. they intended for people to continue to buy their cigarettes as a result of not telling them the truth. mr. haliburton kept buying their cigarettes. and he kept buying them after 1982, which is a date that means something. the cigarette companies placed cigarettes on the market that were defective and unreasonably dangerous. well, people might have heard or -- or actually thought, well, they are dangerous. but if you are addicted to it, what do you do? but he would not have known they are unreasonably dangerous. did not say that. that is the engle finding. 3810 they are unreasonably dangerous. they are not just dangerous, they are so dangerous, it is unreasonable. that is what that means. so dangerous it is unreasonable to have that product on the market. that you have to accept as established in the case. that is what was found. that is what these books say. all of the cigarette companies, including reynolds, were negligent. 480,000 americans die prematurely. mr. persons: objection, your honor. mr. acosta: that is in these books. mr. persons: objection. the court: counsel, sidebar. court: the surgeon general's were in but they are in for notice, so if you want to use that for notice purposes. mr. acosta: it is notice, but it was also said by dr. proctor, and dr. feingold said it also. the court: i do not have an issue with that. but just do not say it is from the surgeon general's. because it is -- they are in for notice. okay? mr. acosta: okay. 3811 acosta: so this is what they look like up close. now, think about this. reynolds had choices, too. they had choices. it is not just a smoker that may have a choice. reynolds had a choice. they chose to deny the truth. they chose to deny the truth about lung cancer and addiction. they chose to manipulate the nicotine. they chose to use ammonia. they chose to commit negligent conduct. they chose to make cigarettes not just dangerous cigarettes, but they chose to make them unreasonably dangerous. they chose to falsely tell smokers they would cure any hazard which their research revealed, which they never did. they chose to fraudulently conceal material information. they knew that smokers did not have a free choice about smoking. "we cannot defend continued smoking as free choice if the person was addicted." that is from 1980. that is a tobacco institute document. it is in evidence. these are letters to kids at school. this one on the left is in 1963. the one -- there is another one on the right -- i think i got it wrong 3812 there. but there is another one that is in evidence that is the form letter for children. then we have one from 1990, the 1990 one says basically we have not been able to determine that cigarettes cause any disease. please tell your students. that is what they are doing in 1990. they never told mr. haliburton the truth. we saw that. i'm almost done. i want to talk to you just for a second about the verdict form. can we put that up? and while he is doing that, i'll tell you a little bit about the instructions, because some of these instructions are a little complicated. there is an instruction that talks about what legal cause is. and there is two instructions on that. and the second one is the one that we put our trust in. the second one says that a -- mr. persons: objection, your honor, that is improper. the court: sustained. mr. acosta: -- that a -- strike. the court: sustained. mr. acosta: the second one says that a legal 3813 cause can be a substantial contributing cause. in other words, you can have something that is a substantial contributing cause be a legal cause. so if addiction was a substantial contributing cause, then it is a legal cause. it can be a cause with other things. it does not have to be the only cause. it can be one of many causes, as long as it is a substantial contributing cause, then it is a legal cause. okay. mr. persons: objection to that. that is a misstatement of the instruction. the court: go from the instruction, so sustain. mr. acosta: okay, i do not think that is a misstatement of the law, your honor. sorry. mr. persons: objection to the commentary. the court: just read from the -- the instructions are what count. mr. acosta: okay. "was andrew haliburton addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, and if so, was his addiction to nicotine a legal cause?" so we ask that you check yes. the second question -- if you check no on the 29 december 18, 2014 first question, then you have decided that reynolds wins the case and you go home. mr. persons: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. mr. acosta: well, judge, i think that when your verdict is for the defendant, they win the case. mr. persons: it is the way it was stated. the court: just rephrase. sustained. mr. acosta: "did mr. haliburton know, or should he have known in the exercise of reasonable care, before may 5th, 1990, that he had emphysema/copd?" well, we know there is no evidence that he knew he had copd before 1990. none. that should be marked no. then the next -- next question, please. the first question has to do with whether he relied. the second, number 4 there, has to do with conspiracy and whether he relied on the omissions that they made. and i'm suggesting to you that every smoker relied on what they had heard over the years about smoking. does not have to be a direct statement to them for them to rely on it. plus we know that he continued to buy cigarettes. that is reliance. 3815 please state the percentage of any negligence that was a legal cause. you will fill in those percentages. then we have damages down there, the next -- if we keep going down, the total amount of damages. there is a line there with a dollar sign. mr. gary is going to talk to you about the damages. and let us go to the last question. and the last question is decide whether or not punitive damages are warranted. if you say yes, we will come back for a very, very brief, short bit of evidence, and then you will decide how much, if any, to award in punitive damages. at this point, i'm going to stop. i'm going to ask mr. gary to talk to you about some of the other issues that i did not -- i did not cover and damages in the case. and i thank you very much for your -- your attention. thanks. mr. gary: good morning. let me just take a moment, members of the jury, to say thank you for your service. we do not take it lightly. this ain't a contest, it is about justice. and the only way that lady, who has been waiting for a lot of years just to get justice, and honorably, who walked into this courtroom and said my husband is somewhat to blame. that is honor. you do not even have to figure that out. she took the oath and she told the truth. members of the jury, we thank you and i think i speak on behalf of everybody here, because we watched you. and this is not only a day of justice being rendered for ms. haliburton, but this is -- this trial has been a good thing. i've watched you-all. 3818 you have made friendships that is going to last forever. you made connections that will last forever, because you have been here. and you have been here for a lot of days now. mr. persons: objection. it is one thing to say thank you, it is -- the court: okay. i'm going to overrule. you can continue, mr. gary. mr. gary: thank you. you been here for a lot of days. and not one time have you failed to answer the bell. so on behalf of everybody here, and surely on behalf of our client, ms. haliburton, we want to say thank you. members of the jury, you know, she said -- she did not understand, she does not understand the legal system, she said i want to say something to -- mr. persons: objection, your honor, he is testifying. the court: sustained. just rephrase how you are saying it. mr. gary: she wanted to say thank you, and i told her she could not. but you just need to know she said it. that is what she said. now, members of the jury, nothing you will do 3819 in this trial will bring back the millions of people -- mr. persons: objection, your honor, it is improper. the court: sustained. just say in terms of the death, do not say bring back. just in terms of the way it was phrased, mr. gary, that is all. mr. gary: okay. in terms of your service, what you going to do in this case is render a verdict, but nothing else beyond that, because you cannot bring back, a verdict cannot bring back, those who died because of their lies. mr. persons: objection, your honor. may we approach? the court: of course. counsel, sidebar, please. at the [#deleted sidebar#] the court: ladies and gentlemen, the last 3824 objection was sustained for the record as well. mr. gary: please the court? the court: yes, thank you. mr. gary: ladies and gentlemen, what i'm saying is that the defendants, not the lawyers, and i want to make that clear, the defendants, reynolds, who lied and lied and lied and lied to the american people about their product, reynolds knew, members of the jury, that they had a product that they were killing people. this is no play matter. and guess what. rather than them living up to what they said, they said that if we find something in our product that is not right, we will take it out, and they lied, and you know they lied. there is no question about it. the defendants, not the lawyers, but the defendant reynolds in this case, they have been all about money, billions and billions of dollars on the backs -- mr. persons: objection, misstates the evidence. the court: sustained. rephrase that last -- just that last comment. mr. gary: they have been all about the dollar, 3825 the almighty dollar. and they talked about it after the -- after they met in new york. and some of their workers were interviewed. and -- and i'm going to show you the board in a minute, but from one of their documents, they said that, boy, we cannot afford to lose any smokers. if one -- we lose one smoker per day, if everybody stopped smoking just one cigarette per day, that is 40 million -- 40 billion. what they have done, these defendants, these tobacco people, is not right. their negligence, and when i say "they", i'm talking about -- please know i'm talking about reynolds, that is who i'm talking about, whoever they are over there, they lied, members of the jury, and you know they have lied. and we have proven this case. and we think the damages in this case, yes, i want you to look at it, try to be clear about it, for taking this woman's husband of 40-plus years. one story, one mistruth after another, on and on and on. give him a chance to live. tell him the truth. and then if he makes that decision, that is fine. but members of the jury, way back in 1927, and i'm going to show you the board in a minute, they were lying then. it was september. you 29 december 18, 2014 remember the board. september. they are licking their chops. school is about to start. and they sent out an all-point bulletin, go get the kids. that is what reynolds did. go and get the kids. go to the schools. go to the park. go to the playground. just get them. members of the jury, this is candy cigarettes. they lied to our children. our children wrote them a letter -- mr. persons: objection, your honor. the court: need to come sidebar, mr. persons? mr. persons: yes, your honor. the court: certainly. court: yes. mr. persons: "lying to our children" is a violation of the golden rule. it -- when you say "our children," you are implying that these are the children of members of the jury, children of the community. this is tantamount to a conscience of community kind of argument which is clearly, clearly impermissible. they can say that they lied to children, but then the reference to "our children" is highly, 3827 highly improper and prejudicial. the court: so you want to say they lied to children since the 1920s, since 1927? mr. persons: right. mr. acosta: but i would not think that is objectionable. it is okay to say our children. he did not connect them to the jury's children. they may not have any children. the court: well, you know we know they do because of christmas pageants, so. mr. acosta: but i do not think that was intentional. the court: just so there is no -- just so we do not cross any -- just say "the children since 1927". mr. guest: i have another objection. the court: yes. mr. guest: i notice one of mr. gary's boards that the jury can see right now has a picture of mr. persons on it. i do not know what is going on with that, but i want that removed from the jury's presence. mr. gary: well, i'm going to put it up. the court: okay. mr. persons' picture? mr. gary: his picture, what he said. 29 december 18, 2014 mr. persons: you cannot do that. mr. chestnut: that is a demonstrative aid. the court: as long as you do not say anything negative about what mr. persons did. mr. gary: i'm not going to say anything -- i'm showing them what he said. the court: just what he said during opening -- probably what you said during opening. it is probably what you said during jury selection. mr. gary: it is. the court: i'll allow it, but just caution you about that. in open court before the court and jury.) the court: all right, the last objection was sustained for the record. mr. gary: candy cigarettes. why are they making candy cigarettes? why? they are making candy cigarettes, members of the jury, because they referred to it as children in training become customers. start them -- start -- go after them early. same color, same pack, same everything. that is what they were doing, members of the jury, going after our children. 3829 and let me just stop for a moment to show you a clip that i think is really interesting and will shed some light on what this whole case is about. would you play, chris, please. (video deposition of neal benowitz, md, played as follows:) a. nicotine causes more deaths than all of the drugs of abuse combined by a long shot. youths start smoking early by age 14 or 15. by mr. uiterwyk: q. did you make a determination whether or not youth are informed smokers? a. they are not. q. why? a. because i think most know that smoking is bad, but they do not understand the magnitude of risk so they underestimate the force of addiction. adolescent brain is not fully developed, it is more vulnerable to permanent changes from drugs, including nicotine. the earlier you start, the harder it is to quit. they think that they are immune, but, in fact, by the time they are ready to quit, they are addicted and they cannot quit. q. did tobacco companies inform the public in any way that people would underestimate the threat of addiction? 3830 a. no. q. did the tobacco companies publish the findings that you-all had in 1994? a. no. q. are you aware of anything the tobacco companies did to disclose this? a. no. while most smokers would like to quit, they have great difficulty quitting. q. why is that? a. because they are addicted to nicotine. it is difficult to stop. it also requires multiple attempts. some people, it might take years, some people never. q. does the level of addiction affect the loss of control of drug use? a. yes. if you are addicted to nicotine, you may say i should not smoke, but if you are compelled because nicotine has an effect, you have an intense craving for that cigarette. q. when people start to smoke, do they realize more likely than not they are going to develop addiction? a. no. people do not smoke cigarettes without nicotine. they smoke as a way to get nicotine. and so if you took nicotine out of cigarettes, people would smoke none or smoke very few. 3831 q. did smokers in the '50s and '60s make an informed choice to smoke cigarettes? a. i do not believe so. q. so, dr. benowitz, ultimately, does the cigarette smoker, with addiction to smoking cigarettes that contain nicotine cause his illness? a. absolutely. q. is the cigarette the quickest means of putting nicotine in the body? a. yes. q. a person who smokes ten cigarettes a day or more for ten years goes through that nicotine addiction? a. yes. many people who, after not having had a cigarette for six months or a year or ten years, and a week later are smoking a pack a day again. nicotine causes addiction. q. does he have a free choice? a. nicotine addiction undermines free choice. q. does their addiction to cigarettes cause their diseases, such as copd, et cetera? a. yes. q. did you determine whether or not for many years, defendants knew that nicotine was addictive and that nicotine is the reason that people smoked? a. yes. 3832 q. did they publish this information to the public? a. no. q. "the nature of the tobacco business and the crucial role of nicotine therein," rjr document from mr. teague. a. "we have deliberately played down the role of nicotine." q. i want you to read the last paragraph of exhibit 2015? a. "i am told that the entire matter of addiction is the most potent weapon a prosecuting attorney can have. we cannot defend continued smoking as free choice if the person was addicted." q. some people have quit in the morning and by the time the afternoon comes on, they cannot take it anymore? a. right. some people cannot last even 24 hours. smoking is harder to quit than alcohol or heroin or cocaine use. (video deposition concluded.) there is no question dr. proctor told you that nicotine is dangerous. it is killing people. it is killing people. 3833 the sad part about all of this, members of the jury, is from new york, when they were in hot water, their sales were going down, they were not making as much money, they decided to concoct a lie to the american people, to fool them, sucker punch them to keep buying their cigarettes. why would you lie to someone on something that is detrimental as this. members of the jury, look, this is a -- this is a supreme court finding. r.j. reynolds -- mr. persons: your honor, may we approach? the court: okay, mr. persons. before the court at the bench and out of the hearing of the jury.) mr. persons: i want to show you these. the court: okay, let me take a look. yes? mr. persons: i object to this. for one thing, this was during jury selection. this is not in evidence. the court: okay. mr. gary: i admit, it is argument, your honor. mr. persons: yeah, but. mr. gary: this is argument. i should have a right to say what he said. the court: okay, but -- 3834 mr. gary: and it is exactly what he said. the court: you can do that, but you can indicate it is not evidence. mr. gary: okay. the court: and it is not evidence for you to consider. mr. guest: why should he show it, your honor? it was during jury selection. the court: i'm going to allow you to do it, but you have to caution the jury this is not evidence. mr. gary: okay. the court: okay? and again just be very careful about any disparagement of defense counsel. mr. persons: just for the record -- the court: i know you are objecting. mr. persons: okay. all right. gary: members of the jury, engle findings, if you determine that mr. haliburton met all the requirements of the engle class, then our judge, judge sasser told you, she read the instructions to you, did anybody maybe could have, should have that, this is the law, this is the law. 3835 and i remember when you-all raised your hands and you took the oath and you said that it meant something to you. you -- you -- that your oath to tell us -- or give us true answers, you gave us true, and we are okay, we are happy with them. but reynolds raised their right hand, even before congress, under oath, and they lied. they lied -- would they lie about something that is nonchalant? no, they lied about something that is killing people. it is killing people. the buck stops with you. mr. persons: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. r.j. reynolds and others, the whole group of them concealed or omitted material information not otherwise known or -- it was not even available to laypeople, to common people. if it had been, you would say, yeah, you are right, you have made your choice, you do it. but you cannot lie to people about what is in your product. and then you blame them for believing your lie. they were spending billions of dollars advertising, every time something good came out about do not smoke, do not smoke, you know what they 3836 did? override it. they suppress it. see, they -- they -- in the presentation of their case, they showed you those little newspaper clips, you know, reader's digest and -- that is giving a story once a year maybe. but they did not tell you that. they were spending billions and billions of dollars to offset all of that, people like mr. haliburton, you know, overwhelmed, on television, on tv, where you did not prove that he watched tv. come on, please. you know better than that. tv is in your home, three televisions in the house, you are going to see that john wayne was his favorite hero. died from smoking. sammy davis, jr., died from smoking. these young people looked up to the ball players. they looked up to the movie stars, young men and women. they looked up to them. and they just lied and lied and lied to them, members of the jury. do not take my word. this is supreme court ratification here. mr. persons: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. mr. persons: misstatement of the law, i ask that that be stricken. the court: sustained. 3837 mr. gary: members of the jury, what does it say? knowing that the material was what? false. misleading. failed to disclose. material fact concerning not just anything, but the health effects of addictive nature of smoking cigarettes. our cigarettes are great, they do not hurt anybody, they do not kill anybody, that is what they were saying. that is what they were saying. and members of the jury, this was said, no offense to mr. persons, good lawyer. good lawyer. but he just told you, he was telling you the truth -- mr. persons: objection, your honor. the court: sustained, and that was during jury selection, not evidence. mr. gary: during jury selection, it is not evidence. i want to make that clear. it is not evidence. mr. persons: for a curative. the court: sustained. ladies and gentlemen, that is not evidence. what is stated in jury selection is not evidence. what is stated in opening statements is not evidence. mr. gary: okay. may i -- the court: of course. 29 december 18, 2014 mr. gary: thank you, your honor. it is not evidence. it is not evidence. but that is just what he said. i read it, "i want you to think about something for a minute. even though my client sells cigarettes, a legal product, it is a dangerous product, it is a product that can," what? "kill people." "i want to know, how many of you would say that the nature of the tobacco business, large company making and selling dangerous and addictive product that can kill for profit, does it rub you the wrong way?" the court: again, ladies and gentlemen, that is not evidence in this case, that was during jury selection. mr. gary: right. well, and i'll echo it, that was not evidence, that was just during jury selection. you-all remember that, during jury selection. now, members of the jury, we have proven our case. there is no question about that. we have proven our case that the defendant, reynolds tobacco company, among others, created a conspiracy that they knew if people believed them, that it was going to kill people. and they set it up so they 3839 could replace the ones that would die. they called it replacement smokers. they said, look, we have got to get busy. they said if our business is going to stand, if we are going to stay in business, we have got to go get the kids. and i want to talk to you about that for just a minute. members of the jury, just one after another. now, here, they getting the figures on the kids, the teens. all of this was confidential, never thought they would see the light of day, but they had to give it up. it says here, members of the jury, -- these general industry figures, they have gone out and done their research, they have checked on the kids, they have interviewed them. "these figures indicate that 47 percent of the population, 15 years later, had smoke cigarettes." they smoked cigarettes during that -- 15 -- 47 percent of the population, that is really what it is saying. "school days are here." now, this will go back as far as 1947. "and that means big tobacco business for somebody." they sent this letter out, this is r.j. reynolds tobacco company. members of 3840 the jury, i'll say this, if you want to say an adult makes their own choice, that is all right. do not touch the kids. do not go after the children. that is not right. and they know it is not right. but it is where they make their profits. it is where the big money is. here it is in september, school starts a little earlier there, in september, "school days are here, and that means big tobacco business for somebody." let us go get it." and this is a memo now that is sent out to their marketing people. "give every school a good work" -- "working just as quick as possible after it opens." if that ain't targeting children. i want to see what their answer is going to be for going after the kids. "we will probably use one or more of the student," that is high school, "magazines." these people were -- it was all about profit. it was all about money, members of the jury. and it goes on and on. they tell them, try to not give -- "try to sell one of the prince albert 8-ounce and cork jimmy pipe combination to every student who you and your men find is not already smoking. get 'em." 3841 these are children. high school students. freshmans in high school. sophomores in high school. juniors in high school. then they say attached is a list. we will not show you where the most important prep schools are so you will not make -- will not waste any time, just go and get them. in 1973, members of the jury, here it is in 1973, warnings on the packs, and they claim -- they have ran in here with all of these exhibits talking about books in the high school said do not smoke, talking about the palm beach post, do not smoke, reader's digest, do not smoke. well, where was reynolds with something that said do not smoke to the kids? where were -- where was reynolds? not one single time -- he is going to get up here and talk about yeah, they had to know, information was coming from everywhere. but where was reynolds? reynolds was spending billions and billions of dollars saying it is good for you. "winston tastes good like a cigarette should." you heard it. that was one of the things that mr. andrew haliburton said. "winston tastes good like a cigarette should." but why in 1973, you have got warnings on 3842 cigarettes, and they say -- this is r.j. reynolds, interoffice memo. "let us develop a new r.j. reynolds youth appeal brand." go out to the kids. that was after, members of the jury, after a fifth grader, a fifth grader who saw the candy cigarettes, had wrote them a letter, and this is a reply to willow ridge school, a reply to the fifth grader through their professor or through their principal. it said -- writing -- after they had got a letter, the fifth graders said, look, why are you-all going after kids, you have got these candy cigarettes, you have got kids in training to be smokers, and you know -- you have research, in-house research that says that your product kills people. they kill people. members of the jury, this ain't about no -- like no rear-end accident or who ran the red light. these people knew. the defendant reynolds knew that their product was defective, it was defective, and it was killing people. they wrote back to the principal, saying, "a number of your fifth grade students have written." these are students writing these letters. this is bad, members of the jury. it is real bad. "a number of the" -- "have written letters to r.j. 3843 reynolds tobacco company commenting that they do not feel our company should allow the use of our brand names on children's toys and candy cigarettes." they were saying, in other words, why are y'all letting these companies use your name, use your patent, use your brand, use your everything to sell cigarettes. they wanted to start them early, that is why they let them do it. and they write them back, write them back and they say, "our advertising is directed to adult smoking and not youth people." members of the jury, that is a lie. you just saw a board said they set up a whole committee to go after the kids. they sent letters out in september, when school started, to get 'em, to get 'em. and go a step further, and i'm going to move as fast as i can, because time is of the essence, and i appreciate your time. high school and college students in '60. youth, what, research. they developed an institute, an institute to target, to target young kids, children. and all they want to do is come in here and put down mr. haliburton. this man did not -- mr. persons: objection, your honor. 3844 the court: sustained. mr. gary: the defendant, reynolds -- mr. persons: same objection. the court: sustained. mr. persons: it is improper. and move to strike that comment. the court: sustained. disregard the last comment. it just goes on and on. even late as '58. this is during the time when mr. haliburton is young. they are -- they -- they -- they targeted an age of students, of kids between the ages of 15 and 22 years of age. a survey, they took a survey of high school students and college students. most college students are still teenagers, at least their first year or two in college, regarding cigarette smoking. they did a study. and they did not just do it in one place, members of the jury, they did it all over the country, it says here. you read it. they interviewed. 1,050 interviews were conducted among young smokers. and now this was in 1974. you already had warnings. if you had warnings on the pack, why are you messing with 3845 these children? why are you out there trying to lure these children into your private projections? it was all about billions and billions of dollars. that is why, members of the jury, $16 million, $16.5 million based on his life, what he meant to her, and the fact that, members of the jury, this was a time when they were making trillions of dollars. mr. persons: objection, your honor, no foundation. the court: sustained. mr. gary: i'm going to move right through this. their research, again, after the children. you know, they are going to get up there and talk about everything about mr. haliburton, try to sleaze him out, all kinds of stuff. mr. persons: objection, your honor, and move to strike. the court: sustained. disregard the last statement. mr. gary: okay. but i want them to take -- and i'll let them have this board. let them explain how they were out going after eighth graders. when they get up here talking all this other evidence and all of that, in your mind say 29 december 18, 2014 why do not you explain why you were going after eighth graders. that is just two years -- two years beyond elementary school, three years beyond elementary school. high school graduates smoke, 41 percent are smokers. they knew that. they preyed on it. they even talk about it in their documents that the only way we are going to make the big bucks or keep making the big bucks is to get the kids, get the kids. they did surveys. they did surveys. this is bad, members of the jury. this is real bad. r.j. reynolds, not only are they liars and they are conspirators, but they knew what they were doing. they knew that ultimately, they knew their cigarette was a cancer stick, and they were lying, telling people that it did not cause cancer when they knew that it did. give me a chance to make an informed decision. they did not do that. they took that away. and then you have got to remember at one date in time, mr. andrew haliburton was a teenager. now he only made it to the seventh grade. ms. haliburton told you she made the eighth grade and she did not finish it so she got through with the seventh 3847 grade. and i said, well, why did not you stay in school? she says i had no choice, because i had to work. how old were you when you got your first job? i was in the sixth grade. these are just hard-working people, members of the jury. mr. haliburton was a reserve officer, worked the job for ten years without a dime. it did not even matter to him because he wanted to serve his people. and that is what he gets. seventh grade education, but he worked hisself up. did not look for no free rides, did not ask for something for nothing, sent his kids to school, worked hard. he was not perfect. none of us are. nobody is. but he was a reserve officer, working every night for nothing, for free, not knowing whether he was going to come home or not. but he did it because of the love for his country. then, well, they make a big deal of -- he did not go to church. now, the man in a singing group, going -- singing in different churches every sunday, but you put him down because he did not go to church. mr. persons: objection, your honor. 3848 the court: sustained. mr. gary: this defendant, members of the jury, they preyed on high school kids, starting their freshman year, high school. why would they go out and talk to almost 300, 279 kids that were boys, 212 that were young ladies, just for -- and freshman, that is in ninth grade. you have no business there. they should not -- they had no business doing that, none. they had no business doing it, members of the jury. and reynolds and those tobacco companies that purposely concealed, that purposely used false information, that purposely lied about what they were doing should not get away with it. here it is -- members of the jury, what year is that? the warnings are already out there. are they saying to students, wait a minute, do not smoke, do not do this? all they coming in telling you is, well, they should have known because there was a lot of stuff in the newspapers and there was stuff in the tv and there was this and there was that, and they show you books from high schools that out of a thousand pages almost had one or two paragraphs about do not smoke, and they want to take the credit for that. they do not deserve no credit 3849 for nothing, zero. no credit. this is august 1983, warnings out there. now, if the warnings are out there, why would you be out there, what, the executive committee has asked that we develop with a great sense of, what? urgency, appropriate programs on four specific issues. and the number one issue was what? you are going to have those documents back there. do not take my word for it. you will have them. you can go through them. you can look at them. you can read them for yourself again and again. i wanted to show you this, members of the jury, because it is one thing for me to say it, but you need to see it. i talked about profit. that is what they are out there to do. this is their document from r.j. reynolds. young adult smokers are critical to our long-term performance and our profits, in essence. you read it. "we should make a substantial long-term commitment of manpower and money dedicated to young adult smokers' programs." and they were talking about the kids, members of the jury, when they talked about young adult -- they were talking about the kids. and then they did not 3850 stop there, that was not enough. they had to go at our boys and ladies and girls that served in the armed forces. and let me tell you what they did there. you read the documents, and you going to read some letters that came from the veterans administration. they gave them -- this was the sucker punch here. they gave them free cigarettes, because our young men and women were out on the battlefields fighting for their country. sometimes -- no restaurant, no kitchen, no nothing. they had to have -- take their food with them. chesterfield. cigarettes. cigarettes. they in a foxhole fighting. cigarettes. free of charge. they lied to -- they lied to our men and women in the armed forces, and i'm going to show you how they flat out did it, do not take my word. this is a letter from the veterans of foreign wars. this was in 1954. mr. haliburton was a young lad then. it says here, this is -- these men and women that come back home realized that they were having problems and they heard about the fact that smoking can kill people, and then tobacco people were lying about that, trying to suppress 3851 that. "no, do not worry about it, you are okay, you will be all right, just keep buying the cigarettes, it is okay. it is okay. believe me, trust me." and they were lying through their teeth. right after the war, this is a letter to the tobacco people. when we got home, and i'm going to paraphrase it, you can read it, we discovered that something is wrong with these cigarettes and we need you to write us and tell us. and that is because we all remember, we all remember that during the war that we were given all the cigarettes we needed, and given, now, not sold, given, because they knew if they got them hooked during the war, when they come home, they would be customers. they knew that. that was their mo to do that. we all remember that during world war ii, we were given all the cigarettes we needed and many young men and women starting the smoking habit who has never -- who have never smoked before. and this is the -- really the sad part, members of the jury. they had never smoked before and who never intended to smoke. and all they wanted was for them to write them 3852 back and tell them that it was okay. we have got your back. we ain't going to lie to you. we would like to have a full report from the research -- from the research men of the tobacco companies who are familiar with the testing and all of that stuff. tell us, we want to know that we are okay. what, all of a sudden, no talking. doctors lost their jobs. and members of the jury, let me just take a moment. you have probably heard dr. proctor talked about the mouse house massacre. the mouse house massacre. they were complaining about the tests that were done on the mouse and other animals that showed that it caused cancer. but they did their own. they did their own testing. that is where you get the mouse house massacre. that was when they found out that their scientists that they had hired to shade the issue, to lie about the issue, came up with proof that that cancer, which they already knew, they had known it for a long time that cancer was killing people and they kept selling a product that killed people, but they got more proof, and it came out of the mouse house massacre. and, boy, after they found out what was going on, man, they moved in 3853 like gangbusters, shut down the mouse house, laboratories, they fired all the scientists, they lined -- they killed the mouse. i mean, it was like whoa. the nerve of you coming up with something that validates what the public has been saying and not what we have been saying. that is the way they do business, members of the jury. now, these boys that fought and died, and members of the jury, boys, men, and women that fought and died for their country. we trust that you will favor us with a reply. "we do not want" -- "just come back to us and tell us that everything is okay, because we want to know do cigarettes really cause cancer." well, guess what, they never even got a response from them. they never even got a response from them, members of the jury. and then it gets -- during all of this time and long before -- and let me say this about the veterans before i move on from it. you know, we all are important as americans. i said something special about them because they off at war, some of them never made it back home, some of them did. some of them were 3854 lucky. they dodged the enemy bombs and bullets to come back home. were honorably charged, but they died a dishonorable death, and it ain't right. it is not right. that is why we are seeking punitive damages in this case. mr. persons: objection, your honor, improper argument. the court: sustained. mr. persons: no evidence of it. the court: sustained. from one of their documents marked, what? they never thought this would see the light of day. it is marked "confidential. there are biological materials present in cigarettes tobacco. these are cancer causing." who gets a chance to get away with putting a product on the market that you know is unreasonably dangerous and above that, you know that is flat out killing people. and your only defense is, well, mr. haliburton should have known that it was going to kill him. he should have diagnosed his case. here this man with a seventh grade education, just a hard worker, pulled himself up by his bootstraps, taking care of his family, not asking anybody for anything, but, you know, 3855 carrying his own weight. and then they blame him. well, you should have known that we had a bad product out there, and you should have known in the '80s that it was bad, and if you were going to sue us, you should have sued us then. ha, ha, ha, you did not do it. mr. persons: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. strike. the court: sustain. you read it for yourself. their product was unreasonably dangerous because they knew it caused cancer, and they were hiding it, hiding it, banking on the fact that they could defend this litigation and blame the smoker. they blame the smoker. that is what they were doing. members of the jury, a good example of that was mr. samuel, dr. -- forgive me, i'm sorry, i do not want to disrespect anybody and i do not mean to disrespect him. dr. samuel. you-all remember he testified as late as yesterday? when that man came in here, and he would say anything, he would say anything to help their cause. mr. persons: objection, your honor, that is 3856 highly improper. the court: sustained. counsel, come sidebar, mr. persons. court: yes, mr. persons. mr. persons: your honor, that is highly improper, disparaging a witness or a party is impermissible. and that is been found to be grounds for -- has been found to constitute reversible error. we -- we object to that. the court: i'm going to sustain the objection. you can say he was hired by reynolds. mr. gary: okay. the court: he certainly was an expert for reynolds. but you cannot say that he was hired to -- mr. gary: okay. the court: -- come in here to say anything. mr. gary: okay. mr. persons: your honor, i move -- mr. chestnut: we can argue the credibility of a witness; correct? the court: yes, but that was not, that was basically saying he was lying. 3857 mr. gary: i'll get him on the credibility. mr. persons: and i'll add to that, motion for mistrial. the court: okay. i'll deny, but grant a curative. mr. persons: thank you. in open court before the court and jury.) the court: ladies and gentlemen, i sustained the last objection. please disregard the last comment. mr. gary: please the court? the court: of course, mr. gary. mr. gary: ladies and gentlemen, dr. reynolds, dr. reynolds {sic}, i want to talk about those in a second, because, you know, the things that he said, you could ask him what color were the sky, and he qualified it, you know, he would take an hour to do it. but that was his style. but the thing that -- that you need to keep in mind is something that he said, even his powerpoints he did not prepare. who prepared them? r.j. reynolds did. mr. persons: objection, your honor, that was not the evidence. the court: sustained. sustained, rephrase. 3858 mr. gary: okay. who prepared the documents? listen to what you recall the testimony. you know what the testimony is. and then r.j. reynolds sent people out to train them. if i did not -- if i'm getting it wrong, disregard what i'm saying, because i want you to go by what was the truth. he said it under oath, he said r.j. reynolds sent people out to train its whole staff. mr. persons: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. mr. persons: no evidence and move to strike that comment. the court: sustained. that was not consistent with his testimony. sustain the objection. mr. gary: well -- well -- well, you recall what he said, members of the jury. but there was -- there was discussion about his testimony. and you recall what he said. i'll leave it just like that. just recall what he said about how he put together -- as a matter of fact, he did not even put together all those slides and all that he was talking about. he did not to that. and just rely on your recollection as to who did it. i want to talk about nicotine a little bit, 3859 because they tried to make it seem like nicotine was nothing, that is what he did. members of the jury, do me one favor, if nothing else, when you get back there, look at the surgeon general's reports. you are going to have them. just make mental note of that. but look at that report and see how many people are dying every year. mr. persons: objection, your honor, violates a ruling. the court: sustained. they go to notice, not for the -- mr. gary: okay. the court: sustain the objection. mr. acosta: your honor, could we approach on that? mr. gary: every year -- the court: sure. before the court at the bench and out of the hearing of the jury.) mr. acosta: the '84 -- i mean the '88 and the '89 surgeon general's report -- the court: that has no relevancy. mr. acosta: that does too, and so it was not in there for notice, those were in evidence, so -- the court: no, i understand. but that is the 3860 current, how many people have died a year. that was the objection. mr. acosta: okay, well, i just wanted to make sure that there was an understanding that -- the court: no, no, no. the other ones are not in just for notice, the other ones were in substantively, but the comment was done as in the present. so that was in reference to the 2014 was my -- mr. persons: right. the court: okay. mr. acosta: all right. gary: may i proceed, your honor? the court: of course. mr. gary: thank you. this is a serious matter, members of the jury, this is a real serious matter. and i know you will not take your responsibility lightly. i feel that i have watched you. you have shown interest beyond what you could expect or imagine. and do the right thing. it ain't about winning or losing, it is about doing the right thing. a lot of people are dying. it does not have to happen. 3861 mr. haliburton ain't coming back. he is not coming back. but they should have to live up to the agreement, the pact they made with the american public. they said, and you saw it, you saw them on tv, if we find anything in our product that is harmful, y'all remember what they said, they said we will either take it out or if we cannot get it out, we will stop making the cigarettes. they do not have to stop making cigarettes, they just can take the nicotine out and stop getting people hooked. they can still make money. they will not make as much. but what is more important, them making -- them keeping their profits up or saving lives? 5 -- 480,000 people a year, you heard dr. proctor testify to that. 480,000 graves. put the grave diggers out of business. mr. persons: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. strike that comment. the court: sustained. disregard the last comment. what they are doing is not right. and they want you to allow 3862 them to continue to do it. mr. persons: objection, your honor. that is not appropriate. the court: sustained. mr. persons: and move -- the court: sustained. mr. persons: same motion, move to strike. the court: sustained. mr. gary: we trust -- how much time do i have? the court: nancy? the clerk: you have 20 minutes. the court: 20 minutes. mr. gary: okay. charity is a nuisance. do not give ms. haliburton nothing, do not give her nothing. nobody deserves to be given anything unless it is to help them save their lives, whatever the case may be. we do not come here seeking charity. we want justice. and this ain't just about mr. haliburton. this is about what they have done to him. it just so happened they have done it to millions of other people. they really have. and they have been getting away with it. mr. persons: objection, your honor, and move to strike that. 3863 the court: you need to come sidebar, mr. persons? no? i'll sustain the objection. mr. persons: okay, thank you, your honor. mr. gary: your verdict can say no more, we are not going to be a part of it, that is what your verdict can say, members of the jury. mr. persons: objection. the court: sustained. strike that. the court: sustained. mr. gary: now, members of the jury, dr. proctor told you, you remember him, -- put dr. proctor up for me for just a second. take this down. they broke their word, they did not keep their word. you know, back -- you know, if you give your word, your word should be your bond. we teach our children that. do not lie. tell the truth. tell the truth. they lied and they lied and they lied to the detriment, you saw the engle finding, to the detriment, that people relied on what they said, they said to their detriment. that is the law if you find that he is a member of the class. they believed it to their detriment. they will say well, 3864 there is no proof that mr. haliburton heard anything, he believed anything. members of the jury, through 20 years they want you to believe he never heard about their lies, cigarettes are safe, do not worry, do not believe those other people who say cigarettes can cause cancer. they lied and they had in their own files information for research that they had done that said they were lying. you know they were lying, and then killing people. for profit. killing people for profit. nicotine is not addictive. the year that they went to washington, dc, all of those owners, the big guys, they went to washington, dc, raised their right hand before man and god. mr. persons: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. mr. gary: and, members of the jury, they lied. they lied about nicotine being addictive. but we know now that nicotine kills people. and they knew it. they had done the research. they had the documentation. and it was in 1994 when they were in washington, dc, lying through their teeth, mr. haliburton found out, 1994, in essence that he was going to die from their lies. that is not right, members of the jury. they 3865 knew that dr. samuel was going to -- and let me say about dr. samuel. i ain't putting nobody down, but this is the only time i get a chance to talk to you and you have got to know the truth about everybody. if you are going to believe him and not dr. proctor and not dr. benowitz, dr. benowitz wrote a part of -- a chapter in the book published by the surgeon general. that is the top medical doctor in the united states of america. credentials like you would not believe. earn his stripes. but dr. samuels {sic}, when we -- he came in here knowing everything. and that is okay. but we said, wait a minute. wait just a second. have you written any papers? no. have you done any research? no. and then we find out the man did not even have a bachelor's degree. that came out through the evidence. but he knows more than the people who wrote the surgeon general's report. and we went a step further. because he was asked by my partner, well, do you have hospital privileges? if doctor retired -- he is a fairly young guy. you would have hospital privileges because if one of your patients -- he sent all his patients, all his patients, if one of them tried to commit suicide or 3866 something happened and he said, doctor, meet me at the hospital, he could not even show up. he does not have hospital privileges. that is who they brought in here. $40,000 to read the depositions. $40,000 to read the depositions. that is why, members of the jury, 16.5 million for over 30-some-odd years for ms. haliburton is -- may not be enough, and you may decide that $16.5 million is not enough. he got $40,000. mr. persons: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. mr. gary: then he want to say nicotine had nothing to do with mr. haliburton's addiction. was he addicted? members of the jury, if we proved anything, and i know we proved a lot, here is a medical record. none of us were around. how on god's earth can he come in here and say this man was not addicted when he smoked for 30 years or 40 years, take your -- whichever one you want. like 30 years, even like 30 years was a big deal, like somebody was lying about it. say you had a mix-up with 10 years, but 30 years or 40 years, it really does not matter, you smoked two packs of cigarettes every day, 20 in a pack, and like my partner said, 3867 some 400 minutes a day you are smoking? and you do it for 40 years and he gets up there and says, no, that ain't no addiction. now, you can blame mr. haliburton for the addiction, whatever you want, but you know he was addicted. and maybe it was -- he should not have been. that is not the point. even after all of their lies and everything else, maybe he should not have been, but he accept some -- his wife accepts some responsibility. she is an honorable lady. and he said no, not -- none whatsoever. it is clear, members of the jury, he did not know how in -- how in the world he is going to know that he had copd or emphysema? he could -- he -- there is no way. he is not a doctor. even their own expert doctor said there is no way this man could have known that he had copd. their expert, the defense expert, reynolds' expert said that. no way he could have known it. because they knew, why were they pressing that? they knew that if you find that he should have known, he should have diagnosed his case, he is a doctor or he close to one, or whatever, none of that, he just had a seventh grade education. but they say -- if they get you to believe that, there is no case. 3868 mr. persons: objection, your honor, to get you to believe something, and move to strike the comment. the court: sustained. mr. gary: if the defendant r.j. reynolds can get you to believe that it is his fault, that he knew or should have known, seventh grade education, just a hard-working fellow that try to do the best he could, take care of his family, sing in the church group, gospel group, and help his country, his community, and his city by being a reserve police officer. dr. feingold, do people without medical -- do people without medical training have that kind of expertise? no, they do not. and a lot of these diseases that people have, for example, emphysema, most patients or people, regular non-doctor people, they do not even know what it is. and he goes on to say that that is right. and i'll show you that board in just a second. the clerk: counsel, ten minutes. mr. gary: thank you, ma'am. i'm just going to let you browse through some of his testimony, because i've got a few minutes. just to remind you. 3869 two packs a day for 40 years. and here he talks about the kids again. in the united states, the great majority of people try their first cigarette at age 14. that is no accident, members of the jury. that is no accident that these kids, these minors, these children, some at 13. he could buy cigarettes out of the stores at 8, 9 years old. the tobacco industry had it going. and you remember when dr. proctor was here and you-all asked him a question when was it the law against kids buying cigarettes. and it was -- the questions by reynolds, the defendant, that suggested, oh, that was a law back in the '30s and the '40s. well, if that was a law, why were they setting up youth, children institutes all over the country to get children to smoke? that is violating this law. you know it. it is not right. not right, members of the jury. here it is, i was looking for it. dr. feingold. "in your experience and medical training, required diagnosis of these diseases." now, if i have -- god forbids it, but if i have lung cancer, copd, and i'm just an average person, well, even with a law degree, how can you expect me 3870 to know or should have known because i've got a cough? he was taking cold medicine for it. because i've got a cough. i should have known that i had a heart disease. i should have known that i had emphysema. he probably could not even spell emphysema. just like his wife, she was in the cotton field, picking cotton at age six, cropping tobacco a little bit later. did you want -- i -- why did you drop out? i had to. well, why did you have to drop out of school? because i had to go to work. some lady. what a lady. and then he goes on to say, "a great deal of medical training is required to even identify two or three diseases that the person probably has. and even more medical training is required to narrow that down to the most likely diagnosis." and they want to tell you we win because he should have known that he had copd, that he had emphysema. first time he went to the doctor, he found out he had copd, think about what he did. he stopped smoking. the rule is sometimes you can, sometimes you cannot, you just do the best you can. but everybody ain't the same. you just cannot say because one person could do it, everybody can -- he 3871 had tried, he had tried, he had tried, but when the doctor told him the truth, that you going to die, which is what reynolds should have told him, they knew that was the truth, they knew they were killing people, and they lied about it, but the doctor did not lie to him, he trashed the cigarettes. he could have done that 40 years earlier if they had been telling the truth. but they were lying to the public. and they just did not lie to mr. haliburton, they lied to millions of people. they set 'em up. and then they -- you remember one of the exhibits, and you may ask for it if you get back there and think about it, but one of the exhibits, the lawyers were telling them, say, look, man, this choice stuff ain't going to fly. this choice stuff is not going to make it. we ain't going to be able to look somebody straight in the face and say it was choice when you got nicotine going to the brain every ten seconds, you puffing that cigarette, you getting a jolt to the brain. members of the jury, dr. feingold testifies most of the time in other type cases for the defense. he testifies for the defense. his nicotine addiction, his smoking, and his 3872 cause of death, those were his opinion, smoking. and, members of the jury, if you find that mr. haliburton was responsible to some degree, say it. that is okay. we are not coming in here asking you not to blame him. but what we are saying is that we have proven that the greater majority of the fault and the blame in this case are on these people because they are more concerned about stuffing their pockets with profits than about saving people. and they go after the children. mr. persons: objection, misstatement of the law. the court: sustained. mr. persons: move to strike, your honor. the court: sustained. mr. gary: just one second, i'm getting ready to close. the clerk: counselor, two minutes. mr. gary: how much? the clerk: two minutes. mr. gary: two minutes? okay. the court: do you want to use some of your rebuttal time? would you like to use some of your rebuttal time? mr. gary: no. 29 december 18, 2014 the court: okay. mr. gary: i'm -- mr. chestnut is going to do the rebuttal. the court: okay. i do not know whether you got a chance to meet mr. chestnut. stand up so they can see you. he is going to do the rebuttal when the case comes down to that point. and i have just two minutes. these people were so concerned about money until when they were up in new york, they were like bragging and boasting about, is not it great that our customers have a habit that they cannot break. why are you rejoicing over having somebody hooked on something and you glad about it because they cannot break the habit? you go and almost like having a party. just bear with me one second. here it is. now, members of the jury, this was after the frank statement. you remember the frank statement basically said we are going to -- if we find anything in it that is not right, we are going to take it out, and if we cannot take it out, we are going to shut down cigarettes, because we are not 3874 going to kill people. well, they lied about that, they did not do that. well, at the same time, they had -- this is -- this is their people saying this. they had this big, powerful media group that were interviewing them. and one of them slipped up and said, one of the men said, "it is fortunate for us that cigarettes are a habit that they cannot break." fortunate? what is this world coming to? and another one said, "boy, would not it be wonderful if our company was the first to produce a cancer-free" -- that mean they knew that the cigarette, members of the jury, was -- had carcinogens in it, it caused cancer. and then lastly, "suppose everybody smoked just one cigarette less a day. that would be maybe 40 billion a year." 40 billion a year. the clerk: counselor, time. mr. gary: okay, i'm going to take just a couple of minutes, your honor. the court: okay, you can take it out of rebuttal, that is fine. the word came that mr. andrew haliburton had died, ms. haliburton went to his bedside. they had been together a lot of years. some ups and some downs. but through it 3875 all, they withstood the test of time and all the problems that life going to throw your way. because if you have not had any problems, just keep on living. but in the final analysis, she said -- i'm not -- i know i'm crying, but i'm not worried because i know he is going to meet his maker and he is going to be all right. he is going to be all right. i do not know what your verdict is going to be, but right now, it does not really matter, because i can tell you this, i know it is going to be the right thing. you are going to do the right thing. you are going -- justice is going to roll. you are going to do the right thing because it is right to do the right thing. and, members of the jury, you know, this is a -- this is a -- you have had a wonderful two, three weeks, we have seen some important things happen, we have seen the birthday of -- of pearl harbor when our boys were bombed. and you seeing birthdays, you have celebrated a birthday together here among yourselves. so a lot of good has come out of this. but do not let him die in vain. mr. persons: objection, your honor. 3876 the court: sustained. mr. persons: that is improper. and move to strike that. the court: sustained. in years to come, you see, i just want -- i do not know what the verdict is going to be. and like i said, that is okay. i'm okay with that. but whatever it is, give it from your heart. mr. persons: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. mr. gary: whatever it is, members of the jury, base it on the evidence. you know, we have tried to prove our case, and you know it. these people kill people with their cigarettes. that is dangerous, it is unreasonably dangerous. they hide the truth, they lie about the truth. you have an opportunity to make a difference. mr. persons: objection, your honor, that is improper. the court: sustained. mr. persons: move to strike that comment. the court: sustained. do what you think is right, because in years to come, you want 3877 to be able to say that i was there, palm beach county, and i did the right thing, with all my heart, i tried to see that justice, that is right, justice, the heart and soul of the american dream, i tried to see that justice finally came for dorothy haliburton. mr. persons: object to that comment. the court: sustained. mr. gary: thank you, members of the jury. mr. chestnut: 25 minutes, i'll move. may it please the court? the court: yes, thank you. mr. chestnut: members of the jury, again, i'm christopher chestnut, you have been thanked, i think three times now, but i am going to thank you a 3989 fourth because you really have been attentive and astute in the questions, it lies in the questions that you have asked. and i'm going to try to answer some of those questions, but first i just want to share this because i've been sitting here all day and i keep remembering this story. i'm from gainesville originally, and so my dad used to tell me the story about the floods, there are a lot of creeks in gainesville, and there is a story about a scorpion and a frog. and so there is this flood and the scorpion and the frog are in the low land and the water is rising, trying to get to high land where it is dry and where they can be safe. four lily pads in between them. and so the scorpion comes up to the frog, the frog is about to leap off. he says, "listen, can i get a piggyback ride to safety, to dry land? and the frog says, "you know, i do not know about that, man, you just killed my brother last week, i really do not know about that. i do not know if i can trust you." and the scorpion says, "no, no, no, no, it is good, i'm a new person, i do not do that anymore. that was last week, this is this week." 3990 and scorpion is like -- i mean the frog is like "i just, i do not know, i do not feel good about this." and the scorpion says, "well, how could you live with yourself if you leave me to here to die?" so the frog finally capitulates and he says, "you know what, okay, fine, get on my back." so he hops on, and they hop, first lily pad. he says, well, okay, maybe the scorpion is okay. the second lily pad. looks back, all right. third, fourth. the fourth jump, pop. the scorpion stings him. frog gets paralyzed, and in midair they are suspended and they land on dry ground, the frog looks back and says, "i thought you said you was not going to kill me?" the scorpion says, "what can i say? i'm a scorpion, that is what we do." and, members of the jury, i think that is really what we are dealing with today. there is a scorpion in this courthouse. mr. persons: objection, your honor. mr. chestnut: i did not point to anyone, your honor. mr. persons: objection, improper. 3991 the court: okay. okay. sustain the inference. strike. the court: sustain. mr. chestnut: so there are half-truths in this courtroom, ladies and gentlemen, and we will get through them. because in one instance, reynolds is saying we took responsibility, in the next instance, they are not, they are pointing the blame at mr. haliburton. in one instance, they endorse the engle findings, in the next they do not. mr. persons: objection, your honor. mr. chestnut: so let us go through it, ladies and gentlemen. mr. persons: objection. mr. chestnut: your honor, this is argument. the court: go ahead. you may proceed. go ahead. mr. chestnut: thank you. so the first question is -- okay. are we up? thank you. the first question is was andrew haliburton addicted to cigarettes and did that cause his death. and i just want to go through this so when you go back to the jury room, just recall this, he 3992 had copd, respiratory failure, and cardiac arrest. and reynolds' own expert testified that the copd clogs your lungs, puts weight on it, which then can cause respiratory failure. as the lung fails, there is respiratory failure, it puts more pressure on the heart which causes cardiac arrest. so his cause of death is due to copd. and it is been established and unrefuted, they admit that copd is caused by reynolds' cigarettes. so the answer to number 1, ladies and gentlemen, is yes, by their own admission. mr. persons: objection. the court: overruled. mr. persons: we have not admitted anything. mr. chestnut: did mr. haliburton know or should he have known in the exercise of reasonable care that he had emphysema/copd, that there was a reasonable possibility that his emphysema and copd was caused by smoking. now, members of the jury. mr. persons: may we approach, your honor? the court: of course. of course, mr. persons. mr. chestnut: and the time stops, correct? the court: yes. 3993 before the court at the bench and out of the hearing of the jury.) mr. persons: this is the correct verdict form, i think he is got the wrong one up there. the court: okay. yeah, let us use the right one. okay. mr. persons: that is all. the court: okay. in open court before the court and jury.) the court: all right. mr. chestnut: now, members of the jury, what is important for us to first recognize is that mr. haliburton had copd. he had a seventh grade education. now, their own expert, members of the jury, came up and testified on their behalf, dr. cosmos. dr. cosmos went through extensively what he reviewed, what everything he reviewed, and he says -- initially they come to you, ladies and gentlemen, and they say -- i tell you, we will come back, let me just go to what they say. they said mr. haliburton knew or should have known before may 5th, 1990 that there was a reasonable possibility that his copd and emphysema 3994 was caused by smoking. this is their board, they showed you this. okay? two of them. now, let us go back. now, you recall i asked dr. cosmos three times, dr. cosmos, are you here to testify that mr. haliburton knew or should have known before 1990 that he had copd. he says no. i asked him three times because i was shocked. i was -- mr. persons: objection. the court: sustained. mr. persons: and ask to -- mr. chestnut: so then i asked whether he should have known. the court: disregard. you may continue. mr. chestnut: so i asked whether he should have known. he says, i'm not here to testify to that. well, let us talk about what he testified really, and why these are half-truths and inferences, ladies and gentlemen. everything he reviewed is after 1994. and then he then relies on these deposition testimonies, ladies and gentlemen. now, you recall all these depositions of all these people. none of these folks are doctors that they deposed. and they read all these depositions to you about 3995 coughing and wheezing, et cetera, et cetera, but they were all non-doctors. the only two doctors says he has copd, but after '94. there is no evidence whatsoever that mr. haliburton knew or should have known -- mr. persons: objection. mr. chestnut: -- before 19 -- the court: counsel, sidebar? mr. persons: yes, your honor. before the court at the bench and out of the hearing of the jury.) mr. persons: he is got dr. rattinger on his slide and dr. rattinger did not testify in the case. mr. crickenberger: we have seen two slides from them plus boards that were -- that were testimony from depositions that were -- the court: but i corrected that based upon mr. acosta's objection. so just indicate rattinger did not testify at all, so. mr. acosta: but feingold talked about what rattinger said, so. the court: okay. but then you need to -- i'll sustain the same objection you had. so i'll sustain your objection, mr. chestnut, so he 3996 needs -- because he did not testify, he needs to say based upon feingold's testimony but rattinger did not testify, so. mr. acosta: okay. the court: okay. chestnut: so dr. rattinger was the only doctor who diagnosed mr. haliburton with copd, that is in 1998. here are the factors that dr. cosmos references, patient history, symptoms, physical examination, pulmonary function tests, radiology, pathology. members of the jury, all of these are after 1990, yet they are here trying to convince you that he knew or should have known before 1990. it does not add up. here is a consultation report, this is their doctor, they put it in, here it says, "chronic pulmonary obstructive disease in 1994." that is what the medical record says. so this is a 1998 record referencing back to 1994. now, this corroborates our position, this supports what we are saying. ladies and gentlemen, you see this? "peptic 3997 ulcer disease in the 1980s." so, members of the jury, if there were any medical evidence that mr. haliburton knew before 1990 that he had copd, it would have been here, just like they put the peptic ulcer. but they did not, because he did not. he did not know. members of the jury, they also kept referring to family diagnosis, and they relied upon deposition after deposition after deposition of family members who eventually came in and said that mr. haliburton knew or should have known he had copd. but if we really look at it, ladies and gentlemen, what those deposition and testimonies really said was they listed symptoms, cough, wheezing, shortness of breath, and then they want you to make a leap, but there is no nexus. so just because someone -- he -- counsel said it best, heartburn. he said, well, it could have been heartburn. so is it now -- what happens when somebody has heartburn? they take pepto-bismol. you do not immediately associate heartburn with smoking, so just because mr. haliburton had heartburn prior to 1990 does not mean he had copd. there is no prima facie demonstration. and, ladies and gentlemen, sometimes you have 3998 to look at how the evidence comes to you. so they read all these depositions in. they were asked leading questions, which means a lawyer -- mr. persons: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. mr. chestnut: your honor, i think i can comment on how the questions were posed. that is -- the method of examination is relevant is argument. the court: just slightly modify that question. sustain the objection for the record. mr. chestnut: okay. so there were deposition questions, and there are two types of ways a lawyer can answer a question, and you can answer, hi, how are you, what time is it today. mr. persons: objection, your honor. the court: need to come sidebar? before the court at the bench and out of the hearing of the jury.) mr. persons: objection, he is suggesting there is something improper with the deposition process, and the court has already instructed this jury that that testimony is to be received and given the same weight as though the person were here. this is a denigration or derogation of that 3999 instruction. and i object to it. the court: and that is fine, suggested change in terms of anything wrong with leading questions, and that was perfectly fine, so. mr. crickenberger: how about if he just states that it is -- it is permissible for them to ask a leading question. the court: okay. that is fine, say it was permissible. okay. chestnut: so earlier, mr. guest was talking about quality of evidence, and a lawyer can ask a leading question, but a leading question is when a lawyer puts forth a positive statement and asks the witness to agree with him. you saw it happen a lot to mrs. haliburton, they put -- kind of put forth an affirmative statement and then she responded. well, that is a leading question versus what time is it. so that is an open-ended question. it is 4 o'clock, is not it? that is a leading question. well, all the deposition testimony they read were leading questions. ladies and gentlemen, here is what i invite you to analyze. of all the -- all of the relatives 4000 they brought, all the depositions they read, they did not ask one relative, did he have copd? did you ever tell him he had copd? did mr. haliburton know he had copd prior to 1990? no. no. that is why they did not call them in, ladies and gentlemen. mr. persons: objection. the court: sustained. mr. persons: objection. and ask for a curative. the court: sustained. disregard the last question and statement. mr. chestnut: so, ladies and gentlemen, there was no relative who came in here who testified that i told mr. haliburton that he had, andrew haliburton, he had copd prior to 1990, or andrew haliburton told me he knew he had copd prior to 1990s. they read a lot of depositions, they did not come. and, ladies and gentlemen, mr. guest talked about quality of evidence, but let us talk about it. i mean the only two people that came here and testified for the defendants were paid. mr. persons: objection. mr. chestnut: they did not have one -- the court: sustained. 4001 mr. persons: objection. mr. chestnut: may we approach, your honor? the court: yes, counsel. court: they read multiple family members who were not paid. mr. chestnut: that did not come in. they read their depositions, but they did not physically come in, your honor. the court: but deposition testimony is the same thing under the law. mr. acosta: you have to say -- just say live testimony. mr. chestnut: your honor, can i say live? the court: yeah, and the instruction i gave the jurors is you are to consider and weigh -- i mean, i basically said you have to consider the deposition testimony as the live testimony, that is what the standard instruction said, we do not denigrate deposition testimony. mr. persons: i mean that is precisely -- mr. acosta: right, he has actually already talked about deposition testimony in a non-denigrating way, so i think that was just kind 4002 of a -- the court: okay. i'm sustaining the objection. mr. persons: and i move for a mistrial given -- mr. chestnut: how much time do i have? the court: nancy, how much time do we have left? the clerk: it is 49 so 5:15. the court: okay. about 18 minutes left. mr. chestnut: 18. the court: 18 minutes. okay. i'm going to sustain the objection. okay, and i'm going to reserve on the motion. in open court before the court and jury.) the court: ladies and gentlemen, the objection was sustained for the record. and, mr. persons, i am reserving on your motion. mr. persons: thank you, your honor. the court: okay. mr. chestnut: just one last thing on diagnosis, ladies and gentlemen. let me just go to diagnosis. 4003 they talked about diagnosis, so let us just talk about diagnosis. for you to have copd, ladies and gentlemen, a doctor has to diagnose you with copd. now, how do we know that and how does the medical evidence confirm that? well, one of the treatments for copd is oxygen. well, you cannot get oxygen without a prescription from a doctor. the most reliable method of determining whether someone has copd is a pulmonary function test. well, there was no pulmonary function test prior to 1998, arguably '94, but there was certainly none in the 1980s because if there were, it would have been no. moreover, ladies and gentlemen, there were no prescriptions. so there are a list of prescriptions that are prescribed that are written by a doctor to address the ailments of copd. there were none in the 1980s. ladies and gentlemen, there is no evidence whatsoever of mr. haliburton knowing that he had or having, in fact, copd in the 1990s. so the answer to number 2 is no, the statute of limitations. and what is most important, ladies and gentlemen, is their own expert came in here, dr. cosmos, and testified to you to just this, the guy they paid to come in and testify, the guy they 4004 paid to read depositions, when i asked them, are you saying that mr. haliburton knew or should have known, no, i'm not saying that. well, are you asking that -- are you saying that he definitively had it? no, i'm not saying that. then he tried to kind of bootstrap and say, well, maybe since he had severe in 1994, he probably would have had copd in 1980s. well, there is no medical literature, there is no factual basis upon which he relied. mr. persons: objection. mr. chestnut: there is no evidence. mr. persons: your honor, that is a misstatement of the evidence. the court: sus -- mr. chestnut: your honor, your honor, there is no medical evidence. the court: okay. that part is fine, but the second part i am sustaining the objection to. mr. chestnut: he did not cite to you one piece of literature from the new england journal of medicine, from other speeches, other doctors who said you can calibrate, or there is a formula that is accepted in the medical industry that calculates dating back severe chronic pulmonary disease from 1994 to the 1980s. that was guesswork, ladies and 4005 gentlemen. mr. persons: objection, because -- mr. chestnut: your honor, i can argue -- mr. persons: he could not bolster -- mr. chestnut: -- the credibility of the witness. the court: counsel, sidebar. court: you cannot do that on direct because that would be bolstering, he is an expert, you cannot -- that would be in violation, and i would sustain the bolstering objection. mr. chestnut: however on cross, i asked him is there any literature to support that, he says no. mr. acosta: he is talking about methodologies, he is not really talking about opinions in a -- the court: and that was fine. mr. chestnut: and i thought i was following your instruction because -- the court: and i'm happy to -- i'm happy to have you address his methodology, not whether his opinion was confirmed in any literature. that is the basis i'm sustaining the objection. okay. 4006 that is fine. chestnut: thank you, ladies and gentlemen. and in closing, they addressed that mr. haliburton did not exhibit any symptoms or distress from withdrawal as it relates to addiction. let us just talk about addiction, that he did not say he was stressed or jittery or nervous or craved cigarettes or felt out of sorts. but, ladies and gentlemen, mrs. haliburton came to you and told you just that, that when he quit smoking in '94, he had all the -- he was stressed, he was jittery, he was nervous, he was quiet. they quoted the children, ladies and gentlemen, who said the same. now, here is what is -- as relates to addiction and was mr. haliburton addicted to cigarettes, frankly, ladies and gentlemen, i will not deal with it much because i cannot argue it any better than counsel for reynolds. he had a very compelling argument that, in fact, mr. haliburton was addicted because he said to you his wife had problems, respiratory problems consequent to smoking, but 4007 mr. haliburton could not quit, that people told him he had a cough, but he could not quit, that he would cough and wheeze, but he could not quit. he went through a laundry list of symptoms that mr. haliburton exhibited, counsel did, and then said he did not quit. now, he tried to couch it in terms of mr. haliburton was very selfish and it was a choice. mr. persons: objection. mr. chestnut: your honor, this is argument, i can comment on his argument. the court: just do not reference it to counsel. mr. persons: there are limits. the court: okay. that is fine. just do not reference counsel. so that is fine. mr. chestnut: and it is not personal, ladies and gentlemen. i respect counsel very much. i'm just also respecting the fact that he made a very compelling argument that mr. haliburton was addicted yet they are saying he was not addicted. he just argued that to you. moreover, ladies and gentlemen, jerry miller says, he says, question, "what was mr. haliburton's 4008 response when you would say, hey, you need to quit -- stop smoking because you are experiencing shortness of breath?" answer: "man, i'm going to quit one day. i'm trying. or, you know, it is just hard, you know, something like -- like what they told him, i'm going to try to quit, you know, but he just never did." here it is in deposition testimony where he admits he is addicted. let us talk about reliance, ladies and gentlemen, number 3. now, members of the jury, this is america. you want to talk about, "did mr. haliburton rely to his detriment on statements or omissions made by a tobacco company that were otherwise known or available to him concerning the health effects or the addictive nature of cigarettes and, therefore, whether those were the legal causes of his death." ladies and gentlemen, this is america. we all love america. this is the land of opportunity. and we are not here saying that reynolds should not capitalize on the opportunity. you want to drive your stock price up through the roof, go for it. you want to become a multibillionaire, go for it. 4009 it is the land of the free, free to vote, free to do what you want, you are free to open a business. but you cannot do it at the expense of safety to the american public. and, ladies and gentlemen, that is what reynolds has done. there are safety rules here. you can be all that you can be, but there are safety rules. you cannot endanger the public. and when a cigarette company has a defective product that they know is harming and killing people, that company must either recall the product, cure it, or remove it for the market -- from the market. when they fail to do that, they are responsible for the harms and losses to the public, including mr. haliburton. and, ladies and gentlemen, that is where we are with reynolds today. think about it. car manufacturers do it. when there is a defect -- mr. persons: objection, your honor, there is a motion -- mr. chestnut: your honor, may i respond? mr. persons: there is a motion in limine on that. mr. chestnut: may i respond, your honor? i believe case law says -- the court: counsel, sidebar, please. 4010 court: mr. persons. mr. persons: comparison of other industries -- the court: we are not going to be talking about ford pinto or any of these -- mr. chestnut: it is not direct, i did not say ford or chevy, i just said -- mr. acosta: no, he is not comparing them to a bad company and saying they are just as bad as -- the court: okay. mr. acosta: -- ford is or they are just as bad as enron, he is just saying what another company would do, that is different, it is a totally different thing. the court: okay. just be real careful because red flags go up when you start doing that. and mr. persons is correct, we do have an order on that issue. mr. persons: we got an order on that. mr. chestnut: okay. thank you. chestnut: so car companies, they have a 4011 defect in their cars, they recall it. drug companies, pharmaceuticals, they have a recall, they have a drug -- they have a defect, they recall it. but, ladies and gentlemen, in this instance, tobacco has a defective product, it is the cigarette. now, here is how this works. what we are saying is the defect in this product, the defect that tobacco knows about are these chemicals. so people may know that smoking is not good, that it is unseemly, that it stinks, that i probably should not do it, that it may make me cough, but what cigarette companies did not tell them was that all these chemicals are in there. and here is the issue, ladies and gentlemen, it does not have to be in there. why is this in there? cigarettes, nicotine causes addiction. these chemicals cause death. this is your lung cancer right here, ladies and gentlemen. these -- you would never inhale formaldehyde knowingly, carbon monoxide, ammonia, acetone. would not do it. they hide it from the public. this is the breach, ladies and gentlemen. this is what we are saying. they are going to come -- they argued individual responsibility. 4012 well, you know what you are doing, but you do not know about this, mr. haliburton never knew all this was in cigarettes, and it does not have to be in cigarettes. but you want to know why it is in cigarettes? because you saw the quote earlier today, one less cigarette a day is $40 billion. why is this? money. this allows a cigarette to be lighter so that you can smoke 20 of them in a day. a cigar is natural tobacco, you cannot smoke 20 cigars in a day, it is too heavy, it is not palatable. this makes cigarettes palatable, it also makes them deadly. this is greed, ladies and gentlemen. they could take this out and still survive, but it is greed, that is why we are here, ladies and gentlemen. so did mr. haliburton rely to his detriment? absolutely, because anybody with common sense, as counsel says, it is a common sense decision, well, anybody with common sense would just know that there is no way any company in america would have me smoking lighter fluid or household cleaner or rat poison. it is greed, ladies and gentlemen. so let us talk about the conspiracy. may i have time, please? 4013 the court: nancy? the clerk: you have five minutes left. mr. chestnut: whoa. time flies when you are having fun, i guess, huh? okay. so, ladies and gentlemen, let us go to the videos that we saw. you-all recall seeing the videos, they showed about three videos a minute ago about knowledge in the '60s? ladies and gentlemen, again, these are half-truths. mr. persons: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. mr. persons: and ask to strike that. the court: sustained. mr. acosta: videos. mr. chestnut: your honor, can i not comment on the evidence? the court: you can comment on the evidence, but not in the way it was presented. so that is why i sustained it. mr. chestnut: okay. the court: the evidence, you can talk about the evidence. mr. chestnut: well, here is the most important part of the videos out of the all the 4014 videos you saw, right, not one of them was from reynolds. they were all, what, lung association, heart association, they were from public interest groups, people who have to raise money to raise awareness yet they are trying to take credit for it. it is like the referring to the office pool where you are secret santa and somebody brings in the best gift and then they take credit for it, but you did not bring in the gift. somebody else did. they are taking credit for the lung association, the heart association. they did not tell smokers that. and you can think about it. they were spending billions of dollars in advertising. look at the quality of those videos. that is not a tobacco product video. that is not a joe camel. that is not virginia slim lady. that is not the man mr. -- oh, man, i forget his name, but he is really cool, though, with the hat and the brim. i'm sure you know who i'm talking about. ladies and gentlemen, let us just look at what they are saying. they have anticipated this litigation back in '72. "we have employed a single strategy to defend ourselves on three major fronts: litigation, politics, and public opinion." litigation, they flip it on the person who is 4015 smoking, which is what they are doing today. blame it on -- mr. persons: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. mr. persons: and i've got a motion. the court: counsel, sidebar. before the court at the bench and out of the hearing of the jury.) mr. persons: that is the -- the court: that is the -- mr. chestnut: well, it is the responsibility -- the court: hold on. hold on. mr. persons: i'm sorry, nancy. the court: you can go ahead and say responsibility, but not in terms of them defending themselves today. mr. acosta: just say "reynolds", not "they". the court: yes. mr. persons: that is the objection, attacking the defense. the court: just change it to reynolds that is all. mr. persons: and move for a mistrial. the court: i'll reserve. let us move forward. 4016 chestnut: reynolds is your defendant. politics and public opinion. again, here is the politics piece, members of the jury. they create doubt with the health change -- charge, advocating the public's right to smoke without actually urging them to take up the practice. "on the litigation front for which the strategy was designed, it has been successful." 1972, this is their strategy, seems a lot like what we are hearing today. mr. persons: objection. the court: reynolds. strike. the court: just refer to reynolds, okay? mr. persons: and renew. the court: reserve, sustained, reynolds, move forward. mr. persons: thank you. mr. chestnut: reynolds, ladies and gentlemen, reynolds. can i just have a standing reynolds for today, your honor? no? the court: just move forward. in the last three minutes, let us finish up. 4017 mr. chestnut: "we must in the near future provide some answers." i've got three minutes, but i really want to show you, ladies and gentlemen. earlier, they talked about the studies that they -- that they funded. let us talk about the studies that they funded, ladies and gentlemen. they were funding studies that only supported their tobacco. and if they did not, ladies and gentlemen, the ctr that they told you about, if they did not support what tobacco was saying, here is the executive committee, they are giving money to schools; right? well, here is a scientist who has told the truth, said, look, smoking is dangerous. what happened? the ctr that they just referenced terminated his grant june 20th, 1984. this is their document, not ours. freddy homburger, smoking inhalation in hamsters, and it shows that cancer due to smoking caused inhalation by hamsters caused cancer in hamsters, they terminated his grant, ladies and gentlemen. did mr. haliburton rely? america relied. they made the argument, well, mr. haliburton grew up in south georgia, we would not do it in south georgia. of course, it was in south georgia. south georgia is pennies, they were targeting 4018 america. "i believe the current movement toward contract research is a violation of our advertised pledges to the public." this is somebody who has got a guilty conscience in 1977 saying they were lying to the public and the public is relying on them. and here is the kicker, ladies and gentlemen, an admission by the industry that excessive cigarette smoking is bad for you is tantamount to an admission of guilt -- the court: mr. chestnut. mr. chestnut: -- with regard to the lung cancer problem. the court: time to wrap up. mr. chestnut: so this could be an open door to litigation. members of the jury, i'm sorry i'm running out of time, but here is the issue. counsel took issue with the $16.5 million, but you know what they could not show you one instance where reynolds even spent a fraction of $16.5 million to educate the public to the truth. mr. persons: objection, your honor, that is improper. the court: okay. and we are out of time. mr. chestnut: thank you. 4019