closing argument mr. murphy: yes, your honor. may it please the court, your honor, and counsel, mrs. hall, ladies and gentlemen, we are almost at the end of the case. this is my last chance to talk to you. i'm going to try to spend my time summarizing why plaintiff has not proven her case to you. before i do that, what i want to do, in case i lose track at the end, i'm going to do something that is very important right up front, and that is to thank you. you know, there is a reason why we all stand every time you walk in and out. as i told you in opening and i told you in jury selection, our jury system is one of the things that makes our country great. there is a right to trial by jury and that whole process only works when people like you show up. and you have done it and you have done it over two weeks and we all appreciate it. you have done more than your civic duty. that is one of the best things a citizen can do for their country. so thank you. let me get to what this case is about and i told you what i thought the evidence would show in opening and now i'm going to talk about what the evidence has shown, now that we are in closing. first thing, the evidence is established that mrs. hall did not prove that mr. hall's injuries and death were caused by smoking. the evidence also established that mr. hall was aware of the risk of smoking. he himself was aware. the evidence shows that mr. hall could quit smoking. we know he could quit because he did quit. the evidence also established that mr. hall did not rely on anything r.j. reynolds company said or did. no one came in here and told you about anything mr. hall relied on. going back to opening again, we both agree that this case is about mr. hall. it is about mr. hall and no one else. this case is not about whether other people have been injured by smoking and no one else but mr. hall -- excuse me, mrs. hall will get money if the plaintiffs win this case. so it is not about any of those folks. this case is also not about whether cigarettes should be sold. we talked about that in jury the benefit of going last. they get to respond to what i just talked about and i do not get to respond to what they will say. so when you are back in the jury room, and you are thinking about what they just told you, think about what i might have said if i had the chance. think about whether you should accept that full value, what they say, just because they get the last word. the reason they get the last word is because they have the burden of proof. and the evidence in this case shows they cannot fulfill their burden. let us go back to that slide as i close, the first slide. mrs. hall did not prove that mr. hall's injuries and death were caused by smoking. this is not the case of a smoker who had a clear case of lung cancer caused by smoking where they found cancerous cells in his lungs and there was no question about the cancer. that is not this case. that did not happen here. there are too many questions that plaintiff cannot answer about mr. hall's cancer and death. mr. hall was aware of the risks of smoking. this is not the case of someone who did not know the risks. those people may be out there. mr. smith may convince you of that, but that was not mr. hall. that is not this case. mr. hall could quit smoking. that is what the evidence shows. this case is not about a person who could not quit. those people may be out there. mr. smith and mr. avera may talk a lot about them. that was not mr. hall. he did quit. that is not this case. mr. hall did not rely on anything r.j. reynolds company did or said. there may be people out there who heard those statements and believed them. there may be people out there who thought that was controversy. that is not mr. hall. there is no evidence of that. that is what the evidence in this case shows. and for those reasons, your verdict should be for r.j. reynolds. thank you very much for your time and attention. i know this week -- these two weeks has not always been easy, but we all appreciate it. thank you, your honor.