and now for the defense, mr. bayuk. mr. bayuk: thank you, your honor. and may it please the court, counsel, miss hardin. good afternoon, ladies and gentleman. (jury says good afternoon.) mr. bayuk: i need to start the same place 4245 that mr. kaiser did, which was to thank you for your time and attention to this case. the system does not work without you and so we really appreciate it, but more so, i want to thank you for your patience, because this trial has lasted a long time. it is lasted about three and a half weeks. it is almost two weeks to the day from when i was up here giving you the opening statement. and you were actually a little bit more patient than you needed to be in this case, because as the argument that you just heard for the last hour demonstrated to you, much of what you heard is not going to help you in this case. much of the argument you heard and the evidence that was talked about is not going to help you answer any of the questions that y'all have to decide when you go back to jury room and deliberate. i told you at the beginning, i told you in opening statement, i think this is pretty simple. i think you are going to find it is a pretty simple case. the case is not about smoking in general. it is not about other smokers. it is not about tobacco company conduct in general. it is not about tobacco company 4246 documents. the case is only about one smoker and one smoker only, and that is mr. hardin. this is mr. hardin's case. you are here to decide things like why mr. hardin smoked; what he saw; what he relied on; what he knew; and why he did the things that he did. and so i want to spend my time today talking to you about the evidence that relates to that issue, the evidence that is going to help you. i asked you in opening statement, "please, please, try to keep your eye on the ball. please listen to the evidence as it came in and see, number one, does it relate to mr. hardin. because if it does not, it is not going to be of much use to you when you go back to deliberate. but, number two, if the evidence does relate to mr. hardin, what side does it support? does the evidence support the claims that are being made or does it refute them? is the evidence that you remember consistent with the argument that you heard this morning or does it refute it? is it the opposite? and i think when you -- mr. kaiser: objection to what counsel thinks. 4247 the court: sustained. mr. bayuk: well, my plan for the next hour is to walk you through the evidence. and i would submit to you that once we do that, you are going to see, overwhelmingly, the evidence only points to the fact that the plaintiff has failed to carry their burden of proof on each and every one of their claims. and we are going to look at that evidence. one thing i want to remind you of, and it is important. based on what you just heard this morning, the instructions tell you this: "the plaintiff has to prove her case with evidence, not with argument." you have an instruction that says, "you cannot engage in guesswork or speculation or guess about things that were not covered here." the plaintiff cannot fill the gaps in their case by asking you to rely on their argument. and you heard it a number of times this morning. you heard it right off the bat with the discussion of addiction and what dr. o'brien said, the plaintiff's addiction expert. because there is been discussion of these dsm criteria. you-all remember when dr. o'brien 4248 came to testify and what he said about the dsm criteria. we are going talk about that in detail. but the argument you heard this morning was, "well, maybe there was this criteria, you know. dr. o'brien said it. if i had had the chance to interview mr. hardin, maybe i could have found this." that is argument, that is not evidence. so you cannot find that the plaintiff met their burden when that is all that you have. another example. you know, we went through trial. dr. proctor was the first witness. he was on the stand for about a day and a half, nothing to do and not a single thing about mr. hardin. then dr. o'brien testified, dr. flurry, dr. messina. mr. hardin's deposition was played. mrs. hardin testified. all the while, not a single comment by all these people that knew mr. hardin, including the man himself, said he was demented. it was not until the cross-examination of dr. giakas, the last witness you heard from, when the plaintiff decided, "mr. hardin's 4249 testimony actually was not that good for them," and so the explanation was invented that mr. hardin was demented. you did not hear a single thing about that until the very end of the case. after four-and-a-half hours of his own deposition was played to you, after you were just argued to about what he said and what it means. that is what i mean when i say, "please keep your eye on the ball and look for evidence, because argument does not suffice." so when you boil it down like so, i think you will find the case is pretty simple. i want to show you a board -- i showed you an opening -- a board of five facts that i think answer all of your questions that you will have to decide when you retire to deliberate. can everyone see that? i told you in opening statement we were going to establish these facts by the end of the case. the evidence does establish these facts. it is overwhelming and unrefuted evidence. number one, mr. hardin did not start or continue to smoke because of anything the tobacco industry said or did. 4250 that is what the evidence is. you heard a lot of argument about that this morning; heard a lot of argument, "he must have relied because he did this thing that other smokers did" or "tobacco companies were saying this and he did it, so that must be reliance." well, we have evidence not just about people that knew him. we have evidence from him himself about why he did things, why he switched, why he smoked. and the overwhelming evidence is the tobacco industry had nothing to do with it. he told you that himself. number two, despite knowing the risks of smoking, he chose to keep smoking for decades without ever trying to quit because he enjoyed it. and we are going to look at the evidence on that. number three, once he was motivated to quit, this is in 2005, he quit the first time he tried with no difficulty, no withdrawal, no relapse, no craving, never going back. that is simply what the evidence is. number four, he admitted -- mr. hardin admitted that he could have quit smoking sooner and prevented his disease and death. he told 4251 you he had the power to change the outcome, but he did not want to quit. that is what the evidence is. and, finally, the plaintiff's case is legally barred because mr. hardin knew or should have known that he had a medical condition that he related to smoking before may 5th, 1990. you heard the defense, on this claim, has the burden of proof. and i'm going to show you we have carried that burden overwhelmingly. we are going to look at the evidence, because it is not -- the argument you heard this morning, there is zero evidence to support this. this is something we made up. i'm going to show you testimony on this exact issue in a little bit. and now the quotes. you have heard these time and time again in this trial: from opening statement, you heard it from multiple witnesses, and you heard them come from mr. hardin himself. you know, there is a claim made, "he did not know" -- you heard the argument, "he did not know the dangers of smoking." what did he tell you? this is the difference between argument and evidence. what was the evidence? 4252 you saw the warnings and you understood that smoking was dangerous, did not you? "right." there is no evidence of confusion. there is no evidence of doubt. he says he understood. he knew that cigarettes were dangerous. he told you repeatedly, "i saw the warnings. i saw the sign on the cigarettes, but i did not pay no attention. i did not heed by them." not that i missed them. not that "i did not know every pack of cigarettes carried a warning." i saw it, and i did not heed it. and why? why did he tell you that? well, number one, he told you, "it is my choice to smoke." he did not say, "addiction makes me smoke." it does not compel me against my will to smoke." and this is when he is deposed in this lawsuit as the plaintiff. "it is my choice to smoke. it is strictly up to me whether i quit or not." not "it is ten percent up to me and the rest is because of addiction." "it is strictly one hundred percent up to me whether i quit or not." and what was the difference with mr. hardin? 4253 he told you, "i did not want to quit." this is before 2005. "i did not want to quit." not "i could not quit," not "i was unable to quit," not "i want to quit but i cannot." "i did not want to quit." that is the evidence. when i say, "keep your eye on the ball" -- and based on what you heard this morning, it is so important to not be distracted by issues that you are not here to decide. you know what, these questions that mr. kaiser told you the defense is not going to answer -- well, you know what, i want to focus on the questions you are here to answer. you have a copy of a verdict form. we call this machine the elmo. i'm not sure why, but when mr. kaiser was answering these questions as he thought they should be answered on the verdict form, he failed to point out something i told you in opening. you do not need to go further than the verdict form to know that this case is only about mr. hardin, not to be distracted by other issues. every single question on the verdict form 4254 has mr. hardin's name on it. every single one relates specifically to him and his very specific legal claims. and so when i say "do not be distracted," just for example, you heard a lot of argument this morning about addiction, and you heard a lot of argument about mass media, about marketing, and about reliance. and so let me talk to you about what the evidence is on those issues so we can put those to bed. we can put them aside and they will not distract you from what you are here to decide. there is a lot of claim, a lot of talk about mr. hardin being addicted. what was the evidence? what was the evidence on that? and you heard two experts come, dr. o'brien and dr. giakas. and dr. o'brien -- we are going talk more about him. you kind of got two stories from him. you got one on direct examination and then you got a different story on cross-examination. we are going to talk about exactly what he said and why there was such a difference. but the bottom line, all of the evidence supports that mr. hardin was not addicted to 4255 nicotine. and i'm going to show you testimony, but y'all remember that? the evidence was mr. hardin did not lose control over his smoking. dr. giakas told you that, and dr. o'brien, on cross-examination, said, "yes, i saw evidence he could control it. he could control his smoking. mr. hardin quit when he wanted to quit with no problem." dr. o'brien told you, "the hallmark of addiction is being unable to quit when you want to." well, this is what the evidence supports unequivocally. and, finally, he had the ability to quit and prevent his disease. so when you hear all of this talk, these claims about addiction and mr. hardin was compelled, this is what i mean when i say to ask yourself if the argument you hear lines up with the evidence. because, i submit to you, it is actually the opposite. the evidence supports the other conclusion, and it is overwhelming. what was the evidence about why mr. hardin smoked if it was not for addiction? well, you heard a lot of reasons. you heard 4256 a lot of reasons from mr. hardin himself and from both of the experts: enjoyed smoking, liked the taste, smoked to relieve the boredom of hours on the road in his truck, smoked to help relieve stress and relax when he would run into traffic, help him concentrate on the road. and, finally, dr. giakas explained to you, you know, there is this concept of distress or impairment. that is how you can distinguish addiction from someone that just does something regularly, a habit. and dr. giakas explained to you that mr. hardin smoked out of habit. you heard mr. hardin himself tell you, "smoking was a habit i got into." that was his testimony under oath. advertising, mass marketing. a lot of time spent this morning and in this trial talking about those issues. well, first, the jury instructions give you guidance on how to approach the claims. and so i want to highlight a few. instruction number 16 tells you, "the manufacture, sale, and advertising of cigarettes is a lawful activity and cannot be the basis for 4257 liability." why is there so much time spent on advertising when your instructions tell you in black and white, it cannot be the basis of liability the fact that reynolds advertised. instruction number 18, "reynolds has a first amendment right to advertise its products. you cannot base a liability on the fact they advertised or even how much money they spent." that is a jury instruction that you have to follow in the case. so why is there so much time spent talking about the advertising when the instructions tells you what role it plays. it does not play any role. but more importantly, if we are going to focus on mr. hardin, what was the evidence about mr. hardin? you heard a lot of talk with dr. proctor about skywriting and bellhops, you know, billboards, magazines, and television ads. mr. hardin himself told you, "i did not rely on advertising. i did not use advertising to base any single brand choice or smoking decision that i ever made." that was mr. hardin's own words as the plaintiff in the case. 4258 and then there was a lot of talk this morning about this winston ad. you were shown a board where mr. hardin's testimony was that he smoked winstons because he remembered a winston jingle, "winston tastes good like a cigarette should." well, he did remember that ad in the deposition, and do you remember what he said right after he recalled it? he said, "that would not have been it. that was not why i switched. that would not have been it." mr. persons, who is going to get up after me and walk through the rest of the verdict form, is going to show you that that particular testimony, that that is the evidence. you did not get the full picture this morning. and so the full picture is the only ad mr. hardin remembered, he then said immediately, "i did not rely on that ad." a lot of argument was made too about filters, that he switched from -- switched to filtered cigarettes because he was relying on the tobacco companies. you were shown some testimony from dr. proctor, but you were not 4259 shown the next question and answer from dr. proctor's exam. because the next question that mr. kaiser asked him was, "did the tobacco companies ever tell the public that filters were safer?" and dr. proctor said, "no. they would not say that. they did not say that because they did not want people to think the other cigarettes were not safe." so they did not say that. dr. proctor told you, "the only people telling the public that filters were safer was the public health community, the surgeon general." and mr. persons is going to go over that with you. but more to that point, in what mr. kaiser showed you this morning, and he showed you the testimony, dr. proctor said, "the big push for winston was in 1954" -- "the big push for winston cigarettes was in 1954." what did mr. hardin say about when he switched to winston? 1952. 1952, before they were even being pushed, as dr. proctor said, by reynolds. so that is the full story. that is the full story to show you that there is no evidence of reliance. 4260 and more broadly, not just about advertising but, you know, you heard a lot of discussion about white papers and frank statement and the waxman hearings. again, what was mr. hardin's experience? what did he tell you? he was not impacted by or did not rely on any public statements by any tobacco company or anything in the tobacco industry. there is no evidence he ever thought there was a controversy or that he was confused. the only evidence is that he understood smoking was dangerous. that is the evidence specific to him. and then we had two experts, one on each side, review the entire record. remember, i asked questions about the entire record. all the depositions, all the medical records, all the discovery responses, thousands of pages. did you find anything dealing with this case showing mr. hardin had any reliance on anything from the industry? their expert said no. our expert said no. there is simply zero evidence of reliance. that is the full story. and so with that, i want to spend the rest 4261 of my time walking you through the evidence. you know, this is called closing argument, but i do not need to argue. i do not need to argue about it, not on this evidence. i'm simply going to show you what the evidence was, remind you what it was and tell you how it answers all of these questions. and i think -- i submit that you will find there has been a complete failure of proof on every claim. and so i'm going to walk through first two claims on the verdict form and then i'm not sure, we may take a lunch break and mr. persons is going to get up and walk you through the rest. and so i want to start with question number 1: "was thomas hardin addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, and if so, was such addiction a legal cause of his copd/emphysema and death? yes or no?" this is the class membership question, so let us look at the evidence on class membership. you remember when we discussed this in opening statement we illustrated this as two hurdles. there is two components of the plaintiff's burden on this. they have to meet both. they cannot 4262 just meet one. they have to prove addiction, and then even if they prove addiction, they have to prove addiction causation, that addiction is what drove mr. hardin to smoke himself to copd and death. that is their burden to prove both those issues. so let us take them one by one. addiction, the plaintiff must prove that mr. hardin was medically addicted to nicotine. well, what was the evidence? the only standard that you got from both sides was the dsm. mr. kaiser showed it to you this morning. the purple book, the dsm-5 and its criteria. well, the evidence, and we are going to look at it, was mr. hardin does not meet those criteria for nicotine addiction. that is simply what the evidence was. and so kind of a framework for how we are going to walk through what the evidence was, you heard, you know, mr. kaiser said that dr. giakas said this was the gold standard. well, dr. o'brien who wrote the book told you that it was the gold standard. psychiatrists agree it is the only test. both experts agree also, you have to have 6 or more of the 11 criteria. mr. kaiser told you 4263 that in opening. he said, "i'm going to bring a world-renowned expert. he is won all kinds of awards." the discussion of awards was longer than his discussion of mr. hardin. but he -- he -- mr. kaiser told you, the expert is going to come and say, "i wrote these criteria and you have to have 6." and we will see what the expert says. that is what he told you in opening. he did not really admit to it on direct examination, but on cross examination i had to show him his deposition, he said, "you require 6 criteria?" and he said, "yes." that was his testimony under oath. dr. giakas said the same thing, "6 or more are required." that is one component. in addition to that, there has to be significant impairment or distress, another component that plaintiff has to meet to prove addiction. and, finally, both experts agreed that half of people that smoke every single day just as much as mr. hardin are not addicted to nicotine. they smoke for other reasons. that is simply what the evidence was and it came from both sides. and so both experts, you know, a lot of talk 4264 about dr. o'brien and him writing the dsm-5, but might have found it telling that when mr. kaiser was asking him what was in the dsm-5, dr. o'brien could not remember. and so mr. kaiser had to walk up to the witness stand and show him the book that he wrote to remind him what he had written in the book. maybe that is not surprising because dr. o'brien told you, "i was involved with dsm-5, but i've never applied it. it is been out for over two years and i've never applied it to single patient. i do not apply it in practice. i do not see smokers." that is what he told you. contrast that with dr. giakas. he came, told you if he was not here, he would be treating patients that day. that was on a thursday and friday. he was missing patients to be here. he uses the book every single day in his practice. he has diagnosed 600 patients for smoking issues and nicotine addiction. he knows the ins and outs of how it is applied clinically every single day. talk a little bit more about dr. o'brien. i want to point out a jury instruction. you got it read to you before open -- before closings, 4265 but it is an instruction, instruction number 3 on the believability of witnesses. it tells you: in evaluating the believability of any witness and the weight that you will give to the testimony, you may properly consider the demeanor of the witness while testifying, the frankness or lack of frankness of the witness, the intelligence, any interest they may have, and then the ability of the witness to remember the matters about which the witness testified. i'd submit to you this instruction was made for dr. o'brien in this case. and why do i say that? you remember, as i said, different story between direct and cross-examination. direct examination, you may have found it pretty clear that dr. o'brien actually did not remember much about the case. we find out why on cross-examination, because he had not read a single material about the case in about six months. he could not answer basic questions about what people said in the case. when mr. kaiser was asking about how he applied the dsm-5 criteria, he answered, "well, mr. hardin smoked. mr. hardin smoked. well, we are here in a smoking case." mr. kaiser had to prompt him. 4266 "well, did you see anything about quit attempts?" "oh, quit attempts, that is right." you may remember the testimony. but on cross-examination i was very respectful to the man. we went very slowly and i was asking him questions that i had already asked him in deposition, and time and time again he gave different answers. and so y'all know by now we call this impeachment. before trial starts we have an obligation to go take depositions of the witnesses, say what they are going to say; see what their opinions are. it is all under oath and we make a written transcript. and that is so that when the witness comes to court we are not surprised by what they say. and oftentimes you may have seen during the plaintiff's case we did get surprised by what the witnesses say, and so we have an obligation at that time to bring you the full story, to show the witness their testimony that was given under oath and have you evaluate why was there a change in the testimony. and here there was a change 33 times. 33 times. you know, mr. kaiser told you this morning, dr. o'brien, you know, questions were posed to 4267 him and he said, "you know, there is no black and white answer. i cannot say yes or no." and then i would show him his testimony under oath where the answer would be yes or no. and so you have to think about why was he not candid with you on cross-examination. and the instruction tells you that you need to take that into account when you consider the weight to give to his testimony. i told you the requirement of 6 or more criteria. the plaintiff told you that in opening. dr. o'brien told you that. this was a big change. you know, mr. kaiser, i thought it was very telling in his closing, he told you, "oh, dr. o'brien found the dsm criteria met." he did not give you a number. he did not tell you how many criteria there were because he knows he has to have 6 or more. well, in trial on direct exam, dr. o'brien came up with 8. 8 criteria. so i had to bring out his deposition on cross-examination where he admitted under oath he only found 5. he only found 5 criteria. and so what happened between the deposition and trial? well, maybe among other things, dr. o'brien knew he had to find 6 4268 if he was going to help the plaintiff carry the burden of proving that mr. hardin was addicted. and so all of a sudden it went from 5 to 8. in addition to the number of criteria, there has to be this finding of significant impairment or distress. and dr. giakas told you why. and so you do not have a trivial condition rise to the level of a mental disorder, rise to the level of an addiction. that is why you do not go through the checklist without training and check off boxes when you see something like smoking in bed or smoking one to two packs a day. you have to understand more. you have to apply clinical judgment. that is what dr. giakas told you. and the purpose of that is to see if the behavior rises to a severe level, rises to being an addiction. well, what did dr. o'brien say on cross-examination when i asked him, i pushed him, "what was the evidence of distress or impairment?" this is what he told you, "we do not have evidence that he was distressed by his smoking." dr. giakas told you the same thing. did not show any distress or impairment. and remember, dr. giakas went through the extra 4269 step of watching the video, not just reading the transcript but watching the testimony, so as a board-certified forensic psychiatrist he could look at mr. hardin's demeanor. he could see what mr. hardin's body language was and how his voice was when he is talking about his smoking. and he said, "that just confirms it." you all saw it. you need to decide if you thought you saw distress when mr. hardin was talking about his smoking. dr. giakas told you his opinion as a forensic psychiatrist. so that is something you need to think about, the evidence that you have, not argument but the evidence is he was not distressed or impaired. so you have plaintiff failing to carry their burden simply because they did not meet the test that they put in front of you, 6 or more criteria. they do not meet this test. their expert on cross admitted this. so this is another reason they do not carry their burden. but there is more because what did mr. hardin say? what did mr. hardin say about his smoking and whether he was distressed about it? he told you in his deposition, "i never had no problems smoking." never had no problems with smoking. 4270 and that is consistent with the other quotes. "it is my choice, strictly up to me, i did not want to quit, never had no problems smoking." well, what was the problem? and we do not, from the defense side, do not submit that there was any problem. mr. hardin engaged in behaviors he was free to engage in. and i told you in opening, not one single person from this side is going to say anything bad about him. and i'm not up here to say anything bad about him now, but what was the evidence that if mr. hardin had any problem, what was it? heard a lot of talk about gambling, a lot of discussion about gambling from a number of witnesses. and so when the claim is being made by the plaintiff that smoking was causing the problems, that smoking was the problem and distressing his daily life, is that how you remember the evidence? what was the evidence of what was actually causing some distress in his life? because it was not the smoking. it was not what they claim he was addicted to. it was the behavior that no one claims he was addicted to, gambling. and so i've compared and contrasted what the 4271 evidence was and what you have heard from the witnesses on these issues. because if mr. hardin had any problem, it was the gambling, not the smoking. the gambling, mr. hardin testified about the reno incident where he lost so much money he had to call his boss, could not get where he was going because he could not afford it. he said on his trips he would stop at casinos when he is on the way to make deliveries. smoking never impacted his work. in fact, the opposite. mr. hardin told you, "you know what, we had company meetings." he could not smoke. "i did not smoke and had no problem. no withdrawal, no problem at all." "when i had to go places and deliver goods and you could not smoke at the delivery site, no problem with not smoking, no problem." no impairment at work. caused financial problems, gambling, again, the reno issue, you heard something again, argument that came up at the end of trial when there is all this discussion of noncompliance, that somehow mr. hardin could not afford his medications. well, if that was -- that was the case, and you heard dr. giakas say this, he 4272 was -- mr. hardin was gambling until the end of his life. you saw the medical record that dr. giakas showed you just seven days before he died. mr. hardin was gambling until the end of his life. his choice to do that. but when you look at what was causing problems, if anything, it was not the smoking. smoking never caused any financial problems. you heard about gambling. "the only problem we ever had," the only problem, tension in the marriage from the gambling. never a single fight about smoking. no conflict at all about smoking. you heard on the stand when mrs. -- mrs. hardin was testifying, you heard on direct examination from mrs. hardin, and it is a little uncomfortable, you know, in this setting to be talking about it, when mrs. hardin is sitting here, i do not mean any disrespect, but i need to bring you -- remind you what her testimony was. and so there was discussion about gambling before she testified, so she knew what the discussion was going to be. and on her direct examination, she told mr. kaiser she never had a problem with gambling. she told her husband that he should do it, it was an outlet or a 4273 recreational activity. and she encouraged him. on cross-examination we had to say, "miss hardin, you know, in your deposition did you say you told your husband that gambling was addicting?" and she said, "no, i do not tell him that," and then we had to show her her deposition testimony and remind her what she said. and this was a while ago. but she said, when shown the deposition, "okay, i might have told him it was addicting." and then the question was asked, "well, not only you told him it was addicting, you told him he was addicted?" and she said, "i might have, i might have told him he was addicted." unequivocal, she never told him he was addicted to smoking. and then finally, gambling, the last thing you wanted to do, again, back to that medical record seven days before he died, when you think about the evidence on smoking, you know, evidence was put before you, it causes permanent brain changes. it causes long-lasting craving, you relapse years after you quit smoking, all you want to do is smoke. but the last thing mr. hardin wanted to do in his life was not smoke a cigarette, it was take one more trip to the casino. again, 4274 that is his choice. but that is the evidence in the case that you have to think about. smoking, you know, you heard the story, i think this is again from mrs. hardin on the stand where he quit smoking in 2005. no problem quitting, no withdrawal, and on one occasion after that, mrs. hardin said that mr. hardin said, "you know what? i want a cigarette. i could smoke a cigarette as long as this trailer. i like to smoke." what is mrs. hardin's response? remember, mr. hardin quit because his doctors had been telling him, "you are going to die if you do not stop. you are going to die. you are hurting your copd. you are hurting your health." in 2005 they said, "if you do not quit, you are going to die." he quit and lived seven more years. and so kind of stunningly, you have this episode brought to you from mrs. hardin where mr. hardin says, "you know, i like to smoke." and mrs. hardin, the plaintiff in the lawsuit, who is bringing a claim, you are told, for somewhere between 11 and $20 million, told her husband, "i'll go get you some cigarettes. you should smoke. i'll go get you some cigarettes." and 4275 mr. hardin had to be the one to say, "no, we are not going to do that again. done smoking. no problem quitting. i'm done smoking." that was the evidence that you have in this case. and so now we looked at the evidence, the plaintiff cannot carry their burden to show you the number of criteria for addiction. they cannot show the impairment or distress to prove addiction. and so dr. o'brien, left without the dsm, came up with a new definition on the stand, a new definition of addiction. he said, "the hallmark sign of addiction is the loss of control and an inability to quit when you want to quit. you want to quit, but you cannot quit. that is what i, you know, 50 years as a knight, a french knight, this is what i define as addiction." but then what happened on cross-examination? he admitted that even that test was not satisfied by mr. hardin because he said on cross, "for most of his life mr. hardin did not want to quit..." not was unable to quit, not had an inability to quit. he did not want to quit. there is no evidence before 2005 that mr. hardin ever decided for himself that it was 4276 time to quit smoking. there is no evidence he was ever motivated before 2005. at some point he got really motivated and at that time he quit smoking. and dr. o'brien also told you at the end of the cross-examination, he always had that ability. he always had the ability to quit, the power to quit and prevent his disease and death. and so with the definition that he resorted to, that he set up, "you want to quit, but cannot," he told you the evidence shows mr. hardin never wanted to quit. and when he finally did, he did quit. that is the opposite of the hallmark of addiction. and so plaintiff fails on this prong to carry their burden of proof on addiction. and this was untouched on redirect. they have a chance on redirect examination to get up and try to fix this. say "he did not really mean those things" or "can you explain, dr. o'brien, what you were saying when you made those admissions?" not an effort at all to try to add context to these admissions. they are unrefuted in the evidence. and then you go to this point, both experts agreed, people that smoke just like mr. hardin 4277 every single day, half of them, at least half of them are not addicted. they smoke for other reasons. it is an either or proposition. you smoke for addiction or you smoke for another reason. that is what the experts told you. well, what are reasons people smoke besides addiction? both experts said this. enjoyment, taste, relaxation, socialization, bonding, stress relief, weight control, boredom. they gave you a list from both sides. and then what did they say about mr. hardin particularly? you have already seen this slide at the beginning of the closing. he smokes for all these reasons. and this is not a case where the defense, i'm up here saying, you know, he enjoyed smoking and the plaintiff is saying, no, no, that is not the evidence, he did not enjoy smoking. this is unrefuted, undisputed evidence of all of the various reasons why he smoked, the same reasons both experts told you people smoke every day and are not addicted. we have all these reasons in the case. we read to you at the end of our case request for admissions, admissions that the plaintiff made under oath about why mr. hardin 4278 smoked. we asked questions because we wanted to know before trial started, why do you contend that mr. hardin smoked? they could have said addiction. they could have said he could not control himself. this is what they said and this is instruction number 11: "you must accept these facts as true." not that he smoked because of addiction. he smoked because he enjoyed smoking. it relaxed him. he liked the taste of his kool cigarettes. he liked the smell of tobacco as it burned. this was admitted by the plaintiff before they ever came into court and put on their case for you. it is a judicial admission you have to accept as true. and so the bottom line, all of the evidence -- and i would respectfully submit to you it is overwhelming. if you recall your memory and you recall what the evidence was as it related specifically to mr. hardin, he did not meet the criteria. he did not meet the dsm criteria. and, again, i think it is -- i submit it is very telling, you did not hear a number from mr. kaiser this morning. there is a really distinct reason why he did not, because he knows 4279 what dr. o'brien said. he knows what dr. o'brien said on cross-examination. smoking did not cause distress or impairment. we looked at that evidence. mr. hardin controlled his smoking when he had to. he was able to quit at any time, and he demonstrated that in 2005. and, finally, you know, there was evidence generally about withdrawal symptoms. well, what was the evidence specific to mrs. hardin? you heard something about you could hear it in his voice or ill. but what did dr. o'brien, the plaintiff's expert, tell you? "i could not give him that criterion. i could not give him number 11 which dealt with withdrawal. i did not see enough evidence for it." so he did not meet that. dr. giakas agreed. he told you that too. the experts were in agreement on that point. so i'm not sure what you heard about withdrawal this morning, but that is not consistent with what the evidence was, not consistent at all from both experts. dr. giakas explained to you in detail, he even answered a question from y'all about quit 4280 attempts. he explained to you, what does an addicted smoker look like? what do i look for in my practice clinically when i'm applying the dsm and treating smokers every day at my practice? he told you an addicted smoker tortured by smoking, dislikes what they are doing, is guilty about continuing to smoke because they want to stop it and they are having trouble, smokes against their will, not in control, avoids going places because they cannot smoke there, so they miss out on going to the ballet recital or they miss out on flying on the airplane because they cannot go without smoking. that is not the evidence about mr. hardin. he told you smoking never caused a problem. dr. o'brien told you he never missed out on anything he wanted to do because of smoking. it is simply, if he could not smoke, as mr. hardin himself told you, if he could not smoke then he would go wherever he needed to go and when he got done playing or whatever he wanted to do, he would simply smoke when he could. that is control. addicted smoker, multiple failed quit attempts. struggles to quit after diagnosis. relapsing. withdrawal symptoms. chain smokes 4281 one after the other two, three, four, five packs a day. multiple relapses and craving. how does that compare to mr. hardin based on the evidence you have? "i do not want to quit. not i cannot quit again. i do not want quit." you know, i feel like i keep coming back to these things, but it is because the evidence is so overwhelming on these points and there is no contrary evidence that the plaintiff can point you to. he enjoyed smoking. he smoked because he wanted to. he controlled his smoking. no withdrawal. quit for good and never looked back. no evidence of craving. that is what the evidence is. that is why you cannot allow plaintiff to meet their burden with just argument. that is why they have to point you to the evidence that establishes these things. and this is what the evidence shows. and then final point, final point to kind of put the cherry on top of why mr. hardin was not addicted, in addition to all these other reasons they failed to carry their burden, there is discussion of personality and discussion of risk-taking. and, yes, dr. o'brien did fight this on direct examination. he would not admit 4282 it on cross -- on direct examination and so this is one of those 33 times i had to say, "dr. o'brien, you know, in your deposition you said personality and specifically these risk-taking behaviors are relevant to determining whether or not someone is addicted." he said, "yes." determining whether or not -- dr. giakas told you it is important because you have to use your clinical judgment. you have to use clinical judgment in assessing the dsm. and that is -- part of that is looking at the personality, because people smoke, half of them every day they value the benefits over the long-term risks. and that is a decision people make without addiction impacting them. and so who was mr. hardin? his wife described him as someone who was stubborn and did what he wanted to do, his own man, made his own decision, independent and risk-taking. and the claim was made this morning in closing, why on earth would someone smoke for 50 years every single day? because they liked it or because they enjoyed it? the only explanation for that is addiction. well, what do you know about other things that he did in his life, about how 4283 he operated his truck, about his gambling when people are telling him, "you have to quit gambling." he is getting into disputes with his wife. his in-laws are telling him, "you have to quit gambling." and he says, "i enjoyed it. i wanted to continue gambling." how did he approach other risks? why on earth, to use their logic, why on earth would the man speed all the time, overload his truck, endanger others' safety on the road? why would you do that? well, there is no evidence that that was caused by addiction. why would you not take your copd medications? why on earth would someone do that? well, there is -- that was not caused by addiction. both experts told you that. i showed you this in opening. this noncompliance, it was not a two-year thing. it was a chronic thing that lasted the length of his treatment. addiction does not cause people to do this. that is the bottom line. addiction is not driving this. and so, you know, when the claim is made to you why on earth would someone smoke, well, why on earth would someone do this? and does it speak to their personality? does it 4284 speak to who they are and what they think about risks and doing what they want to do? i submit to you smoking, on the evidence you heard, is exactly consistent with that judgment about someone's personality. this is not being driven by addiction. this is just who mr. hardin was. and we are not here to blame him. you know, a lot of discussion about dr. giakas judging him. y'all can judge that for yourselves. you can judge what you thought of that. he came and presented facts. and unlike dr. o'brien, he learned the record. so he did not have to be reminded about things. he recalled every detail for you. think about that when you think about the believability of witnesses as well. the message was clear, there is people just like mr. hardin, we showed this in opening, we showed it with dr. proctor, this was a message that was dictated, that was directed directly to people like mr. hardin. he knew he was gambling. he knew it. "i did not heed the warnings," but he knew what the risks were and he made the choice just like every other thing in his life. this was the message. 4285 can you play it, mr. smith? (video clip was played and taken down to the best of the reporter's ability as follows:) voice: you lose. (video clip concluded.) mr. bayuk: it does not get any more powerful and it does not get any more specific to the facts of this case than this public service announcement in the '70s. this is mr. hardin. and the evidence you heard, he made a choice to do these other things. he made a choice to smoke. he told you that. "it is my choice." he knew the risks. and he made the choice. because he was hoping he would not get sick. he knew cigarettes caused cancer. he understood they were dangerous. and just like the other behaviors, you heard from the witness stand, this was a gamble that he made, he is allowed to make, and then ultimately it did not turn out well. he lost. but he tells you, "it is my choice. it is not addiction. it is my choice." and so i would submit based on all of that, all of those pieces of evidence, the plaintiff has overwhelmingly failed to prove to you that mr. hardin was addicted under the own -- their 4286 own test that they set up. but there is a second hurdle that they have to prove even if you -- the clerk: mr. bayuk -- mr. bayuk: -- even if you found addiction. the clerk: mr. bayuk, you have 15 minutes remaining. mr. bayuk: thank you so much. they have to prove that addiction was a legal cause of mr. hardin's copd/emphysema and death. and this was the same way i asked you to think about it in opening, was mr. hardin rendered powerless by nicotine addiction so he was unable to quit and prevent his death? well, you heard mr. kaiser tell you this morning on this issue, addiction causation, what else does addiction do besides compel you against your will to smoke, forces you to smoke, leaves you unable to quit, powerless to quit? well, what was the evidence on this? this is the jury instruction on what you have to find addiction -- the role addiction played in mr. hardin's disease and death. the plaintiff has to prove that mr. hardin's alleged addiction directly and in a natural and 4287 continuous sequence produced or contributed substantially to producing his copd/emphysema and death so that it can reasonably be said that but for his alleged addiction his copd/emphysema and death would not have occurred. if he was powerless, unable to quit, forced against his will to smoke, that is why he got copd/emphysema and death. that is why he died. that is what the plaintiff has to prove to you. well, what was the evidence on this? it fails for three reasons. it fails, number one, because overwhelmingly they have not proven addiction, so addiction cannot cause disease or death if you are not addicted, number one. number two, their own expert admitted that the disease came before the addiction. they have to prove addiction caused the disease. i'm going to show you his testimony, dr. o'brien's testimony on that. and, finally, the evidence, again, is unrefuted, mr. hardin always had the ability to quit. the claim is being made he was powerless, he was unable to quit. well, that is not the evidence. that is the argument, but that is not the evidence. 4288 and so on this point, you know, i asked dr. o'brien on cross-examination, "you say he is addicted, dr. o'brien, when is the first time you can say with certainty to this jury that he was addicted, that he had nicotine addiction?" and dr. o'brien said, "it was in 1996 when he made these quit attempts." well, you know the evidence, those quit attempts came after he was diagnosed. he had the disease before the plaintiff has the first shred of evidence that mr. hardin was addicted. that alone, this one fact alone, prevents them from meeting their burden on this issue. they cannot show addiction before disease. but more so, on top of that, you know mr. hardin admitted fault. he told you and you heard it in the instructions he bears some measure of fault for causing his copd and emphysema and his acts and omissions related to his quit attempts. his lack of quitting were a cause. well, what does this mean? what does the admission mean? it is a lot of legal jargon. but what does it mean as a matter of common sense? 4289 well, number one, it means mr. hardin chose to smoke for 50 years without making a real quit attempt. it means that he knew smoking was dangerous and chose to continue smoking. that he was not confused is that strictly -- that is, again, his words -- strictly responsible for quitting and that he is able to quit. think about this: why would you say that you are at fault for something you have no control over? if you cannot change the outcome, if you cannot quit smoking and prevent your disease, why would you ever have any fault for that if you could not do anything about it? it does not make any sense. that is what the plaintiff's admission of fault means, that he was the only one in control of what he did, the only one in control to prevent his disease and death. dr. o'brien told you this on cross-examination, "he was the person responsible for beginning smoking and for continuing smoking." not "addiction was responsible," not "he had no choice in the matter." he was the only person -- the only person who could have made 4290 choices about his smoking was mr. hardin. he was in the driver's seat. he was the one in control. and dr. o'brien told you, "even if he was addicted, mr. hardin could exercise power over his addiction and quit smoking. and he could have done it and he had the ability to do it and prevent his disease." not he was unable. not he could not quit. he always had the power and the ability to quit and save himself. it was in his control from the plaintiff's expert, dr. o'brien. and then he told you, generally, there is no smoker who was addicted so severely that they are powerless over their smoking. and what does that mean for people in this country in general? you heard millions of people quitting at the same times mr. hardin is choosing to keep smoking. the '50s through the '80s, all of them, 95 percent of them quitting by putting their cigarettes down and stopping because they are concerned about the risks. 60 million total quit smoking, all the while mr. hardin kept smoking. 4291 dr. proctor broke the numbers down to you more specifically. all this time he is talking about a denialist campaign. well, these people did not get the message. people are quitting by the millions. and so why is mr. hardin different than the 60 million people who quit? were his cigarettes more addictive? dr. proctor told you, no. what, is his brain different? was he exposed to advertising differently than the people who quit? did he smoke for longer? did he start earlier? did he smoke more than these 60 million people that quit? no. no different than those people. what is the difference? did he want to smoke? did he not want to quit until 2005 when he quit for good? that is the difference. every expert, every person, including mr. hardin himself tells you, that is a quote from mr. hardin, he know -- he knows, "you have to want to quit" if you are going to quit. but he did not want to. we have looked at that evidence. mrs. hardin on the stand, there were times -- "were there times that you were insisting that he quit?" 4292 "no, i did not insist because, you know, god gives us all the opportunities to do what we want to do, and we have got to do something -- we have got to want to do something or we just ain't gonna do it." that is the plaintiff in the case telling you why her husband did not quit smoking. he did not want to. "you have got to want to do it," she told you on the witness stand. he did not want to. his doctor, dr. flurry, "mr. hardin always acknowledged he knew he needed to stop, but he would laugh at it. he would laugh it off." and then these quit attempts in '96, you got the full story on that from dr. giakas. he talked to you about quit gestures because they were prompted by mrs. hardin asking her husband to quit. she went out and bought the patches, when she told him, "you cannot smoke on the patches, mr. -- "thomas. you cannot smoke on the patches." his response was -- it was not, "i want to quit so i'm going to try patches." it was, "we are going to have to have these patches off right now." and that is consistent with him wanting to keep smoking, as he told you. "i did not want to quit smoking." that is the 4293 evidence. mrs. hardin said, "even these '96 attempts she does not know if mr. hardin was just trying to placate her by going through the motions." dr. messina, "at the same time he is described as making quit attempts, he needs to be much more motivated to stop." and dr. flurry, "it was obvious every time i saw him he was not going to quit smoking." and this is one of the most powerful admissions in this case, this is from the plaintiff's attorney taking this deposition, dr. flurry said he was -- mr. hardin was an extreme, and the plaintiff's attorney said, "well, when you say he was an extreme, do you mean he was extremely addicted? and the treating physician said, "he was extremely unwilling to quit smoking, not unable, not could not, extremely unwilling." and mr. hardin reminds you, "strictly up to me. i did not want to quit." his own words why he smoked, "my choice." not addiction, not confusion, "my choice." and so when you think about this question, you think about all this evidence, i would submit to you the only reasonable answer based 4294 on the evidence you have is to answer question number 1, no. now i recognize, i do not think you should get past that point, but i recognize you might, i have to do my job to talk to you about the next issue because we have to go through the verdict form. it is our job as attorneys to do that. so i want to talk to you briefly about question number 2. and you see on the verdict form: "did thomas hardin know or should he have known in the exercise of reasonable care prior to may 5th, 1990, that he had a -- that he had chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, emphysema, and that there was a reasonable possibility that that condition was caused by smoking?" that is the question before you on question number 2. well, the evidence on this is clear. and frankly, i was really surprised with what i heard mr. kaiser say. mr. kaiser: objection to counsel being surprised. the court: sustained. mr. bayuk: well, y'all take into account what you thought it meant when you heard 4295 argument this morning that the defense had not a single piece of evidence to establish this claim, that this was made up, it was invented and not a single witness put any symptoms of copd in the 1980s and not a single witness connected those symptoms in mr. hardin's mind to smoking. we are going to look at what that evidence is. and so you are going to think about why you heard the argument you did when you look at who the testimony came from in the case. but the bottom line is, before that date mr. hardin should have known that there was a reasonable possibility that he had a medical condition that was caused by smoking. that is what the -- that is what the evidence establishes. this is the question. i read it to you. this is the instruction on the issue, instruction number 15 in your packet. it tells you reynolds does not need to prove that mr. hardin was actually diagnosed with a disease or medical condition before that date in order to prevail on this defense. the critical date is not the diagnosis, because you have heard a lot of discussion about diagnosis in 1996. well, that is irrelevant for the purposes of this 4296 question. it is not diagnosis. it is when the disease or condition first comes about, when it first manifested itself. and the instruction tells you, in making that determination you may properly consider what mr. hardin knew prior to may 5th, 1990, concerning the health risks of smoking. you can consider his knowledge about the dangers of smoking when you are thinking about this issue. and so what is the evidence? well, the evidence is mr. hardin did have symptoms of copd/emphysema before may 5th of 1990. he received clear warnings about those exact conditions before that date. and he connected his symptoms to his smoking. comes from dr. o'brien. this came on cross-examination. mr. kaiser made not a single effort to follow up on this or try to refute it on redirect examination. dr. o'brien told you the severity of the copd in 1996, do you remember the treating doctors in the video said his copd was severe in 1996 based on the pfts, the pulmonary function tests. it was severe. dr. o'brien is a medical doctor. he told you the severity of that condition is something that 4297 could have been going on as early as ten years before, 1986. he also told you that mr. hardin described having symptoms going back a number of years before 1996. and specifically about the cough related to copd dating back to the 1980s at the same time that dr. o'brien told you mrs. hardin began warning her husband in the '80s. he said 1983. you heard argument this morning there was no discussion of mrs. hardin saying anything in the '80s. well, their own witness said it, their own expert who reviewed every material told you that, that mrs. hardin started warning him the same time he is having a cough in the '80s. the medical records, the first medical record you have says past medical history. and that is because dr. flurry said the condition was so severe he had to have the disease. i assumed he had it. "if it walks like a duck," as mr. kaiser said, he had the disease. and he wrote down unequivocally "past medical history." dr. messina's first record, "chronic cough and sputum production over a long period of time." you heard something about six months 4298 this morning. he only had a cough for six months. that is not what the evidence is. i'm going to show you dr. o'brien's testimony on that, the actual transcript of what he told you from the witness stand. but then you think about this issue: well, did mr. hardin know or should he have known? is there any doubt that he should have known the symptoms he was having being connected to smoking? he received warnings dating back to 1964 when he heard about the surgeon general's report telling him a relationship exists between cigarette smoking and emphysema. "i heard his report. like with the warnings, i did not pay much attention to but i heard it and this is what it said." and then in 1955, every single pack of cigarettes he picks up to smoke a cigarette (sic) tells him that smoking causes emphysema, it tells him about the disease that he has at that time. every time he goes to smoke, he is having these symptoms and the packs are telling him what he has. "i saw the sign on the cigarettes, but again i did not pay attention. i understood it. i did not pay attention or heed 4299 it." and here's the testimony from dr. o'brien. i do not know if mr. kaiser was in here when dr. o'brien said this, i asked him the question, "and you agree that mr. hardin certainly recognized the symptoms that he is having as being connected to smoking going back in time, right?" answer, "yes." the clerk: mr. bayuk, you have one minute remaining. mr. bayuk: thank you. question, "and so it is pretty clear that mr. hardin is having symptoms of copd back in the 1980s -- back in the 1980s, but he is not getting serious about quitting until later on?" "right." mr. hardin recognized the symptoms as being connected to smoking and the symptoms were of copd in the 1980s. plaintiff's expert, not the defense expert. plaintiff's expert, untouched on redirect, untouched by mrs. hardin or by any other witness. and so when you answer this question, this is the evidence that helps you. you know, argument heard -- defense cannot 4300 prove this. there is no evidence. well, this is what the evidence is. and so even if you can get past question 1, i submit to you based on that evidence that the answer to question 2 is unquestionably yes, mr. hardin did know or he should have known about his condition before may 5th of 1990. i'm going to sit down now. you guys have been so attentive for the last two weeks. i really thank you for your time. thank you very much. the court: ladies and gentleman, at this point in time, i do want to remind you, we are going to take a lunch break because we are going to continue on. we are still -- have not heard all of the closing arguments. and i've not given you the rest of the law that you must follow. having said that, i'm going to ask that you leave your notebooks here, close them up. and, again, you are strongly now reminded to adhere to the orders that i've been giving you for the last two, three weeks that we have been here. whatever you may have heard, your thoughts, impressions or ideas, you are not to discuss at 4301 this point. again, just as a remainder, when you commence your deliberation, which is at the end when the attorneys have finished with their closing arguments and when i've given you the last part of your instructions, then is when you can all get together and commence deliberation. but up until then, you are prohibited from commenting, sharing or discussing anything about the case. having said that, it is 10 after 2:00, according to that -- the clock here, but that is fast. it is 2:04, actually. i'll have you come back, then, at -- come back at 2:55. and just make sure you have eaten -- eaten enough but not so much that you fall asleep. and we will get ready to work, then. all right? thank you so much, and we will see you back then. mr. persons: yes, your honor. may it please the court, counsel, mrs. hardin, and ladies and gentleman of the jury. good afternoon. (jury says good afternoon.) mr. persons: hope you had a good lunch but not too good a lunch so you can stay awake. i want to add my voice to the court's, and thank you for your patience and your attention. we really do appreciate it. obviously the system will not work without you. i'm going to start where mr. bayuk left off, and that is with questions 3 and 4. and because those questions are so similar, i'm going to discuss them together. and those questions require reasonable reliance upon a statement 4309 that conceals or omits material facts. i'll tell you what that means. here's the question, question number 3 and number 4. number 3, "did thomas hardin reasonably rely to his detriment on any statement made by reynolds that concealed or omitted material facts not otherwise known or available concerning the health effects or addictive nature of cigarettes, and, if so, was such reliance a legal cause of his copd/emphysema and death?" that is number 3. number 4 is slightly different. number 4, "did thomas hardin reasonably rely to his detriment on any statement made in furtherance of an agreement entered into by reynolds to conceal or omit material facts not otherwise known or available concerning the health effects or addictive nature of cigarettes and, if so, was such reliance a legal cause of his copd/emphysema and death?" now, that contains a number of legal principles, and we are going to discuss them now. we will look at the jury instruction itself that you will have with you. 4310 you did give me the clicker. thank you, mr. smith. i'm looking to you to advance and i've got it right here. but here's the instruction, final instructions number 19 and number 20. and on number 19, on plaintiff's claim for fraudulent concealment against reynolds, can everybody see that? cannot. they cannot see that very well. is there any way we can -- no? technician smith: no. mr. persons: okay. let me -- i'll read it slowly. on plaintiff's claim for fraudulent concealment against reynolds, the issues for your determination are whether thomas hardin reasonably relied to his detriment on any statement made by reynolds. so, first of all, there has to be a statement upon which he reasonably relied. and that statement would have to be one that concealed or omitted material facts not otherwise known or available regarding health effects or the addictive nature of cigarettes. and if so, whether that reliance was a legal cause of his copd and his death. now, a material fact, this is very 4311 important, a material fact is of such importance that thomas hardin would not have acted as he did but for the concealment or omission of that fact. in other words, it is a game changer. it is something that would have caused him to change his behavior. and in this case we are talking about smoking. it would have to be something that would have caused him to quit smoking. and, first of all, there is no evidence of any reliance. in fact, the evidence is to the contrary. you can scour the record and i'm going to show you where experts did that. there is no evidence of any reliance whatsoever. in fact, mr. hardin testified, and you saw his testimony, that he never relied on any statement made by any tobacco company, r.j. reynolds or any other tobacco company in making his smoking decisions. either the decision to start smoking or to continue smoking and not to quit. did not rely on anything, any statement. now, argument can be made that there was advertising out there and there was a campaign of doubt. he never saw those things. you will remember from dr. proctor, the first things i 4312 asked dr. proctor, a series of questions when i began his cross-examination, elicited from him. "what information do you have about mr. hardin?" he had none. he had a lot of information about what was generally in the information environment, but he could not link it to mr. hardin because he had not studied anything about mr. hardin. in response to those questions he would always say, "well, i was not his biographer, i did not study anything specific to him." in other words, i'm a generic witness. a generic witness would apply to smokers in general. well, this case is not about smokers in general. this case is about mr. hardin. and mr. hardin is not a generic plaintiff. he is a plaintiff in his own right. this is his case, and so that is what we are focusing on. so there is no statement upon which he relied because he said there was -- he did not rely on any statement. and there is no evidence of any statement that he ever saw, read or heard that concealed information. so the answer to questions 3 and 4 should be no. but we are going to discuss why. in order to carry their burden of proof on this, these 4313 claims, the concealment and agreement to conceal claims, and i hope you could see that a little bit better? can everybody? okay. plaintiff failed to show that mr. hardin died because the dangers of smoking were unknown or available -- unavailable. you will recall we spent a lot of time with dr. proctor showing newspaper clippings for every place that mr. hardin lived, because mrs. hardin's testimony was that in each place they lived she subscribed to the daily newspaper. that is information that is available. whether you want to avail yourself of it or not, that is up to you, but it is available. it is available to you. and there was an abundance, an overabundance of information going back to the 1924 reader's digest that we showed you talking about the link between smoking and cancer. in fact, there was one edition, the title of it was "the growing horror of lung cancer." and then there were the stories by dr. alton ochsner of new orleans, prominent physician there, and there is -- now there is the ochsner award, that is the award for people who do the biggest research, the most advanced research on smoking 4314 and health. he lived in new orleans and wrote pieces for the times-picayune. and we showed you all of that time, time, and time again. that was to illustrate that the information was available about the dangers of smoking. now, let us break it down a little more personal. we can -- we brought you evidence of mr. hardin's own personal knowledge of the dangers and addictiveness of smoking. bottom line is you cannot conceal what is already known. if you know something, it cannot be hidden from you because you already know it. now, this might apply to some other smoker at some other time, some other place, but -- but it does not apply to mr. hardin. so there is no connection between any statement that concealed or omitted a material fact and mr. hardin's death, because a material fact would have changed the outcome, and there is no evidence of any concealment or omission of a material fact by reynolds or any other tobacco company. now, i know you cannot see this, but let me read part of it. "reasonable reliance on a statement that concealed or omitted material facts was a legal cause of thomas hardin's 4315 chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and death if it directly and in natural and continuous sequence produced or contributed substantially to producing such copd/emphysema and death so that it can reasonably be said that but for reasonable reliance on the concealment or omission of that fact, the copd/emphysema and death would not have occurred." and that is what i meant when i said a game changer. it would have to be something that had he heard it, he would not have contracted copd and died. it would have been something that would have prevented him from dying. in other words, it would have been something that would have caused him to quit smoking. and we know from the evidence that he had an abundance of personal warnings that he did not heed, and -- and he did not stop smoking. "this means that plaintiff must prove that but for mr. hardin's reasonable reliance on a statement by reynolds concealing or omitting material facts not otherwise known or available concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes, thomas hardin would have acted differently and, as a result, 4316 would have avoided his copd/emphysema and death. thomas hardin cannot be found to have reasonably relied to his detriment on a statement concealing material facts if he knew it was false or its falsity was obvious to him or if the facts allegedly concealed were otherwise known or available." and so there you have it. they do not meet that standard, they have not carried their burden. now, the evidence is that mr. hardin did not die because the dangers and addictiveness of smoking were unknown or unavailable to him. again, you cannot conceal what is already known. mr. hardin always knew he should not be smoking. now, his parents did not say do not smoke because of the health effects, but the schools were required to teach about the dangers of smoking. we covered that with dr. proctor. smoking was prohibited at his schools. mr. hardin's parents did not smoke. his parents did not allow the children to smoke. mr. hardin was spanked and scolded when his parents caught him smoking and he had to hide his smoking at home and at school. when he got a little older, the testimony was they would see 4317 him smoking, but that was after he got a little older. we know that he knew that cigarettes were bad for him, bad for his health and that they caused cancer. how do we know that? the term "cancer stick," dr. proctor says it really skyrocketed in the 1950s, the use of that term. mr. hardin himself was asked, "did you ever hear anybody refer to cigarettes as cancer sticks?" and his testimony was, "all the time, you hear everybody saying cancer sticks." plaintiff's expert, dr. charles o'brien the psychiatrist was asked, "in fact, when he heard" -- referring to mr. hardin -- "when he heard the term 'cancer stick,' he recognized the implication that cigarettes caused cancer?" answer, "yes." so he knew the connection between cigarette smoking and cancer. so he knew it was dangerous. here's mr. hardin, he was asked the question, "i'm just talking generally now. and you have heard of the reports that the united states surgeon general periodically issues?" answer, "i've heard his report, but i did not 4318 really pay much attention to it." question, "and what you heard was that the surgeon general had said that smoking could be hazardous to your health; is that right?" "uh, yeah." and that is the 1964 surgeon general's report that came out and said that smoking is hazardous to your health. smoking is linked between -- that the link between smoking and lung cancer in men. the evidence for women points the same way. it also said that there was a link between smoking and emphysema. so he is familiar with the 1964 surgeon general's report. did not pay much attention to it, but he was aware of it. and they want to talk about he is got dementia, but here he is giving a deposition in 2011. that is going pack to 1964. that is all -- over 40 years before, but he remembers it. and then, of course, there are the warnings that appeared on every pack of cigarettes that he smoked beginning in 1966, and his testimony was, he remembered the warning that said smoking may be hazardous to your health. that is the first warning that went on in 1966. he is familiar with it. 4319 "caution: smoking may be -- cigarette smoking may be hazardous to your health." and then in 1970 it says, "warning: the surgeon general has determined that cigarette smoking is dangerous to your health." and then they had the four rotating warnings beginning in 1985, including one that says: "smoking causes lung cancer, heart disease, emphysema, and may complicate pregnancy." mr. hardin's testimony was, "i saw the sign on the cigarettes, but i did not pay no attention. i did not heed by them." and so the information is there. it is available, and he is aware of it. question, "you saw warnings and you understood that smoking was dangerous, did not you?" answer, "right." now that is his testimony. that is the evidence in the case. that is not lawyer talk. that is not argument. that is evidence. mr. hardin always knew he should not be smoking. he heard cigarettes were called "cancer sticks" all the time. he heard the surgeon general's report linking smoking to 4320 emphysema. he saw and understood the 1966 pack warning. he was told in the 1970s that cigarettes were addictive. when thirl wilson, his best friend, one of his best friends according to him, told him smoking was dangerous, his response was "i knew it was addicting." so despite knowing the risks, he never tried to quit. and, of course, thirl wilson quit smoking when his brother, thirl wilson's brother, died of lung cancer. his brother was a heavy smoker and died of lung cancer. he quit smoking and he urged mr. hardin to quit as well, but mr. hardin did not. mr. hardin did not need any more information to make an informed choice about smoking or quitting. he knew enough to know he needed to quit, but he chose to continue to smoke. he testified that advertising never played a role in any of his smoking decisions. so despite all the stuff you saw this morning about advertising and how, "oh, he must have depended on the advertising to make these decision," well, that is not the evidence. the evidence is he testified the advertising never played a role in any of his smoking choices. and also, you 4321 know, from any of the ads, none of those ads say that smoking is healthy for you. no. they do not say that smoking is healthy for you. when he tried cigarettes for the first time after his brother sent them to the house, mr. hardin -- this is -- these are his own words, he did not know what a cigarette was, so he did not start smoking because of something that r.j. reynolds or some other tobacco company did. he started smoking because his older half brother who was stationed at fort jackson, south carolina, sent cigarettes home. he could alternate between lucky strikes and camels. and then him, he was the youngest in the bunch, mr. hardin and another group, a group of boys and one girl, his cousin mamie, they went out back and started smoking cigarettes. that is how he got started. i'm making this thing do stuff. how do you cut it off? smith? i'm about to mess up something. i -- thank you. technician smith: you are welcome. mr. persons: thank you, mr. smith. all right. thank you, sir. technician smith: you are welcome. 4322 mr. persons: that is how he got started. it was not because of some glamorization. it was not because of a movie star or a baseball player or some athlete, no. or a baseball card. no. he got access to the cigarettes and started smoking. i do not know why they showed you mr. heimann's deposition. it is a good question. so much of that deposition focused on pall mall cigarettes. well, mr. hardin did not rely on any pall mall advertisements. when he was smoking pall malls he was asked, "when you were smoking pall malls you told us you were smoking them because your cousin mamie was smoking them, right?" "right." question, "any other reason you were smoking the pall mall?" answer, "she could -- she could go buy them, and i could get them from her once she paid for them." question, "it was not anything the tobacco company said, was it?" answer, "not that i know of." question, "and you were not relying on any 4323 advertisement by any tobacco companies?" "oh, no." no, he was not. that is the evidence. that was the evidence that was played for four hours and something during the deposition that you saw. he did not rely on advertisements from switching to filters. the public health community was encouraging people to switch to filtered cigarettes if they were not going to quit smoking. number one, they were encouraging them to quit. but if you are not going to quit, they said, switch to filtered cigarettes. the surgeon general had that message. the public health and anti-tobacco group -- groups had that message. they were promoting filters. reader's digest promoted filtered cigarettes. the tobacco companies were not advertising filtered cigarettes as being safer. there is not one ad that said that filtered cigarettes are safer. you remember dr. proctor said they were not going to do that when it might suggest that the non-filtered cigarettes are unsafe. if mr. hardin thought unfiltered cigarettes were better for him, that information would have come 4324 from the public health community. he did not smoke winston cigarettes for two years in the 1950s based on the winston jingle. his testimony, "that would not have been it." so advertising did not influence his decision to smoke filtered cigarettes. mr. hardin did not smoke menthol cigarettes because of any advertising. he switched to menthol cigarettes because they tasted better and no other reason. no ad prompted him to switch. he switched to kools because they tasted better. he did not give any other reason for it. he was not relying on any ad at the time he made the switch. question, "and can you remember any ads for kools?" answer, "you know, i really do not. do not remember no ads for kool. i just know they taste better than the rest of them." that was his reason for switching. nothing about willie the penguin or anything else that caused him to make the switch, much less any statement from a tobacco company. now, dr. o'brien and dr. giakas, the two psychiatrists, they looked at all of the -- they 4325 read all the depositions. they read all the discovery in the case, the interrogatories. they read all the medical records. and they were asked this question: whether they saw anything that would lead them to believe that mr. hardin relied on anything that reynolds or anyone in the tobacco industry said. and after reviewing all of the case materials, here's what they said. dr. charles o'brien: "i do not know of anything that influenced mr. hardin with respect to advertising... i cannot say that he was influenced by anything." dr. giakas: question, "did you see any evidence in the entire record, thousands of pages of testimony, where mr. hardin ever relied on anything from the tobacco industry?" answer, "no." question, "to make any decisions about smoking?" answer, "it is not in there." it is simply not in evidence. there is -- simply is no evidence. it is just not there. you cannot make it up. it is not there. there is no evidence that he was influenced by anything 4326 that the tobacco companies said or did that caused him to make any decision about starting to smoke or continuing to smoke. he was not impacted by the frank statement. you saw a lot about that in opening statement when plaintiff's counsel, mr. kaiser, was going through the frank statement. well, mr. hardin never saw it, much less relied on it. he never saw it. "have you ever heard about what is sometimes called the frank statement?" he shook his head no. "basically it was a publication that came out, it was addressed 'a frank statement to cigarette smokers.' did you ever hear of that?" answer, "not as i can recall." question, "do you ever recall reading that statement?" "uh-huh." question, "ever recall anybody talking about that statement?" "do not ring a bell." so he did not see it. he did not read it. he did not even discuss it with anyone. so it has absolutely nothing to do with him. so how can 4327 there be a causal connection between him and the frank statement when it is something that he never saw, never read, and never discussed? he was not impacted by the waxman hearings. there was no evidence that mr. hardin was ever impacted by the waxman hearings, where the executives testified before congress that nicotine was not addictive and that smoking was not dangerous. in fact, the waxman hearings had just the opposite effect. caused more people to start quitting. that was dr. proctor's testimony. i asked him, "would not you agree, based on your review of the historical record, what probably happened as a result of the waxman hearings was that it increased people quitting smoking?" his answer, "oh, for sure, yeah. the period after '82 is when you really finally get the rate of smoking going down. it peaks in '82. people see things like the waxman hearings, and that accelerates that trend." question, "accelerates the quitting?" answer, "right." so it accelerated. it caused even more people to quit, not cause people to refrain from 4328 quitting. now, mr. hardin was not impacted by any concealment or agreement to conceal. we know that for a fact and here's additional proof of it. all of these internal documents, all of these internal company documents that dr. proctor likes to call "secret documents," well, they were made public in the 1990s. they became publicly available in the 1990s. the tobacco industry -- institute and the council for tobacco research, they were disbanded, they ceased to exist in 1998, so obviously they could not influence anything anymore. the tobacco companies publicly admitted their cigarettes were dangerous and could cause disease and that nicotine is addictive, they did that in 2000. but mr. hardin did not make a single effort to quit smoking until he decided for himself that he wanted to do so, and that was 2005. so if there was a material fact contained in any of that, i mean, if there was anything that contained a material fact in something that had not previously been disclosed, it certainly did not impact mr. hardin, because he did not even 4329 make an attempt to quit smoking when all of this became available. and that is what the jury instruction says, "known or available." so even after it was available, it did not change his behavior. also the jury instruction number 24 will tell you, "i hereby instruct you that plaintiff makes no claim for concealment or agreement to conceal information regarding smoking and health or addiction before december 1953 or after 2000." so that is the relevant time period that we are talking about in terms of these statements upon which plaintiff alleges mr. hardin relied. of course, the evidence is he never relied upon any statement by reynolds or any other tobacco company or anybody in the tobacco industry in making decisions about quitting smoking. so the answer to questions 3 and 4 are, no, he did not rely. he told you that. i want to talk to you now about comparative fault, because that is the next question on the verdict form is question number 5. and it says "please state the percentage of any fault that was a legal cause of thomas hardin's chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, copd/emphysema 4330 and death that you charge to thomas hardin, r.j. reynolds tobacco company." so we will talk about that now. now, it is important to remember that the assignment of fault relates only to actions that were a legal cause of mr. hardin's copd and death. in other words, things that but for that conduct, that -- those actions, he would not have contracted copd and died. reynolds cannot be assigned fault for actions that were not a legal cause of mr. hardin's copd and death. and this does not call for a comparison of whose choices were worse, whether one party made a worse choice than another. but the choice that is at issue here, or choices, were choices that would have, could have prevented mr. hardin from getting copd and dying as a result of that disease. those are the choices that matter. and the evidence shows that the only person who was in a position to make the choice to quit was mr. hardin. it was solely something that was in his control and nobody else's. and so the fault lies with him. and that is not to cast aspersions on him or be unduly critical of him. i mean, that was his 4331 right. he exercised his right. he had the freedom to go and purchase cigarettes and smoke as much as he wanted to. but he did so knowing that there were consequences, knowing that it could cause disease, knowing that it could kill him, and yet he made the choice to do so anyway. that is what the evidence is. here's the instruction. "your determination of reynolds' fault, if any, must be based solely on conduct by reynolds, if any, that plaintiff has proven was a legal cause of thomas hardin's copd/emphysema and death." and members of the jury, there simply is not anything. plaintiff has the burden to prove each and every percentage point of reynolds' fault. you do not start 50/50 and say, "oh, i'm going to work back." no. they have got to prove every degree of fault, how is it -- how is reynolds responsible. when they have already admitted that mr. hardin bears some measure of fault for causing his copd/emphysema and that his acts or omissions related to the frequency and duration of his efforts to quit smoking were a legal cause of his copd emphysema. i submit to you, they were the only cause. 4332 you do not blame somebody, you do not put responsibility on somebody for not trying hard enough or long enough to quit smoking if it is beyond their control. you simply do not. so the contention somehow that reynolds bears fault is belied by their own admission that mr. hardin bears fault, because if it is impossible to stop, then why do you fault him for not trying hard enough? if it is impossible to stop, then why do you fault him for not trying long enough? it simply defies logic. but logic dictates that mr. hardin bears sole responsibility for his smoking and continuing to smoke. even addiction does not mean that you cannot quit smoking. dr. charles o'brien, the plaintiff's expert said, "every smoker, even if he is addicted, has the choice to quit. every smoker is fully responsible for making the decision to quit. only the individual smoker can stop smoking. no one can do it for him." that is something that both of the experts, both of these psychiatrists would agree with. the clerk: mr. persons, you have 30 minutes remaining. mr. persons: thank you, ma'am. 4333 dr. charles o'brien, "he was the person responsible for beginning smoking and for continuing smoking?" "yes. it was -- even as an addiction, you cannot say that anyone else is responsible for it." even as an addiction, that is the evidence in the case. you cannot say it is somebody else's responsibility. that is another word for fault. that is their own expert is saying that. that is the evidence in the case. even as an addiction, you cannot say that anyone else is responsible for it. beginning smoking and for continuing smoking. question, "so the specific question is only mr. hardin was responsible for his smoking behavior?" "yes, i agree with that." in case you did not get it the first time, well, you might be kind of -- did not -- did not catch it. okay. i'm going to tell you again, "yes, i agree with that." "mr. hardin is the only person who could have made choices about his smoking?" "yes. not r.j. reynolds, not some other 4334 entity, not someone else." question, "regardless of the fact that you think he was addicted, he had the power and the ability to quit smoking and avoid his copd? "yes." and that is what we are talking about, the power with responsibility for quitting and avoiding copd, avoiding death, rested solely with mr. hardin. "dr. flurry, was there at any time, to your observation, mr. hardin did not understand the consequences of copd?" answer, "i think he understood the consequences, yes, sir. he knew what he was doing." here's dr. frank messina, the lung doctor. "it is true also, doctor, that stopping smoking may, in fact, stop the progression of the disease, correct? "yes." question, "and it is also true that stopping smoking may, in fact, help, in other words, improve -- the respiratory function, correct?" he says, "right. absolutely. yeah. some people jump up, get better." 4335 he did not mean you get well, because it is a chronic condition that does not heal, does not go away. but the symptoms can improve once you stop smoking. that was the point he was making. your quality of life can improve once you stop smoking. but mr. hardin did not stop. he continued to smoke. and that continued smoking during that time, no doubt, continued the progress of his copd or worsened the progress of his copd. and dr. robert flurry said, "yes, it did. yes, it did." so the suffering that they are talking about, it is a slow, painful existence, debilitating condition that required hospice care at the end was exacerbated, was made worse by smoking. dr. robert flurry. had mr. hardin quit smoking in 1996, he would not have continued to go to the hospital for exacerbation of copd and would not have been in hospice in 2011. had mr. hardin quit smoking in 1996 his copd would have progressed slower. quitting smoking could have prolonged mr. hardin's life and it might have given him those 12 years that plaintiff's counsel wants you to compensate him for. but 4336 we will never know, because he did not quit. what we do know is that by, according to the medical testimony, quitting smoking, could have prolonged his life. we do know that. we do know that. but he did not quit. "if he would stopped smoking, i would have expected things to have gotten better for him, yes. i would have expected things to have gotten better for him, yes, but he did not." but he took responsibility for it, because he was asked -- or he testified, "the only thing i could think of is that i did not quit smoking then instead of waiting, because it is strictly up to me whether i quit or not." question, "it was your decision to smoke or stop?" "right." so when you get to assign the fault, i submit to you that it is one hundred percent on mr. hardin and zero percent on reynolds because the only person who had the responsibility, and this is according to dr. o'brien, to stop smoking -- he could have stopped smoking -- was mr. hardin, was mr. hardin. and that would have prevented him from getting copd and he would not 4337 have died of copd had he done so. that is the evidence in the case. now, damages. i want to talk about damages, not because they are warranted. they are not. we just told you why he is not addicted, that addiction did not cause his copd. it was the failure to quit smoking. that should be the end of the inquiry. i told you also that he knew or should have known that there was a possibility -- not probability, a possibility that he had a smoking-related condition prior to may 5th, 1990. that should end the inquiry. and i just showed you evidence that demonstrated unequivocally that he did not rely on anything. so the answer on those questions 3 and 4 were "no." so damages are not warranted. but i have to talk about them. i have to talk about them because if i do not, somebody will get up and say, "well, he did not even talk about damages, which means that they probably do not challenge our claim for damages or our calculation." but they are not warranted. they are not warranted. and one of the things i remember we asked during voir dire was if the evidence and law 4338 supported a verdict in favor of r.j. reynolds tobacco company, would you be able to render it? and there was not a single hand of anybody that said, no, that they could not do it, and that can be a very unpleasant thing. because we mentioned it in voir dire, it would mean that the plaintiff recovers nothing. but if the law does not support it, and lord knows the evidence is not there, then it points in one direction. and that is in the direction of a verdict in favor of r.j. reynolds. and what that means is the plaintiff does not recover anything. you can come to court in this country and you can ask for anything, but it does not mean that it should be awarded unless there is evidence to support. and there is no evidence to support it. now, the plaintiff has the burden to prove each and every dollar of damages, which is coming in and making calculations and pulling some numbers out and assigning values to time. that is one thing but that is not proof to entitlement to damages. because you have to prove liability. you have to prove responsibility before you can award damages 4339 against somebody. in reaching your verdict, do not let bias, sympathy, prejudice, public opinion or any other sentiment for or against any party influence your decision. your verdict must be based on the evidence that has been received and the law on which i have instructed you. those are instructions from the court. that is the law that you must follow. and you have to set sympathy aside. it is a natural human tendency -- it is a natural human tendency when you see somebody suffering to feel sorry. it is a natural human tendency when somebody has suffered the loss of a loved one, much less a spouse of 51 years, to feel some sympathy, but that cannot drive your decision. it has to be driven by the evidence and the law. and, ladies and gentleman, the law points in one direction, and that is a verdict in favor of r.j. reynolds, which means no damages. now, the plaintiff's claim for 12- to 20 million defies all common sense, especially when at an average time a family of four makes $50,000 a year. just as an example, just do the 4340 math. to earn $20 million, for the average person who is a family of four, 50,000. mr. kaiser: object to that statement. that is outside the evidence. the court: okay. this is argument, counsel. go ahead. mr. persons: 400 years, that is how long it would take. 400 years ago was 1615, back to the jamestown colony. that is how long it would take somebody to make $20 million. but you can get up and you can ask for anything. you can throw out all kinds of numbers. one thing we do know is the plaintiff is not seeking economic damages, not seeking medical expenses. we are not talking about funeral expenses. we are not talking about mr. hardin's pain and suffering. what we are talking about is mrs. hardin's pain and suffering and loss of companionship. well, why did she have to endure the suffering of watching him suffer? and why is she without him? why does she not have the companionship? well, it is because he chose to smoke, and he 4341 enjoyed it. it is because he chose to continue smoking for decades -- not decade, not two, but several decades -- despite knowing the risk. some 50 years he chose to smoke knowing the risks. warning on every pack of the cigarettes. warnings all in the media about the dangers of smoking. warnings from his doctors, "sir, you need to stop smoking," and the response is to laugh. warnings from friends, and the response is to laugh about it. but you want compensation. always had the ability to quit but did not want to quit; by his own admission, he did not want to. so why should he be -- someone be compensated for that? he quit the first time he wanted to quit without any difficulty, and the reason he wanted to quit then was because the doctor told him -- and he testified. you saw his testimony on this screen right here. he said, they told me i would not be here if i did not quit. if i wanted to stay here. if i wanted to stay on this earth, i've got to quit smoking. well, they had been telling him that message for years. since that first visit back in 1996, 4342 it took almost ten years about them preaching to him about quitting before he quit. and during those ten years, he did other things to aggravate his own suffering. had inhalers and did not use them; that is what the medical records said. nothing in the medical records said he could not afford the inhalers. said he had the inhalers and he did not use them. had the medication and did not take it. the first time anyone heard anything about not being able to afford something was not in any of these records or depositions or the medical records or anywhere else. it was on the witness stand, the first time. "but yet you had money to go and play lotto and play instant millionaire and go to reno, but you did not take your medicine, but now you want to recover for pain and suffering?" never relied on the tobacco industry to make any decisions about smoking; but yet the tobacco industry, r.j. reynolds in particular, should compensate for what you did to yourself? not only is that contrary to the law and the evidence in the case, it is simply unfair. 4343 "please state whether you find by clear and convincing evidence" -- well, let us do this right quick. damages, zero dollars. let us talk about punitive damages. "please state whether you find by clear and convincing evidence that punitive damages are warranted against reynolds under the circumstances of this case?" no. no, they are not. it is a different burden of proof when you get to the punitive damages. the burden of proof on all the other issues in the case -- or the burden of proof is the greater weight of the evidence. when you get to punitive damages, the plaintiff must prove punitive entitlement by clear and convincing evidence. and the instructions will tell you what that is, but it is a much, much, much higher burden. it is not beyond reasonable doubt, but it is up there. the instruction says, "clear and convincing evidence differs from the greater weight of the evidence in that it is more compelling and persuasive. as i have already instructed you, 4344 greater weight of the evidence means the more persuasive and convincing force and effect of the entire evidence in the case. "in contrast, clear and convincing evidence is evidence that is precise, explicit, lacking in confusion, and of such weight that it produces a firm belief or conviction without hesitation about the matter in issue." so if you have got any hesitation whatsoever about whether punitive damages are warranted, then the burden has not been met. they have not met their burden. and the engle findings are of no help to mr. hardin or mrs. hardin on this issue because the engle findings do not establish that mr. -- mrs. hardin is entitled to punitive damages. and, of course, punitive damages are over and above the compensatory damages. they are in addition to the damages to compensate for the loss. so this is something over and above that. "the engle findings may not be considered in any way when determining whether punitive damages may be warranted." cannot even be considered in any fashion. "in determining whether punitive damages may 4345 be warranted, you should also take into consideration any mitigating evidence, and mitigating evidence is evidence that may demonstrate that there is no need to impose punitive damages." and i submit you there is no need to impose punitive damages. number one, they have not carried the burden; but, number two, there is no need to impose punitive damages. they harp on the filters and talking about filters. well, that is not a reason to punish reynolds, because the reynolds scientists, according to dr. proctor, who is looked at all of these documents, internal company documents, the reynolds' scientists genuinely believed filters were safer back in the '50s, when mr. hardin switched to winston and marlboro. they really believed it, and that is in the internal company documents. they did not advertise them as being safer, but the scientists felt that they were safer. we know that the council for tobacco research, ctr, funded $350 million of research. they funded over -- funded projects that resulted in 7,000 scientific publications. the 4346 surgeon general cited those studies more than 600 times. if they did not have anything to do with smoking, then the surgeon general was way off base because the surgeon general cited this research 600 times. it was funded in universities nationwide. and at least ten of the research scientists were nobel prize winners. the relationship between -- the research results established a relationship between cigarette smoking and copd. some of the research showed the effects of cigarette smoking on the impairment of lung function among heavy smokers, the effects of inhalation of cigarette smoking and the risk of lung injury, and the declining lung function. even after these scientists came out with these studies that were contrary to the positions the tobacco companies were taking, ctr continued to fund that research. here's one study in particular that came out in 1963 that talked about the addictive aspects -- aspects in heavy cigarette smoking. "summary and conclusions: heavy cigarette 4347 smokers thus appear to be true addicts showing not only social habituation but mild physiologic withdrawal effects." and this research was funded in part by grants from the tobacco for research. and this is at a time when the industry was saying that it was -- it was habit-forming, it was not addicting. but here's a scientist, research scientist funded by the ctfr, coming to the conclusion, yet the funding was not cut off. since 1986 reynolds has disclosed to congress the ingredients and additives in its cigarettes. since 2009, they have disclosed to the fda the formulas for all the cigarette products and all the research done on ingredients and additives. and since 2009, the fda has had authority to regulate the levels of tar -- bless you -- nicotine and other harmful components. in fact, the fda has the ability to tell reynolds to take out ingredients in its cigarettes and ban additives. they have not done so. reynolds has also done research trying to make a less hazardous cigarette. they have been 4348 doing that for more than 50 years. from the '50s to the '90s, they made efforts to remove known carcinogens from smoke. they spent over a billion dollars in the '80s trying to develop a less harmful cigarette, one that heated the tobacco instead of burning it. and they continue today trying to develop a less harmful cigarette, and it is called the reefo. they have developed products that are less dangerous and products to help people quit smoking. the vuse e-cigarette is much safer than a combustible cigarette because it does not burn tobacco. and a large number of smokers use vuse to quit smoking. and reynolds is in favor of fda regulation of e-cigarettes. zonnic is a nicotine replacement product, and it is less expensive than nicorette. it is fda-approved, and it is sold right alongside the cigarettes in the hopes that someone purchasing a pack of cigarettes will have second thoughts and try zonnic to try to quit smoking. the evidence demonstrates there is no need to impose punitive damages. in determining whether punitive damages are 4349 warranted -- this is the final instruction, number 36 -- you may not seek to punish reynolds for any harm suffered by any individuals other than thomas v. reynolds. the clerk: mr. persons, you have ten minutes remaining. mr. persons: ten? thank you, ma'am. if you decide the punitive damages may be warranted, there will be a second trial, second part of this trial where there will be -- the parties can present additional evidence, additional argument, witnesses, and so forth, and the judge will give you additional instructions for that phase. but i will submit to you there will be no need for that phase, because if you check "no" to questions 3 and 4, then there will never be even the need to consider punitive damages. and i submit to you that that is the proper thing to do, because the evidence supports answering those questions no. so on this one, number 7, not warranted -- oh, thank you. mr. bayuk: sure, sure. mr. persons: at the outset of the case, 4350 mr. bayuk came before you and told you, i think he told you again at the outset of his remarks earlier this afternoon, that these were the four things you really needed to know in order to answer every question on that verdict form. all seven questions to be answered with this information. number 1, "mr. hardin did not start or continue to smoke because of anything the tobacco company industry said or did." number 2, "despite knowing the risks of smoking, mr. hardin chose to keep smoking for decades without ever trying to quit because he enjoyed it." number 3, "once mr. hardin was motivated to quit, he quit the first time he tried without difficulty." number 4, "mr. hardin admitted that he could have quit smoking sooner and prevented his copd/emphysema and death." "plaintiff's case is legally barred because mr. hardin knew or should have known he had a medical condition that he related to smoking before may 5th, 1990." that is all you need to know to answer all 4351 those questions on the verdict form, all seven of them. that is all. you do not really need to know anything else. and mrs. hardin put it best when she said "i've always been taught that we have got our own mind. we do what we want to do. i do not care what you say to somebody (sic), you know, they are not going to pay attention unless they want to." but yet they want you to think that r.j. reynolds -- mr. hardin would have paid attention to r.j. reynolds. but, ms. hardin, she knew him as well, if not better than anybody else. and she said, "unless somebody wants to do something, i do not care what you say to him. they are not going to change." and that is in line with what dr. cuyler hammond said back in 1954 in the cuyler hammond research he did working for the american cancer society." (video clip was played and taken down to the best of the reporter's ability as follows:) dr. hammond: it is now established in my opinion beyond a reasonable doubt that cigarette 4352 smoking greatly increases the probability of developing lung cancer. in my opinion, people should be warned of the dangers and they are being warned. what they then want to do, whether they wish to smoke or not, is their own business." (video clip concluded.) mr. persons: and, of course, in 1964, some ten years later, when the surgeon general's report came out, the same surgeon general's report that mr. hardin testified that he was familiar with, this was what harry reasoner had to say: (video clip was played and taken down to the best of the reporter's ability as follows:) mr. reasoner: in this kind of a country it comes down to you, whether you like it or not. no one is going to forbid an adult to smoke, and it is now quite clear that no one is going to tell him it is good for him either. the decision is his, the decision and the health that may depend on it. this is harry reasoner. good night. (video clip concluded.) mr. persons: and it was his decision. he 4353 will be the first one to acknowledge that. we do not have to guess about it. we do not have to speculate about it. we know what he said about it. he said, "it is strictly up to me whether i quit or not." it was your decision to smoke or to stop, right? and he said, "right." it was his decision. it was his decision. and it was his decision not to quit and to continue in that activity knowing full well there could be harmful consequences including death by continuing to engage in that activity. but he chose to continue to do it. and it is not anybody's right to tell him to do otherwise. tell him to do otherwise. it was his decision. but he bore the consequences of that decision and that is called personal responsibility. he recognized it. he appreciated it. he embraced it. he articulated it. he said, "it is up to me." his choice, his responsibility. i submit to you, based on all the evidence that you have seen in this case over the past 4354 two-and-a-half weeks, the evidence points in one direction, and that is a verdict in favor of r.j. reynolds tobacco company, because not only did the plaintiff not carry their burden, the evidence adduced during the course of this trial overwhelmingly points in favor of a defense verdict. the evidence is overwhelming that he was not addicted, did not meet the medical definition. the evidence is overwhelming that addiction did not cause him to die of copd. the evidence is overwhelming that he knew or should have known that there was a reasonable possibility that he suffered from a smoking-related illness prior to may 5th, 1990. the evidence is overwhelming that he did not rely on anything, any statement from r.j. reynolds omitting or concealing any material fact about the dangers or addictiveness of smoking. the evidence is overwhelming that he is -- plaintiff is not entitled to any damages. the evidence is overwhelming that one hundred percent of the fault is on mr. hardin, who chose to smoke and was the only person who had the power to quit 4355 and thereby avoid contracting copd, the illness that killed him. and the evidence is overwhelming that punitive damages are certainly not warranted in this case. i thank you for your attention, especially coming right after lunch. i do. the case is now with you. we will not get a chance to come before you again and say a word because we do not have the burden. but even though we do not have the burden i think we have demonstrated, we have demonstrated clearly and convincingly that the plaintiff is entitled to take nothing. again, i thank you for your kind attention.