mr. kaiser: thank you. may it please the court and the counsel. ladies and gentleman of the jury, good 4191 morning. the jury: good morning. mr. kaiser: i want to first thank you for your sacrifice and commitment in joining us for the last several weeks here. we could not do this without you. you have taken a lot of time out of your lives. and we do appreciate that. what i want to do, just like i told you in opening statements how i was going to proceed, i'm going to tell you the same way i'm going to proceed in my closing argument. and that is, i'm going to track the verdict form and, based on the evidence, hopefully answer the questions for you to help you in your deliberations. so we will begin with question number 1 on the verdict form, which is, "was thomas hardin addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine? and if so, was such addiction a legal cause of his chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, emphysema, and death?" can everyone see that? so regarding addiction, you recall that you heard from dr. o'brien who was a psychiatrist and had been studying in research and addiction for about 40 or 50 years and teaching for 50 4192 years. and remember dr. o'brien referred to addiction as a disease of the brain? and he said nicotine addiction is a disease of the brain; nicotine addiction is a mental disorder and is included in the book of mental disorders called the diagnostic and statistical manual, the dsm-5, along with the 40 or 50 other mental disorders in the dsm-5. and the mental disorder caused by nicotine is called tobacco use disorder. and you heard about the criteria, and the criteria was written by dr. o'brien. and remember dr. o'brien discussing the various components of this brain disease and remember him telling you about nicotine addiction being a learned behavior and causing a memory. and he talked about this idea that if you smoke a cigarette, each puff is a discrete puff and a dosage of nicotine, and you get this immediate peak and effect in the brain from nicotine because the nicotine gets to the brain faster than any other way when you inhale a cigarette. and he talked about these peaks, and then 4193 the nicotine starts to reduce. and then the next puff has the same peak. and with each of those puffs -- remember, he talked about this memory and this learned behavior so that if a person like mr. hardin who smoked a pack and a half or two packs a day, we are talking 400 doses of nicotine in one day, which he characterized as a lot of memory, a lot of learned behavior. and remember he also talked about the fact that the addict does not do any work. the addict does not do any work in order to activate the pleasure system in his or her brain. remember, he testified about that. and he said, "that is what causes addiction." and so what i'm going to do with you is briefly go over some of his testimony about the effect that nicotine has on the brain before we get to the criteria. and one of the things that dr. o'brien said, he said, "addiction is a change in the brain. it is a memory. and the younger you are when you learn this behavior, the harder it is to change it." and we know that thomas hardin started smoking when he was nine or ten years old. he talked in terms of the thing that causes 4194 learning to occur very strong and very fast is when the reward system is activated. but there are drugs that, by coincidence, happen to go straight to the reward system, and that makes them abused. and he told you, drugs of abuse like nicotine and other controlled substances go right to the reward system and activate the reward system when they hit the brain. the reward from smoking is with each puff, like he said. so there are about ten puffs per cigarette and there -- so there are about 20 in a pack. so you get about 200 rewards. that is what dr. o'brien said. remember, he also discussed this idea of cues: the smell, the feel of the package, things that stimulate and start cravings to cause you to have another cigarette. there are cues associated with everything. so for smoking, it would be, you know, a pack of cigarettes, the smell of cigarettes, seeing someone smoke, you know, seeing people smoking in movies especially. but, yes, so these are the cues, and these teach your body to expect the reward, and it 4195 produces a craving so that every time someone sees or is exposed to a cue, the response after it activates the reward system is to smoke. and remember dr. o'brien testifying about "people are exposed to cues at such a fast time that they do not even know it and they start smoking." what happens when someone becomes aware through therapy of the cues that trigger the smoking and the craving? and his answer was, "well, first of all, they could fight it better." so that is why it is important to allow the smoker to know why or what the cues are to identify those cues. and then dr. o'brien talked about this idea of control. and he said, "addiction does affect your free will. addiction affects the probability of your being able to make a decision and, you know, there is -- there is not -- things are not naturally black and white." remember he said that? it is not normally -- you cannot -- you cannot answer a question, a black and white question when there is a gray area. and he talked about this idea, this probability, and he said, "addiction 4196 is a learned behavior that is very hard to unlearn." so that in a case of someone like thomas hardin who smoked every day of his life for 50 years, that is a lot of learned behavior, that is a lot of memories, and it is a lot of learned behavior to unlearn. and so if we apply the facts to the criteria as dr. o'brien did, what he told you from the facts and you heard is that thomas hardin would smoke the first thing he did when he woke up -- when he woke up in the morning. remember, he said, "before my foot hit the floor"? so what does that mean per the criteria? he smoked because, during the night, you heard, your nicotine levels are at their lowest level because you have not smoked in hours and what happens then is you get this feeling, you get this urge and you smoke. that is craving. now, remember dr. o'brien said, "i cannot rule out craving, but i did not get a chance to talk to thomas hardin." but you know exactly what the criteria says about craving, a strong urge to smoke, and you heard the evidence. you can apply the facts of that criteria and find indeed that there was craving with this strong 4197 urge to smoke. you heard that thomas hardin smoked the same amount of cigarettes, the consistent amount of cigarettes throughout the day and every day of his life. so what does that mean? it means, number one, that he is smoking more than he intended. remember, that is a criteria. and dr. o'brien explained that. when you first start smoking your very first cigarette, you do not intend to be smoking years later one or two packs a day. no one intends that. and that is how he reads and that is how he explains the criteria that he wrote, simply that by the time you are now smoking 15 years, 20 years, 30 years, you are smoking more than you intended after you had that first cigarette. the fact that thomas hardin smoked a consistent amount of cigarettes every day, what else does that tell you? that tells you that he meets another criteria, which is tolerance. and remember the way dr. o'brien explained tolerance. thomas hardin could not have smoked two packs of cigarettes the first day he tried them or he would have gotten sick because nicotine is a drug, it is a poison. he had to 4198 work up to a level, a consistent level that satisfied him, which he did. in this case, it was a pack and a half or two packs a day. that is what is meant by tolerance. now, dr. giakas, the defense expert, he wants to write more in the criteria. he wants to tell you that you need to smoke up to infinity to have tolerance because that is what the criteria says. and he simply added that component of the criteria so that he could just be more subjective and in that way no one would be tolerant. remember, that is exactly what he said. "you have to keep smoking more and more and more because you are used to the levels." under his position you would have to smoke forever consistently raising your level, which is not what dr. o'brien said he had in mind when he wrote the criteria. now, you heard that there were times mr. hardin would go to church, and he could not sit through a whole service. some people said he could. we do not know when, but he would have to go and smoke. on those occasions when he would be able to sit through, you heard the testimony, he could not wait to get to the car, 4199 he had to smoke right outside the church, which means, what? he had a strong urge or a compelling need to smoke a cigarette or else why could not he have waited to get to the car. that is another example, a craving, a strong urge to smoke. and you could bet that while he was sitting in that church he was not thinking about anything other than cigarettes because what compelled him to have to smoke when he got out. mr. bayuk: your honor, object to this. these facts are not in evidence. there is no evidence of this. the court: okay. okay. no speaking objections. ladies and gentleman, you are the judges of the facts. you know the evidence that you heard. remember what the lawyers say is not -- is not the evidence or law. this is just guiding you. okay? thank you. go ahead. mr. kaiser: and you heard the evidence when mrs. hardin would tell him, "look, cannot we at least walk to the car before you smoke?" and he would have a cigarette right when he walked out of that church service. 4200 now, you also heard testimony that he would go to movies, not very often, and if there was an intermission he would smoke and his wife said he would get up invariably and walk outside to smoke, another instance that he could not sit through a movie without having to excuse himself and smoking, an example of an urge, a strong urge to smoke which satisfies craving. what else do we know about the smoking habits of mr. hardin? mr. hardin would smoke in bed at night, not once but several, many times. and what does that mean? the criteria there says "smoking in dangerous conditions," like smoking in bed. now, there is no added language in that criteria that says you have to burn yourself three times; you have to burn your house down; you have to die in a house fire. that is what dr. giakas wants to add so that he could be subjective and not find anyone that meets this criteria. the criteria as written that you saw said "smoking when it is dangerous," and that is how dr. o'brien wrote the criteria. smoking in bed is an example of being dangerous. now, the defense wants to portray thomas 4201 hardin as being this risk-taker, as engaging in these risky behaviors, but when it comes time to smoke in bed, which is a dangerous condition, he is smoking responsibly. remember dr. giakas said that? "he smoked responsibly," so when it came to that, he was a responsible smoker. well, that is hogwash. he met the criteria by virtue of him smoking not once but several times in bed. you also heard that there were many occasions when mr. hardin would get up during the night in order to smoke and get milk. now why on earth would he have to get up and smoke? again, you heard dr. o'brien testify this whole idea about the nicotine levels lower when you are not smoking and it disrupts your sleep, and here we have mr. hardin on numerous occasions getting up at nighttime in order to smoke. another example, we have evidence of mr. hardin trying unsuccessfully to quit smoking cigarettes. and there is criteria for that. and the criteria is "unsuccessful efforts to cut down or control smoking." you did not hear anything about unsuccessful efforts to quit. you did not hear anything about a legitimate or 4202 serious quit attempt. that is not in the criteria. the criteria is solely "unsuccessful efforts to cut down or control smoking," which mr. hardin did, but he was unsuccessful. again, he met the criteria. he tried. he used the patch. it was the addiction that was compelling him to smoke that made it difficult for him to even quit. and remember, each time he started again, were there any symptoms he was experiencing? you heard from thomas hardin, "did your wife know that you had quit when you were on the road?" and he said, "she heard it in my voice," so obviously he was feeling something. do you remember what else he said? at some point he said, "my wife knew how ill i was." and he explained that, "you know, when you are getting on someone's nerves because you want a cigarette and you need one." that is what he meant by i was -- you know, "my wife knew how ill i was." so these are feelings that the man is experiencing. and you have seen the protocol, the criteria for withdrawal. now, dr. o'brien said, "i cannot credit withdrawal, but i cannot discount it. i simply 4203 did not get a chance to talk to him." but when you add these up, there are so many criteria out of the 11 that mr. hardin has met, that he was obviously not just suffering from tobacco use disorder, but he was seriously addicted. and what is his impairment? remember there has to be this clinically significant impairment, and dr. o'brien told you what this impairment was. the man had copd from smoking cigarettes. it basically made him sedentary and nonfunctional. that is the impairment. the man smoked when he had copd knowing it was going to kill him. that also meets the criteria. he was told in no uncertain terms, "you need to stop so at least the symptoms can get better. the disease will not. you cannot cure it, but you need to stop." and he could not stop. he could not stop. the man kept smoking while he had a disease that was caused by smoking. that is another criteria. so you have got the impairment. you have got numerous criteria met, certainly more than six, so by clear and convincing evidence the man was addicted. now, remember dr. o'brien was asked some 4204 questions on direct examination. was there anything other than mr. hardin's addiction that you felt was driving his continued smoking? and his response was, "no. i mean, i think that is the -- that is the overriding, you know, the main thing." what about mr. hardin's personality, what did you find out about that? and what does dr. o'brien say? "now, as a clinician we have to take that into account when we treat them, because knowing their personality helps us decide what is going to work for them." question, "how did this risk-taking behavior impact your opinion in this case?" and his answer was, "well, i just thought that was pretty much a nonissue." he was definitely addicted. whether or not he was a risk-taker is not an important issue according to dr. o'brien. "now, dr. o'brien in assessing whether one is addicted to nicotine do you need to first consider one's cognitive abilities? "not really. "in assessing one's addiction to nicotine in cigarettes do you need to assess one's 4205 motivation? "you know, again, we, you know, the issue that i always approach is treatment." so you might ask, why, then was the defendant's presentation with their expert almost exclusively devoted to motivation, cognition, quitting behavior and personality when it has nothing to do with the criteria right here in the book? you will not find any criteria to assess addiction based on personality, based on motivation, based on cognition, nothing. the reason that dr. giakas spent almost his entire presentation talking about that was simple. he wanted to judge thomas hardin. that is why they put him on the stand, to tell you thomas hardin was at fault. thomas hardin made a choice. thomas hardin made a personal decision to smoke. that is what dr. giakas wanted to tell you, because the man is so obviously addicted if you apply the criteria. remember, this is the gold standard according to the defendant's expert. this is the book he uses to assess addiction. in no uncertain terms, you do not need to consider any 4206 of these personality traits, cognition, motivation to assess addiction. all he was trying to do was to try to tell you that i'm judging thomas hardin. so as an expert he wanted to come in here and judge thomas hardin to say, "well, he must have been at fault." and i'm going to show you how he is wrong. now, when you look at thomas hardin, you look at his smoking history, you see a man who smoked basically every day of his life for 50 years without a day off, without a day off. do you really think that is a person who just liked smoking? now, there is no question when he was a boy, when he was a kid and he just started to smoke and felt cool with the others fellas, sure, he might have liked it, we told you he probably did like it, but do you think when he was smoking every single day without a day off there might have been more to it than just enjoyment or bonding with buddies or liking the feel of the cigarette in his hand? after all, we are dealing with a poisonous chemical called nicotine. remember every puff he took, he got a dose of nicotine. so perhaps there is a lot more than enjoyment or bonding with buddies when he 4207 smoked a cigarette every day of his life, 40 of them every day of his life without a day off. we are talking a lot more than a habit, folks. we are talking addiction. so i submit to you that we have proven by a greater weight of the evidence that thomas hardin was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine. the next item, then, is what about his illness? and you have heard about thomas hardin being diagnosed with copd on august 2nd of 1996. we have got a medical record. dr. flurry testified via deposition. and what you can see from this medical record on the first day that he sees dr. flurry as a new patient, there was some writing that dr. flurry said he wrote. and what he said he wrote. and among other things was that mr. hardin had a sister and three brothers who were healthy. and this is important because you heard some testimony that mr. hardin was aware of the risk of smoking because he had some brothers that had developed lung cancer or copd. at least in 1996, we know they are healthy, so that came sometime later. we also know that what predicated mr. hardin going to see the doctor was because he had a 4208 cough, a cough for six months. not a cough that put him into the '80s. six months in 1996 caused him to go see the doctor. this is on august 2nd of 1996. and we see the patient note from the doctor, their main complaint is of six months of persistent cough, worse in the morning. now, past medical history, it says "copd." and remember, during dr. flurry's deposition, he noted that and said, "look, this is the first time i saw him. when it walks like a duck and quacks like a duck, and i assume he probably had it before." but he said, "there is no basis for me to know that he was diagnosed before the copd." if he had been diagnosed with copd, folks, do you think he would be coming in to see dr. hardin to find out what is wrong with him and get diagnosed with copd for a second time (sic)? that would not happen. and so we know from his social history, he smokes two packs a day and denies alcohol. he is married. his assessment when he saw him on august 2nd, 1996, he has copd -- copd. this is long before he filed a lawsuit in 4209 this case where he said he was smoking two packs a day, denying alcohol. and the assessment here is copd. and just to make certain, what did dr. flurry do? dr. flurry referred him to a lung specialist, dr. messina. we heard from dr. messina as well. dr. messina was from pensacola lung group, and dr. messina wrote a note to dr. flurry about his examination of thomas hardin. and we note that he is never had any unusual exposure to fumes, dust, chemicals, asbestos, or radiation. he does have a chronic cough and sputum production over a long period of time, although he was never asked, "what is a long period of time," only he was never asked "what is a long period of time?" no one knows what that means, at least in dr. messina's eyes. interestingly, you will remember, during thomas hardin's deposition he was shown some medical records and letters. he was shown this one -- this one asking him, "how long a period of time did you have this chronic cough? you know what he was not shown? he was not shown the first medical record where it says six 4210 months. why? because he would have said, "well, six months." and so the impression here is copd combined with bronchitis, wheezing as well as an element of emphysema, just like dr. flurry said. and he also notes here that he had a discussion with mr. hardin about the need to quit smoking because that is what caused the copd. smoking causes copd, and in this case, that is the exclusive cause of mr. hardin's copd. it is not an alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency. it is not an exposure to asbestos. you will not see one medical record, one chest x-ray, one cat scan, that suggests anything other than copd. so the evidence certainly, by a greater weight of the evidence, demonstrates that mr. hardin was diagnosed with copd. he died of copd. and then the question comes, "did the addiction -- was that a legal cause of his copd and death?" and remember dr. o'brien's explanation, "the fact that one is addicted, like thomas hardin, compels him to smoke more than if he was not addicted, because if he was not addicted he would be 4211 able to stop if he had to. compulsion to smoke results in more toxins from the cigarettes, which results in disease." so in a legal sense, that is what causes disease. so his addiction, by virtue of him being compelled to smoke and getting more toxins than otherwise he would if he was not addicted is what caused his disease in this case. so based on the greater weight of the evidence in this case, it is more likely than not that mr. hardin was addicted to the cigarettes containing nicotine, and it was the addiction that was a legal cause of his copd and death. i submit to you, then, the answer on the verdict form is "yes." the next question, "did thomas hardin know or should have known in the exercise of reasonable care prior to may 5th, 1990, that he had chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, copd/emphysema, and that there was a reasonable probability that his copd/emphysema was caused by smoking?" that is not my burden of proof, ladies and gentleman. that is the defendant's by a greater weight of evidence. 4212 and i submit to you that there is no proof that mr. hardin had reason to know or believe that he had the possibility of having copd before 1990; in fact, before six months prior to august 2nd of 1996, because there is absolutely no evidence by testimony, by medical records or otherwise, that mr. hardin was on notice that he should do something sometime in the '80s. now you heard in opening statement the defense attorney tell you, well, you are going to hear evidence that mrs. hardin was telling her husband to quit from 1983 on. did not hear a word. you are going to hear evidence he had a cough in the '80s." did not hear a word. did not see any evidence, did not see one medical record that said the man was coughing in the '80s. did not see one record or one shred of evidence that the man's wife was telling him from 1983 to stop smoking. there has been absolutely no proof by a greater weight of the evidence or otherwise that mr. hardin had reason to know before may 5th of 1990 that he had a smoking-related disease, copd. 4213 the answer is a resounding, "no," ladies and gentleman. number 3: "did thomas hardin reasonably rely to his detriment on any statement made by reynolds that concealed or omitted material facts and otherwise known or available concerning the health effects or addictive nature of cigarettes? and, if so, was such reliance a legal cause of his copd/emphysema and death?" now, what we have as a result of the class membership in this case, we have the engle findings. and you have the engle findings? and the engle findings tell you, among other things, that the defendants, r.j. reynolds, concealed or omitted material information not otherwise known or available, knowing that the material was false and misleading, or failed to disclose a material fact concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes or both. and the concealment refers to this agreement the defendants made with others to conceal. so what does this mean? we know what the information is that r.j. reynolds knew about the 4214 health risk of smoking and the addictive nature of nicotine. we know that from the evidence in this case. and what you know is that at least from the '40s and definitely into the early '50s, r.j. reynolds, by that time, already knew that their cigarettes could cause cancer. they knew that their cigarettes had carcinogens in them. they also knew the importance of nicotine going back to 1935. certainly, by 1953, december, they knew that nicotine was not only important to the smoker, but it was a dangerous drug, and it was addictive. so we know that r.j. reynolds knew that in december of 1953. that is very important. we also know that there was some very negative information about smoking and health in 1953 by the mouse-painting studies that you heard about. remember that? these mouse-painting studies showed a causative link between smoking and cancer. and what happened was the results of these mouse-painting studies became public, and they received a lot of media attention; in fact, so much attention did these studies receive that 4215 the tobacco companies responded. and they responded by meeting on december 14th at the plaza hotel. and what did they decide to do? they decided that they were going to provide false assurances to the public. they were going to pledge research into this issue of smoking and health and get to the bottom of the problem. and they knew full well this was just a public relations matter and they were not going to do any such thing. and what they did for the next 50 years was this campaign of denial, falsely assuring people that they were going to get to the bottom of the problem. and we know, folks, that they were successful in counteracting this negative information that was put out there about cigarettes. and how do we know that? because there is evidence in this record about the success of this denialist campaign. for example, you have heard evidence that despite this 1953 mouse-painting study that had tremendous publicity, by the next year, cigarette sales grew to record levels and continued to grow. 4216 by 1960 you have heard fifty percent, half of all doctors in the united states were still smoking cigarettes. obviously, they did not get the message. 1964, the mercury mission was a series of several flights into space. and you heard that four of those seven astronauts on those missions were smokers. these are the best of the best, highest iqs, and they are smoking cigarettes during this timeframe. 1965, you heard immediately after the surgeon general's report was made public, record sales and highest profits in the history of the tobacco industry. 1967, what is admitted into evidence is this federal trade commission report that talks a lot about the warnings or the cautions in 1966 being totally ineffective, and it talked about cigarette advertising. and what it talked about was that advertising was so pervasive that you could not help but seeing ad after ad in the media. 1972, the roper proposal by the tobacco institute, remember what it said among other things? the scheme was brilliantly executed, 4217 brilliantly conceived and executed. twenty years later, they were talking about how well their scheme was, but it was not over. it was not over. remember, they said, "we still have to create doubt." 1978, we talked about this meeting in new york with dr. proctor at which time all these representatives of the tobacco company, including r.j. reynolds met, and it was divulged during that meeting that the tirc was nothing more than an industry shield. that was the organization that was going to provide funds to these reputable scientists to get to the bottom of the problem. and their -- the ctr, which replaced the tirc, was just a front. the clerk: mr. kaiser. mr. kaiser: yes. the clerk: you have one hour remaining. mr. kaiser: one hour remaining? the clerk: yes. mr. kaiser: thank you. we saw a memo in 1978 that most consumers were not aware of what nicotine did or what nicotine was. 4218 and in 1982 -- it took them until 1982 for cigarette consumption to peak. that means from the 1950s to 1982, cigarette sales kept growing, growing. cigarette consumption kept growing and growing. so we know that this campaign of denial was effective in counteracting the negative information. so what did thomas hardin know? we know that in the 1950s, thomas hardin did not know anything about cigarettes and health. dr. giakas testified about that. there is nothing -- nothing to suggest that he knew when he first started smoking that cigarettes were bad. and when he continued to smoke, he did not know cigarettes were bad in the 1950s. he certainly did not know that cigarettes could cause cancer in the 1950s. no evidence of that. there was evidence that his parents never said a word about smoking being bad. there is evidence that he never learned smoking was bad from church. there was evidence that he never learned smoking was bad from school. and we have evidence that the cigarette companies, r.j. reynolds included, created this climate of 4219 normalizing cigarettes during earlier times, running into the '50s and even later. so we know thomas hardin, when he is smoking by the time that the tobacco companies were meeting in 1953, does not know a thing about the dangers of cigarettes causing cancer and being addictive. and so the question then becomes, what message did thomas hardin receive? did he receive the message from the negative campaign? or did he receive the message from this campaign of denial? and the evidence in this case shows you that he received the message from this campaign of denial, and he relied on their misrepresentations and their concealment. and i'm going to show you what the evidence is in that regard. remember the testimony of dr. proctor, when dr. proctor was talking about the tobacco industry inventing baseball cards and the tobacco industry, he was saying that most of the top athletes were paid to advertise cigarettes: babe ruth, lou gehrig, joe dimaggio, top baseball players, golf players, football players. 4220 "again, it is hard to name a sport that was not used in advertising." that is what dr. proctor said. and at the deposition of thomas hardin, he is asked, "do you recall seeing any commercials by any -- any stars talking about the dangers associated with, for example yul brynner." and he said, "i used to see billboards showing them smoking but did not say it was hazardous." "you used to see billboards of yul brynner's cigarettes?" and his answer was, "i do not -- i do not know if it was yul brynner." and then he is asked, "do you remember who yul brynner was?" and his answer was, "he was a baseball player?" now, this was one of the most famous actors in the '50s and '60s, and here's a man during his deposition thought he was a baseball player, certainly suggesting he saw the ads on billboards that were advertising cigarettes via athletes, baseball players. then dr. proctor was testifying about when 4221 reynolds and american tobacco started selling their filtered cigarettes, because during this campaign of denial, remember the evidence was that the tobacco companies started pushing filters as a safer alternative without agreeing that cigarettes were dangerous. and filters became eminently successful. in fact, in a decade, most people started smoking filters rather than unfiltered. and so dr. proctor says, "well, reynolds' really big push is with winston beginning in 1954." american tried a filter, not very successfully, but the tareyton cigarette, the one marketed with the "i'd rather fight than switch." that is what dr. proctor said. thomas hardin's deposition, now how do you believe -- "do you believe that you were addicted to cigarettes?" and what does he say? "i believe i had to have one or rather fight than switch." now, is not that interesting, he is parroting the exact phrase from tareyton cigarettes. and in what parlance do you ever hear someone say, "rather fight than switch"? certainly indicative that the man saw that ad for tareyton 4222 cigarettes at some point in the '50s, because he parroted that same exact jingle. what else? "when you switched to winston were you relying on something that you read or from the tobacco company?" and his answer was, "i remember seeing an advertisement saying winstons or marlboros taste good like a cigarette should. now, but with respect to winstons seemed to me like that was winston." and he was right. it was winston. "can you identify any ads that you have seen for cigarettes?" that was later in the deposition. and he says, "onliest one i could think of is the one that says, i forgot what it say, something about winstons, winstons taste good like a cigarette should." we know the man was exposed to the advertising because 50 years later he is parroting what the jingles were at the time that they were on television or in magazines or on billboards. now, dr. proctor's testified. he is asked about the historical record. "do you know why there was this advertising change from unfiltered to filtered cigarettes 4223 during this time period? "yes. "why was that? "well, it is part of the reassurance campaign. the news is being publicized that smoking causes deadly harm, and with this, the industry started marketing filters as a safer product, a form of reassurance." thomas hardin's deposition, "you switched from pall mall, the unfiltered, to a filtered; is that right? "right. "and did you do that because you thought -- and you did that -- did you -- that because you thought it would be better for you? "right." so here's a man getting a message somewhere that filtered cigarettes were better for him. and during the same timeframe in the '50s that the tobacco companies are advertising and pushing filtered cigarettes, thomas hardin switches from unfiltered to filtered cigarettes. and you also heard dr. proctor talking about this willie the penguin was a character invented for kools, developed in the '30s as a medicinal 4224 cigarette for the next 20 years promoting menthol cigarettes. and you heard joyce hardin testify that when thomas hardin after the late '50s switched to menthols, it was kool cigarettes, menthols that he smoked primarily for the rest of his life. so these are example after example of actual reliance on advertisements, on messages from the tobacco companies that prompted mr. hardin to act. that is actual reliance. so the only question, then, is this: if mr. hardin had been told the truth when he was a kid, when he was smoking, before he was smoking even a pack a day in 1955, if he had been told the truth, what r.j. reynolds knew at the time, that cigarettes could cause cancer and that they were -- the nicotine was addictive, would he have acted differently and perhaps not continued to smoke? well, what do we know? we know that as a young man, as a boy, mr. hardin did not involve himself in risk-taking. there is no evidence of that in this record. we know that he was a responsible kid because he left school early in the 9th grade to go work at a farm because his 4225 family was poor. that is responsible behavior. we know that if the truth had come out in the '50s, perhaps there would have been restrictions on smoking sooner. we know that if the truth had come out, perhaps this climate of normalcy would not have existed. we know if the truth came out, perhaps parents would have been able to tell their kids, smoking is bad, it causes cancer earlier. perhaps people in church would have been telling the parishioners that smoking is bad, it causes cancer. perhaps school teachers, if this climate did not exist, would have been telling their kids and their pupils smoking is bad, it causes cancer. and so what would mr. hardin have done, this responsible kid who was not smoking a pack a day yet when confronted with this evidence where it might not have been cool to smoke with your friends, i cannot assure you based on the evidence he would have quit. but based on the evidence, more likely than not, probably would not have continued smoking because it would have been easier for him at that time to stop. that is reliance. that is how reliance caused his disease, because had he 4226 known the truth he would have been able to quit smoking prior to becoming addicted and we would not be here today because he would not have gotten his disease. but he was not told that information, which r.j. reynolds knew and thomas hardin did not. the starting point for this is very important. it does not start after he is smoking 40 years and did not quit because of his addiction. it started when he was smoking as a kid in the early 1950s when he had the chance to quit if he knew the truth. the next question, ladies and gentleman, and this question is answered yes, the next question is the reliance on the conspiracy. and again, the message was from the r.j. reynolds tobacco company, they were part of this agreement after 1953. so it is the same with this conspiracy. the answer is yes. "please state the percentage of any fault that was a legal cause of thomas hardin's chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, emphysema and death that you charge to thomas hardin and r.j. reynolds." now, simply, again the starting point is 4227 back when thomas hardin is a boy, not when he is smoking cigarette after cigarette 50 years later. and what we know is that r.j. reynolds has its laboratories, has its chemists, it is a big company making these cigarettes. thomas hardin is this kid. r.j. reynolds wanted someone like thomas hardin to rely on their advertisements. we know that from robert heimann's deposition. they wanted someone like thomas hardin to rely on their advertisements, and he did. they wanted thomas hardin to smoke their brand of cigarettes, and he did. they wanted thomas hardin to smoke a lot of their cigarettes, and he did. they wanted thomas hardin to become addicted to the nicotine in their cigarettes, and he did. they wanted thomas hardin to smoke for a long time, and he did. thomas hardin started as a kid, as a boy did everything r.j. reynolds wanted him to do. now, whose fault is that when he did not know at the time what could happen? now, that is fault in a vault right there against r.j. reynolds, i submit to you. that is at least 75 percent of the fault because this kid, when he was not lured into smoking by their acts, 4228 perhaps would not have ever smoked. that is their fault. what is thomas hardin's fault when he is a kid? absolutely nothing when he starts, because he does not know anything. and i have some questions that i'd like to direct to you, and i'll answer them. and i could tell you one thing, the defense will not respond to these, because, remember, from their opening statement they do not want to respond to their conduct. they act as if they do not exist and this case is simply about thomas hardin. that is not the case. and so the first question, ladies and gentleman, is when rjr knew of the dangers of smoking in the 1950s, why did it choose not to tell the public? why did not it tell people, "this is what we found out"? well, you know from the evidence it was because they took profits over health, that is why. at the expense of someone like thomas hardin, that is not thomas hardin's fault. that is r.j. reynolds' fault when thomas hardin is a kid in the '50s. when r.j. reynolds knew of the addictive nature of smoking in the '50s, why did not they tell the public then? again, how can you say 4229 that that is thomas hardin's fault when he is a boy, when r.j. reynolds, this company, is not telling them what they know. that is the fault on r.j. reynolds. and we do not accept any fault for that. when r.j. reynolds knew of the dangers of smoking in the '50s, why did they not voluntarily warn the public by putting warnings on their packs of cigarettes? we know from robert heimann, if they did not have to in the '70s and the '60s, they would not have done it, so certainly they could have done it in the '50s, but they -- they did not choose to do it. that is not thomas hardin's fault, folks. he is a kid. he is kid in the '50s. when r.j. reynolds knew of the addictive nature of nicotine in their cigarettes in the 1950s, why did it choose not to voluntarily warn the public that nicotine is addictive, smoke responsibly or you might not be able to quit? that is not thomas hardin's fault when he is a boy in the '50s, i submit to you. that is r.j. reynolds' fault. why did r.j. reynolds normalize and glamorize its cigarettes in its advertising campaigns using famous actors and actresses and athletes for decades going into 4230 the '50s, going into the '60s? remember when robert heimann in his depo was talking about pall malls and the advertising, satisfaction and beauty and glamour, and they advertise these, and they created this climate, and at no time in these advertisements did they say, "but these will cause cancer; but these are addictive." that ladies and gentleman, i submit to you, is not thomas hardin's fault. why did r -- why did r.j. reynolds choose not to cooperate with the surgeon general in 1964 regarding its knowledge that its cigarettes were deadly and that nicotine was addictive? again, that is not thomas hardin's fault. why did r.j. reynolds urge people to switch to filtered cigarettes rather than quitting when they knew that their cigarettes could cause cancer and that filters were not even effective? thomas hardin did not know that. but he bought what they were telling him and he switched to filters. that is not his fault. why did r.j. reynolds advertise menthol cigarettes as a health cigarette from the 1930s to the '50s when it knew cigarettes were deadly regardless of menthol or not, and sure enough, 4231 we have thomas hardin switch to menthol cigarettes. it is not his fault. he was listening to what the tobacco company was telling him. remember the -- this whole idea if the tobacco institute funded by r.j. reynolds and other companies they maintained since 1980, they cannot argue free choice when the smoker is addicted. that is not thomas hardin's fault. why did r.j. reynolds choose not to take all the nicotine out of their cigarettes that they knew they had the capability of doing since 1935? that was their choice. that is not thomas hardin's fault. cigarettes he had had nicotine in them and he got addicted. why did r.j. reynolds provide these false assurances to the public for almost 50 years with its efforts to do more research knowing that this tirc and ctr was a front and an industry shield and they did not tell the public? that is not thomas hardin's fault. that is their fault. so the only possibility of thomas hardin's fault, if you want, is that maybe he just did not try hard enough to quit smoking even though he 4232 was in the throes of addiction. give him fault for that. but what else is he at fault for? sure, at some time he found out that cigarettes could cause cancer. he found out that cigarettes could cause copd because he got it. and he found out that cigarettes were addictive, the nicotine was addictive, because he tried to quit in 1996 and could not. so put fault on him for maybe just not trying hard enough to quit earlier. maybe he would have been successful. we do not know. no one can guarantee that. so put the fault on him. but i submit to you based on the evidence, ladies and gentleman, the percentage of fault, as i told you in opening statement, the lion's share of fault is on r.j. reynolds, and i submit to you that thomas hardin's fault is ten percent and r.j. reynolds is 90, because their actions started when he was a boy in the '50s. and it was too late when he knew by the '80s or the '90s of what cigarettes could do to him because he was already addicted. the next question then becomes damages, compensatory damages. we filed this lawsuit because we are asking you to compensate joyce hardin for the loss of her husband, for her pain 4233 and suffering and for her loss of his companionship from the time he became ill in 1996 until he died in 2012, as well as into the future for 12 years after his death based on the mortality tables, because based on those tables she lost 12 years together with him because he had another 12 years to live but for his copd. and the way i've done this, ladies and gentleman, is to break down the damages into three phases. the first phase being when he was first diagnosed to 2005 when he was intubated in the hospital; the second phase being when he was getting progressively worse from 2005 to his death; and the third phase is future damages for the loss of companionship and miss hardin's pain and suffering. and as you recall, the evidence from the time of diagnosis, thomas hardin was still able to work until his retirement from his neck injury. he was not going to get better because copd does not get better. you are not cured. it is a progressive disease. and what he had during this time were bouts of coughing, fever. he would have to go to the doctor and get antibiotics; his shortness of breath got worse. 4234 when he retired you heard he was living more of a sedentary lifestyle. and he had a makeshift bedroom eventually that he stayed in. and by 19- -- by 2005 you heard he had respiratory distress, was hospitalized and they had to intubate him and put a breathing tube in so that he would be able to breathe. and that is the first phase. not as bad as what the phase is that we are getting into, 2005 to 2012. it is during that phase that he starts really getting progressively worse. he is now on home oxygen after 2005. he is having more exacerbations of his copd, where he is having to go to the hospital several times. he needs a scooter to ambulate, to be able to get around the house. his -- he is losing his mental sharpness and his memory, according to his wife. he has shortness of breath. that is getting worse. he is diagnosed as being hypercapnic, which means he is retaining co2, not o2, which means respiratory failure, which can kill you. 4235 he spends more time sleeping than awake later on. he cannot do the basics: shaving, showering, fixing meals. you saw the day in the life video. he needs hospice care, and on february 14th, 2012, dies with his family present. this, i submit to you, is the worst time for mr. hardin and, therefore, mrs. hardin's pain and suffering. and finally we have from that time, we have from 2012 to 2014, for the 12 years that she will not have mr. hardin, that -- that loss of companionship. and so i want to talk about some of the facts that you heard while thomas hardin was sick with his copd and eventually died. and you heard that this was the only man that joyce hardin knew. she met him when she was 12 or 13 years old. she married him at 15 years old, after leaving school early, moved away from home. she said to you that he was a wonderful husband and a father and never had an unkind word to say about anybody. they were married 4236 for 50 years. they were never separated or divorced or had thoughts of either. they had thoughts about traveling upon retirement with a mobile home across the country, you heard. she was taking care of mr. hardin when he was no longer able to take care of himself. she was still working for a time and told you that she felt terrible because he was not -- he was there and she was not, so she made sure that someone was always at the house with him. she eventually stopped going to church because she was so worried about him. and she would sleep on the sofa bed in the makeshift bedroom except for one occasion, and she told you that was the occasion where he fell and had a laceration. mrs. hardin had a heart attack in 2010, and i'm not suggesting that was an effect from thomas hardin's copd. it is just a fact. she had a heart attack and still had to take care of him. she watched mr. hardin deteriorate until his death. a hospice pastor visited her to help with the grieving. she kept a pair of his pajamas because it had thomas's smell on them for a while after he died. she visits his grave 4237 to make sure it is maintained. she is not remarried. she has no romantic interest with anybody. you watched her testify and saw that it was very hard for her to keep her composure when she was talking about her husband, and she thinks about him every day to this day. she cried for three months after he died. and so this is the hardest part of the case, ladies and gentleman, because you are being asked to quantify an amount of money on noneconomic damages. you are being asked to come up with an amount of money for pain and suffering. and there is no instruction that the judge read to you that has a calculation as to how to do that. and i told you in jury selection that is my obligation to help you. and so what i'm going to do is suggest to you a way to calculate, to come up with a monetary figure to compensate joyce hardin for her pain and suffering and loss of companionship. and the way i'm going to suggest is based on units of time. and why do i say units of time? because everything we do in life is based on units of time. we sleep a certain amount of hours. we work a certain 4238 amount of hours. we get paid for a certain amount of hours. life itself is really based on units of time. and so what i have suggested is to utilize an hourly rate based on a daily hourly rate, and i say "suggestion" because you are not obligated to consider my method. you might find that there is a better one that you want to use. you might hear from the defense and they give you an alternative that you think is acceptable and better. ultimately the decision is what you want to do. and so by way of my suggestion, i want to show you what i have done by way of a summary. and it is based on three phases that we went over earlier. it is based on the less serious phase from diagnosis to intubation. it is based on the worst phase. and it is based on the hopefully healing phase from 2012 to 2024. and so you could see it gives you a low rate, a mid rate, and a high rate for each phase. so phase a is nine years. that was from the diagnosis to intubation. phase b is 6.5 years when he left the hospital on oxygen. phase c is 12 years, the time without thomas after he died. and as you can see, there is a low rate for the 4239 nine-year period of 30 hours, $30 an hour times 24 hours in a day, times 365 days times nine years equals $2,365,200. the midrange alternative is $40 an hour times 24 hours in a day, 365 days times nine years is $3,153,600. and the next one, again, based on $50 an hour, the same calculation, $3,942,000. and then we have the midrange. we have the mid -- the second phase, 6.5 years, starting with a low of $150 an hour, which is considerably higher because this was the worst time during thomas hardin's suffering that it had its effects on joyce hardin, her pain and suffering, her loss of companionship during this time when he was basically sleeping more than waking. so you see $150 an hour times 24 hours in a day times 365 days times 6.5 years equals $8,541,000. the midrange of $200 an hour, i suggest with the same calculations equals $11,388,000, and the high range is $250 an hour with the same calculations amounting to $14,235,000. and, finally, the last 12 years where hopefully miss hardin's suffering will ease with time, we can only hope, but her loss of companionship will still be the same. she will not 4240 have her husband and so it is a significantly less amount of an hourly rate here, and you will see the low hourly rate, $10 an hour times 24 a day times 365 days times 12 years equals $1,051,200. the midrange is $15 an hour with the same calculations, $1,576,800, and finally at $20 an hour with the same calculations for 12 years, $2,102,400. and in summary, for compensatory damages you can see then in different ranges, the low range in total is $11,957,400, the medium range is $16,018,400, and the high range is a total of $20,279,400. this is my suggestion to compensate miss hardin for her pain and suffering and her loss of companionship from her husband's illness until his death and in the future based on the mortality table. and finally, before i sit down, we are asking that you find that we have proved by clear and convincing evidence that punitive damages should be assessed against r.j. reynolds in this case. remember, punitive damages are totally separate. punitive damages goes to the conduct of r.j. reynolds, to punish 4241 r.j. reynolds and to defer others -- to deter others from future behavior. and so i've included some facts in support of our entitlement to punitive damages here. and as you could see, number one, r.j. reynolds was aware of the importance of nicotine in their cigarettes as early as 1935 but took no action. r.j. reynolds was aware in the 1950s that the nicotine in their cigarettes was addictive but chose not to warn the public. this is not accident. this is intentional. r.j. reynolds was aware in the 1950s that the nicotine in their cigarettes was addictive but chose not to take nicotine out of their cigarettes. this is intentional. r.j. reynolds was aware in the '50s that their cigarettes could cause cancer but chose not to warn the public. again, that is intentional conduct. r.j. reynolds wanted smokers to become addicted to the nicotine in their cigarettes. remember on the claude teague memo i showed you. he said, "happily for us, cigarettes are a habit they cannot break." r.j. reynolds wanted people to rely on its advertising while concealing information about 4242 the dangers of smoking and addictive nature of nicotine. again, that is an example of their intentional misconduct. r.j. reynolds wanted people to smoke its filtered cigarettes instead of quitting despite knowing that filters were ineffective while failing to warn the public. and you could see the other examples i have here. finally, r.j. reynolds throughout their campaign of denial put profits over people's lives. and for these reasons, ladies and gentleman, i believe we have provided you proof by clear and convincing evidence that would allow you to assess punitive damages against r.j. reynolds. i'm going to sit down and i'm going to have an opportunity to talk to you later, but i would ask that based on the evidence, you find r.j. reynolds liable for its conduct in this case and you compensate joyce hardin for her loss of companionship, for her loss of companionship and for her pain and suffering. and i thank you very much. mr. kaiser: good afternoon, ladies and gentleman, my last time to talk to you. couple of observations before i start with my response. and that is, number one, just because you keep repeating yourself over and over and over again does not mean it is true or it is going to come true. number two, if the case that we did prove by 4356 a greater weight of the evidence was so flawed and such a failure, why did it take two hours for them to convince themselves that it was? you see, mr. bayuk, when he talked about addiction and said no to number one, that is the end of the case. but they went on to try and convince you that it should be no, the answer should be no to all seven questions. you see, they are not convinced because there is evidence that we showed you well beyond the greater weight of the evidence. and that leads me to something else. there are two burdens of proof in this case. when you get to whether or not we are entitled to punitive damages, that is by clear and convincing evidence and the judge already gave you an instruction. but everything else is greater weight of the evidence. greater weight of the evidence, more likely than not, are we more likely right than not, equal scales of justice, one little grain of sand tipping the scales, that is what that means. it is a simple burden of proof and that is all we have to show. now, a couple of things that i need to respond to. number one, you heard that this 4357 case is only about thomas hardin the smoker. it is not about anybody else. it is not about people. it is not about r.j. reynolds. it is strictly about thomas hardin. well, that is not true. that is not true, because, remember, the fact that we have proved class membership allows you to consider these things. and this says defendants, r.j. reynolds. that is what that means. r.j. reynolds placed cigarettes on the market that were defective and unreasonably dangerous. that does not say anything about thomas hardin. defendants, again, r.j. reynolds, concealed or omitted material information. that says about r.j. reynolds and their conduct, not thomas hardin. defendants agreed to conceal with others material information. you see, that is defendants. that is r.j. reynolds. that is not thomas hardin. the defendants were negligent. that is r.j. reynolds. that is not thomas hardin. so when someone says this case is only about thomas hardin, i beg to differ. you have got these findings, for one. on the verdict form you are asked to apportion fault between thomas hardin and r.j. reynolds. so this case is a lot 4358 more than just thomas hardin. but there is a reason why they want you to think that, because they will actually win this case if they do not exist. if they do not exist, they have won, because then it is just all the conduct on thomas hardin. but we cannot escape the fact that they do exist. and they have existed for a long time. you know, this whole idea about advertising being legal, advertising is legal. they advertised their cigarettes for a long time. from a 40-year period you heard they spent 240 billion, with a b, dollars. and they are able to do that. it is legal. what you cannot do is conceal material information and lie. see, what you cannot do is when you advertise and you know that cigarettes cause cancer and they are addictive, what you cannot do in the '50s is advertise your products and glamorize your products and you do not tell people, "by the way, these will kill you." that is what you cannot do. there was some argument that mr. hardin was not impaired, that he did not have any clinical significant impairment, and yet you heard dr. o'brien tell you that the impairment was the man had copd. now, whether mr. hardin 4359 said he was not impaired, whether anyone said he was not impaired, dr. o'brien told you that. and you know what, that was not challenged. no one disputed that fact. that was dr. o'brien saying this was the clinical impairment. he had copd, the man's work obligations would have been affected. even the fact he was retired, had he been not injured, where he had to retire he would not have been able to work because of the impairment of the copd, because it disabled him. that is the impairment. and that was not challenged whatsoever. you heard mr. bayuk telling you millions of people quit smoking, but then mr. bayuk told you this case is only about thomas hardin. well, then why is he talking about millions of people who quit if this case is only about thomas hardin? fifty percent of people that smoke just like mr. hardin are not addicted. why is -- why are we worried about fifty percent of other people if the case is only about thomas hardin? why are they throwing that out at you? fifty percent of the people, you heard that statistic in this trial, but you heard nothing else. where did 4360 that come from? are those people really smoking two packs a day? are those people smokers for 50 years? are those people maybe smokers that have had ten cigarettes in their lifetime? no one ever testified to that. dr. flurry apparently said that it seemed like mr. hardin was unwilling to quit. well, i submit to you that dr. flurry was not qualified as an expert in addiction in this case and did not render opinions on addiction in this case. so i ask you, how is he qualified to render an opinion as to whether or not someone is going to or not going to quit smoking? what does he base that opinion on? he was not an expert witness on addiction. he was a treating physician. there were no witnesses brought by the defense in this case to talk about mr. hardin having symptoms of copd long before 1996. they did not bring any witness to tell you about that. what they did was they are relying somehow on plaintiff's expert witness in addiction, dr. o'brien, to tell you that mr. hardin must have been suffering from copd for a long time. and not only that, but then they are going to use 4361 dr. o'brien as a seer to say, "and he would have known he would have had symptoms of copd and that they would have been related to smoking." that is a lot to say when you are an addiction expert. see, where was dr. o'brien qualified to render an opinion about someone's copd? he did not testify about that. and again, that is a red herring. you will not see one medical record if you search through them in this case that supports that. there is not one medical record that will talk about one single symptom mr. hardin had going back in the '80s. there is not one single medical record that you will see in this case or have seen in this case that tells you that mr. hardin had symptoms of which he was aware in the '80s. there is not one medical record that you will see or have seen in this case that suggests to you in any way that mr. hardin would have known anything about copd. what it was, whether it was caused from smoking, not one scintilla of evidence to support this defense of statute of limitations. what you have seen is an august 2nd, 1996 medical report from dr. flurry. and what does it say? this is that same report they did not 4362 show to mr. hardin. and what does it say? "symptoms for six months." that is it. not ten years, ladies and gentleman, six months. i submit to you, that defense does not fly. they have fallen woefully short of demonstrating the burden by a greater weight of the evidence that this is somehow barred by a statute of limitations. there was some suggestion that mr. hardin was well-aware of the surgeon general's report, and you had better bet that mr. hardin probably did not go to the library of congress and read that '64 surgeon general's report. in fact, if you remember thomas hardin's deposition, he was asked about the surgeon general's report. no question whether or not he knew what it was. he said, "i've heard of it," one time and yet the follow-up question was never asked, "when did you first hear about this report in 1964?" never asked. how could you draw an inference that he heard about it in 1964, '74, '84 or '94? we just do not know. and what did mr. persons tell you? well, he knew from the '64 surgeon general's report that smoking was hazardous. well, he did not know it could cause cancer. you 4363 see, r.j. reynolds knew, but mr. hardin still did not know. even if you credit that he heard of the surgeon general's report and that cigarette smoking was hazardous to your health, that did not tell him it was going to cause cancer or copd or that nicotine in the cigarettes he was smoking was addictive. r.j. reynolds knew that in '64 and '54 and did not tell him. and there was some suggestion that mr. hardin knew about the dangers of smoking in the 1970s. that is what mr. persons told you. and he said something about thirl wilson. there was not one shred of evidence, folks, not one single shred of evidence in this case that you heard or saw that suggested in any way that mr. hardin had heard anything in the 1970s. nothing. mr. bayuk: your honor, i have to object. that is a misstatement of the evidence. the court: okay. ladies and gentleman, just remember, you are the judges of facts. you heard the evidence and it will be up to you to believe or not believe whatever evidence you did hear during this trial. and what the lawyers 4364 say is not evidence. go ahead. mr. kaiser: it is very interesting that there were expert witnesses called in this case on addiction, dr. o'brien and giakas, and now the defense wants to turn around and use them for all sorts of other expert subject matter areas. they want to use dr. o'brien for an expert in reliance and advertising. and remember i asked him, "are you an expert in advertising?" he said, "of course not." but they will not ask him whether or not from his review of the record he found any instances where thomas hardin relied on advertising. how does he know? he is an addiction expert, not a reliance expert. and he told you from the witness stand he was not looking for examples of whether anyone relied on advertising. you know from the facts, though, that thomas hardin did rely on the advertising. and somehow r.j. reynolds' scientists thought filters were safer. do you remember dr. proctor testified that the president and ceo for american tobacco for which r.j. reynolds is now responsible, refused to sell and make filtered cigarettes for a few years. why? 4365 because he said, "that is just a public relations gimmick and they are not effective." and he thought filters were safer? they knew filters were not effective and they knew it was just a gimmick. and harry reasoner, you saw that last report from harry reasoner. what did he tell you? yeah, it is an adult responsibility to smoke, an adult responsibility, not a boy responsibility or a kid. and that is what happened in this case. and let us go back and talk about addiction and the testimony you heard. and first of all, you need to find out who was the real expert in this case. who had the qualifications in this case to render an opinion? and when you look at it, you see there is no comparison between the two. you see on the one hand, a man who is knighted by the french government, who is been a keynote speaker all across the world, who is been teaching since william giakas was in diapers, whose credentials are so far more superior to dr. giakas that that is why dr. giakas when he took the stand, what did he say? "oh, i see patients. i do not -- i do not do research. i do not do 4366 research." why? because he knew his qualifications pale in comparison to dr. o'brien's. you could just see and remember the testimony. well, who was dr. giakas? says he treats patients. but you really think that is true? this is a man who admitted he speaks on behalf of pharmaceutical companies. this is a man who also does forensic consulting work. and this is a man who is testified and he is been employed on behalf of r.j. reynolds since 2007 and in the five cases he is testified in for r.j. reynolds not one occasion has he ever taken the stand and said a smoker was addicted. that is who he is. he is a professional witness who just so happens to be a psychiatrist. dr. o'brien is a world-renowned psychiatrist who happens to have testified on two occasions in tobacco cases in 50 years of practice. dr. giakas is a man who by his own admission in 2007 was contacted by lawyers representing r.j. reynolds tobacco company. they asked him to review documents on different cases. and it was not until three years later that he first testified. well, you know why? because it was 4367 dr. giakas who said they sent him articles on addiction to read because he had not read them. they created and packaged and brought dr. giakas here as an expert in addiction. and by the way, you did not hear one word from that witness that he was ever board certified in addiction psychiatry. what you did hear is that for 20 years charles o'brien was board certified in addictive psychiatry and did not re-up recently. and he said they even asked him to write the questions for the exam. and he said it was not necessary for him to re-up. so when you look at the qualifications, dr. giakas, i submit to you, he pales in comparison to dr. o'brien. we know who the real addiction expert was. and we can also look at some testimony. let us take a look at the good dr. giakas's testimony. you remember when he testified on direct examination, he was glib and looking at you folks and talking and giving nice little speeches. and then when i started cross-examining him, all of a sudden he started not being so direct. and would not answer the question. remember that? and getting a little 4368 nervous. and then all of a sudden the next day he came in and started making his speeches again when i was asking him questions. again, not answering the question i asked him. how many times did i have to ask him or say to him, "i did not ask that question, did i?" but he did not care what the question was. he just kept wanting to get in his answer and keep repeating his mantra. it was personal choice behavior. it was his choice. i did not see any instances of him climbing the walls and screaming to the world that "i'm in distress and i need help." who is usually the last one to know they have a problem? who do you think is the last one to usually know? the person that has the problem. everyone else around the person knows but that person. that is what normally happens. and yet he did not go screaming, climbing the walls saying he needs help. that meant he was not addicted and was not impaired. let us take a look at some testimony, and talk about impeachment. when the man started talking about animal studies, i said, "wait a minute, you do not look at animal studies, do you?" "oh, yes i do." well, i had to refer him 4369 to his deposition testimony. "i do occasionally read animal studies." he reviewed the deposition. and i said, "you had an opportunity to read the deposition?" and he said, "i spotted that error after the fact unfortunately." and then he went on. he read it, reviewed it and still did not see the mistake that he had said, "i do not read animal studies." it was only when he was preparing for this trial for the first time that he realized he made a mistake in previous testimony where he said, "i do not read animal studies." well, which is it? when it is more convenient here to say "i do" or when it was more convenient in the past when he said, "i did not"? i asked him whether he agreed with the statistic: "eighty percent of individuals using tobacco attempt to quit at some time, but 60 percent relapse within a week and less than 5 percent remain abstinent for life." and he said, "i do not agree with that." "let us look at some of your testimony," i said to him. we went back to prior testimony. and what did he say? 4370 "there are definitely people who will go back to smoking, and i do agree with those stats." same exact statistics that i read him earlier. i definitely -- he agrees with those stats. then what does he say? "i've gone back and looked at that and my agreeing was a mistake." same thing. when he read the deposition -- when he read his testimony -- or this was one where he said, "well, you know, in trial, the pressure of trial, you just do not know. you make mistakes." this is another instance. it was more convenient here, but in the past it was not. he is not going to agree with that statistic because look at that, only 5 percent of the people that quit of those millions remain abstinent. remember dr. o'brien was telling you that the criteria he wrote includes loss of control and that addiction is a loss of control. dr. giakas in prior testimony, "and just because somebody quits smoking does not mean they were not addicted, correct?" and he agreed, "correct." "it does mean that their ability to control 4371 the use of the substance is affected, does it not?" and his answer, "if they are addicted, yes." -- right? "and then, 'okay. in fact, if they are addicted, then their ability to control the substance is reduced as a -- generally speaking, than if they are not addicted, correct?' "and what did you say? "correct." but then he added, "and as i've learned at how attorneys look at these things is the reality is you can have a not-a-loss-of-control issue and still be addicted. i'm kind of broadening this out. loss of control is not a requirement. "what is a requirement is that you have impairment of functioning. so even if you do not have the loss of control and you have the seven other criteria, we might still say you are addicted. "you agree with that testimony? did i read it correctly? "well, i did say that at the time, exactly." well, so now he came in this courtroom and 4372 said, "no, being addicted does not mean you have lost your free will or your control." well, which is it? in the past when he admitted to it or when he was on the stand and denying it? see, that is another example of impeachment. what is the truth from this man? you will remember this. on direct examination, dr. giakas was asked, "well, do you remember there was some reference in mr. hardin's deposition where he said something about being ill?" he goes, "i do remember that," and he went on this long-winded speech about what he meant by that. "and do you remember what he told you? "no. i just considered that, with the nicotine patch, he had gotten nauseous. and i've never heard patients talk about feeling ill, so i just assumed it meant that he had just worn the patch, like he had done in the past, and he got ill." and then he was shown the deposition when mr. hardin specifically said, "she knew, my wife, how ill i was," and defined it. he 4373 defined it in the deposition. so when i was reading that, dr. giakas acknowledged it, that he had defined it. and what did he say, the old man, mr. hardin? remember? "somebody getting on your nerves when you ain't got that cigarette, you want one." and what did dr. giakas say? "and i saw that, absolutely." well, which is it? his made-up explanation for what this guy meant when he said "my wife knew how ill i was" or the truth? because the truth suggests withdrawal, ill, like you are getting on someone's nerves because you have got to have that cigarette. he certainly was not going to admit to that because if he admits to that, that is criteria on withdrawal, another instance. this time he made this up of whole cloth. and, finally, in response to a very good question -- and it came from a juror. none of us asked it. and that was: "what defines a real quit attempt?" and look how long the answer was. he did everything but answer the question. you could 4374 read that. everything but answer the question. "what is a real quit attempt?" well, first of all, there is nothing in the dsm-5 that talks about a real quit attempt. so the answer would have been, "well, i could tell you what it is, but it is not a requirement in the dsm-5. you cannot find it there. "what is a serious quit attempt?" same answer. "you do not find it in the dsm-5. what you find for that criteria is unsuccessful efforts to cut down or control smoking." so even though this is totally irrelevant, do you think it really took a page for him to answer the question? and when you read it. you realize he did not answer it. he is bringing everything back to mr. hardin as opposed to answering the question of what constitutes a real quit attempt. the reason he could not answer it is because that is not part of the criteria. he had to think on his feet, and that is the answer that he gave you, ladies and gentleman. you know, you keep hearing about thomas hardin just was not addicted; he just smoked when 4375 he was dying of copd because he enjoyed it. and then you hear at the same time, this was a man who was stubborn. he did things he wanted to do, and he was going to do them. and you have heard me ask this before, and i'm going to say it again: if this was a man who was set in his ways and called stubborn and he simply liked to smoke regardless of developing copd and dying in the process, why is not this stubborn man who wanted to do things his own way say to those people who were telling him to quit, "hey, leave me alone. i want to smoke"? he did not say it. why did not he say it? because his wife, joyce hardin, said, "he did not want to die." he did not want to die. this was a man who was smoking cigarettes day after day, dying a progressive disease, and he is dying and he is smoking, and they are going to tell you that he is smoking because he just liked it. and by the way, no one came into court and said, "well, it sometimes takes 45 or 50 years of smoking two packs a day before you are addicted." the only reason dr. o'brien talked about 4376 when he would have realized he was addicted is when he said, "well, this is when he quit." he in no uncertain terms said, "well, he would not have been addicted 45 years earlier." mr. bayuk: your honor, i object again. that is not in evidence. the court: ladies and gentleman, again, you are the trier of the fact. you are only to consider evidence, and you know what evidence that is. and when you do go back to deliberate, you will be given all the evidence to review as well. thank you. mr. kaiser: do you really think -- and what did dr. o'brien say? the toughest patients that he treats are the ones that start when they are young. the kids that start when they are young are the toughest ones to treat. so do you really think it took thomas hardin 40 years before he was addicted after he got his disease or when he first became addicted? that is ridiculous and hogwash. now, let us take a look. doses of nicotine this man would have taken into his lungs. this is a man who, for 50 years of smoking, if you assume he did not smoke two packs, just a pack 4377 and a half a day, and the average puffs for a cigarette is ten, just like you heard in this courtroom, for 50 years, 365 days times 30 cigarettes at ten puffs, that is 5,475,000 doses of nicotine, every time that man puffed on a cigarette, every time he puffed on a cigarette, he took in a dose of nicotine, an addictive drug. do you think that maybe this guy was addicted after taking 5,475,000 doses of something that we know is addictive? or do you think maybe he just liked it and it was a habit? you do not have to find that there is been any proof from that witness stand that nicotine is addictive, because that is already been found for you. that is not something you have to do. but when you consider 5,475,000 doses of nicotine, you could rest comfortably that we have proven by a greater weight of the evidence that mr. hardin was addicted. and that is why mr. hardin could not quit until he was told in no uncertain terms in 2005, after he was intubated with a tube going down his throat to breathe for him, "if you do not stop now, you are going to die." 4378 and that finally let him hit rock bottom and stop. even dr. giakas said, "sometimes that is what it takes, hitting rock bottom." well, that was the man's rock bottom. and thankfully, he was able to quit in 2005. and finally, we have known since 1980 that r.j. reynolds and other tobacco companies have taken the position that they cannot defend continued smoking as "free choice," as they call it today, if the person was addicted. that is since 1980, and they are coming in here today saying, "oh, it was just his choice to smoke. if he was addicted and you find he was addicted, his free choice was compromised." that is their own position. there was this suggestion that somehow all of this information was available to mr. hardin for years and years. so he would necessarily have known that this information about the health risk of smoking was available to him. and remember when dr. proctor testified and i finished up on my redirect examination of dr. proctor by asking him one general question, and i kept repeating it. and that question was: if for hundreds of 4379 years that information that smoking was harmful and nicotine was addictive was in the public record, i prefaced each time, and i would say, then why was there a need to publicize the mouse-painting studies in 1953? and dr. proctor's answer was, "because people did not know." and i asked the same question again, and i said, "well, then why did cigarette sales rise after 1953?" and he said, "because people were not informed." and then, "why were fifty percent of all doctors in the united states smoking in 1960?" same reason again, "because people did not know. and the message that was put out by the tobacco companies was ineffective." and i asked the same question again, "why were four of seven astronauts on the '64 mercury mission regular smokers?" same answer, "because people did not know. "then why did president kennedy form a committee to investigate the link between health risks and cigarette smoking?" mr. bayuk: your honor, i have to -- none of 4380 this is in evidence. the court: let me see the attorneys sidebar. sidebar conference: (the following proceedings were had before the court outside the presence of the jury:) the court: i mean, he is going to say it is argument. so that is -- what else are you going to say with respect to -- mr. kaiser: i'm going say most of it is in evidence because i was allowed to do it. there was only one or two. in fact, you said, go ahead, ask for two -- you could ask two more. but it is argument at this point. mr. bayuk: well, my objection to this was in dr. proctor's deposition (sic) mr. kaiser maybe asked four or five of these questions, and then your honor shut it down. so the rest of his board is not argument. he is telling them what dr. proctor said, which is not in evidence and that is not argument. mr. kaiser: i'll change the statement and say something else. the court: yeah, i think you need to because i do not remember all of it. that is why 4381 i asked us to go sidebar. okay? end of sidebar conference (the following proceedings were had before the court and jury:) mr. kaiser: and also, regardless of whether all of these were asked to dr. proctor, what is important is this: these are facts. and the question, again, "if everyone had known for hundreds of years that smoking was bad and nicotine was addictive, then why did it take until 1966 before cautions were placed on packages of cigarettes? "well, the evidence shows because the tobacco industry's response was working and people were not informed. "why was there a need to change the warnings in 1970 and 1985? "same reason. and plus, the 1967 federal trade commission report, the '66 cautions were woefully ineffective. "why were there decades of news coverage on anything to do with smoking and health?" remember what dr. proctor said? "they are called newspapers, not oldspapers. you do not publicize something, you do not give 4382 media attention to something when it is known. you cover something when it is unknown. "why was there a need for bill talman to appear in a public service announcement in 1966, the guy from perry mason? "because people did not know. "why were one-third of all doctors in the united states smoking cigarettes in 1970, still a third of all doctors? "why? because the message still was not getting out. "why did the tobacco industry believe that consumers knew very little about nicotine and the fact it was a poison?" remember, in 1978, we have that memorandum. that is what it said. people did not know. the denialist message was successful, as i showed you earlier today. "why was there a need for yul brynner to appear in a public service announcement in 1955, this famous actor in the 1950s and '60s that thomas hardin thought was a baseball player? why did it take until the 1980s where there were restrictions or where people could smoking cigarettes? 4383 "because people were not informed. "why did it take the surgeon general until 1988 to report that nicotine in cigarettes was addictive? if this has been known for hundreds of years, why did it take until 1988? "why did not it take until 1982 before cigarette consumption peaked? if all this information was out there and everyone supposedly knew, how come cigarette sales kept skyrocketing? and, finally, "if all this information was out there for all these years, why is there a need for historians of science like dr. proctor?" and like dr. proctor said, "because history is often forgotten, and that is what a person like him does for a living. they bring back history that would otherwise have been forgotten." and in this case, the history of all this knowledge that you heard about had been forgotten. and when it was brought back, it was counteracted by the message from the tobacco companies. and we also know what thomas hardin did 4384 know, and you heard the evidence, it does not matter that in 1950 schools in alabama were supposed to teach classes about smoking. what you heard here from thomas hardin's own mouth in the 1950s when he was in school, he was taught nothing about smoking. his parents never said anything that smoking was bad, much less caused cancer. they told him he was too young to smoke, but when he was 15, he was smoking in the house. never learned anything in the church about smoking being bad, much less causing cancer. in 1966, when the cautions went on the packs of cigarettes, what did that tell him? it told him that cigarettes may be hazardous or they may not be hazardous. did not tell them him what hazardous meant. did not tell him it was going to cause lung cancer. did not tell him it was going to be addictive so one day when he tried to quit, he would not be able to. that is what those cautions told him. what did he know in the '80s? where is any evidence he knew anything in the '80s? now we know he knew things in the '90s. and the defense wants you to believe that it is 4385 thomas hardin's word you have to believe. he did not rely on anything. he did not see anything. well, if they are taking that approach, what else did he say? when was the first time you realized cigarettes were bad for your health? and what did he say? "1996, when i was diagnosed." if you are going to take the defense's word for it and listen to their argument that you just got to listen to what thomas hardin said, well, then why not listen to what thomas hardin said in 1996? did not know smoking was bad for him. now, this is a man -- you saw his deposition. you saw the way he answered questions. they were repeatedly, not just one time, repeatedly going back to the same subject matter and asking him, "did you rely on any ads?" and they would come back to it again, "did you rely on any ads?" then they would suggest an answer for him. "you did not rely on this ad, did you?" first of all, do we know even if he knew 4386 what it meant to rely on something? was that ever explained to him? now, you saw his demeanor in that deposition. you saw how he answered questions. and you know what else? this has come up in the closing argument of the defense about this dementia. and you will see in evidence, there is a medical record from 2010, and this was another explanation that dr. giakas gave. but this says what? first of all, the patient is an extremely poor historian, especially when his age is taken into account. a historian about the facts. "psychiatric: extremely poor historian, as above. distant. the patient constantly had to be asked the same question." now, this is before his deposition. "assessment and plan: poor historian. whether the patient has underlying dementia or not is not clear. but it certainly would appear that the patient does have some dementia." this is in 2010 before his deposition. and, of course, dr. giakas's explanation is, oh, well, he had pneumonia. of course, he is going 4387 to have dementia because that is what pneumonia causes. really? that is an addiction specialist telling you about pneumonia. this is the medical record telling you about this man's ability to remember things as a historian and the fact that there might be some dementia. and, yet, they would go back to the same subject matter. this was a deposition for two days, and they kept going to the same subject matter. "well, let us talk about the warnings again, mr. hardin. when did you first see these 1966 warnings? it was at that time, right?" there is not one shred of proof that mr. hardin saw warnings in 1966. he did not know when he saw them. he did not give a date when he saw them. remember all he said was "hazardous to your health." when did he see them? nobody knows. but the most important thing when we now get to comparative fault is something that the defendants will not and cannot address, and i did address it already, and that is this, all they want to dwell on is this idea that mr. hardin 40 or 50 years while he was smoking, 4388 after he was smoking did not make enough serious attempts to quit. and they keep dwelling on that. he made a couple of attempts but waited nine more years until he was able to quit, which meant he could have quit any time in his life, but they ignore the fact, they will not address the fact that you have got to start when mr. hardin was a kid and never had a cigarette in his mouth. see, they will not talk about when he started because that is their fault. that is r.j. reynolds's fault, and that is why they cannot talk about it. remember when i put that board up and i kept asking question and question? when they knew about the health risks in the '50s, why did not they tell anybody? when they knew it was addictive in the '50s why did not they tell anybody. when they knew it was dangerous in the '50s, why did not they put warnings on their cigarettes? when they knew it was addictive, why did not they put warnings on their cigarettes in the '50s and the early '60s? they cannot respond to that because if they do, they are going to have to admit they were 4389 putting profits over health. and they are going to have to admit that is not thomas hardin's fault. thomas hardin here in 1952, this is a boy. this is the person they are talking about. this is the person that they had in their sights in 1953 and 1954 when they decided to counteract negative messages about cigarettes. this is the person they wanted to smoke a lot of their cigarettes. and he did. this is the person they wanted to get addicted, and he got addicted. this is the person they wanted to smoke a lot of cigarettes for a long time. and he did everything they wanted him to do. mr. bayuk: your honor, i'm sorry to interrupt. there is no evidence of any of this in the case. i move to strike all of it. the court: sustained. mr. bayuk: and i also would like to make a motion, your honor. mr. kaiser: now, we will see the 1972 roper proposal when claude teague of r.j. reynolds says, "happily for us, cigarettes are a habit that they cannot quit." what does that mean? that they recognized that they were selling 4390 cigarettes that were addicting people and they were happy about it. what did robert heimann say in his deposition? "we wanted people to rely on our advertising. we did not care how much people smoked." that is what they are saying. that is the evidence in this case. and so you have to go with the starting point, when this boy in 1953 had just started to smoke, was not even addicted, had not even smoked a pack a day regularly yet. and so that is what you have to do. they want to just talk about quitting behavior, but the problem is you cannot argue choice when the person is addicted. so if we look at the comparative fault, you see quitting behavior and starting behavior, smoking initiation. and they keep talking about motivation. remember dr. giakas, you know, wanting to judge him. "he just was not motivated, did not want to try, did not want to quit." well, from the evidence in this case, all right, did you see or hear one scintilla of evidence that anyone actually counseled thomas 4391 hardin on how to formulate a plan to quit if that is what you had to do? you will not see one medical record. you did not hear from one witness that said, "we told him how to formulate the plan. he just refused to follow it." no one identified his cues for him so that he would know what prompted his smoking. did not hear any evidence about that. you heard dr. o'brien say, "well, that is a good first step because when people are aware of the cues it helps them quit." you have not seen one medical record where it indicates that any doctor identified his cue so that it would help him identify them and know that he should not react when he would see a cue. there is nothing in the medical records as to what was said to thomas hardin to help him become motivated to quit. you have not seen one medical record that actually said what the doctors told him other than their opinion, they do not think he is serious enough to quit. and these are not addiction experts. these are treating physicians and a lung doctor. what did rjr do to counsel thomas hardin how to quit? what information did they give him in 4392 the '50s? zero. they got him started. mr. bayuk: your honor, same objection. and i renew a motion. the court: sustained. mr. kaiser: their advertising created a climate in the '50s and '40s where it was normalized, where smoking was glamorized, where they pitched their products with athletes, and we know that thomas hardin saw them. mr. bayuk: your honor -- the court: let us go sidebar. sidebar conference: (the following proceedings were had before the court outside the presence of the jury:) mr. bayuk: your honor, this is now -- this is now repeatedly putting facts before the jury that are not in evidence that your honor has excluded. the court: yeah, this i remember specifically. mr. bayuk: i mean, i have -- i'm going to -- mr. kaiser: what was that? mr. bayuk: this is about youth. the court: it is the youth poster. it is the 4393 youth. mr. bayuk: it is -- you are targeting -- mr. kaiser: i did not say one word about any age or youth. mr. bayuk: he said -- he said they targeted this boy. this is who was in their sights. the court: absolutely. mr. kaiser: we are talking about the '50s. the man's hardly -- the court: you talked about -- mr. bayuk: you said '52. you showed a school picture. the court: the record is very clear. the record is very clear that you are saying you have got to look at the boy. it is clear. the record could be read back. mr. kaiser: it does. i might have said one word that -- the court: it is quite clear that the boy is not nine years old, not a 20 year old. mr. kaiser: and it does not matter what -- it -- so i cannot say what age he was when he started? you precluded me from saying that they targeted youth, and i did not say one word about targeting youth. 4394 mr. bayuk: that is exactly what he said. mr. kaiser: i did not use the word "target." the court: but it is clearly implied. i'm going to caution you to stop. you are going against my ruling. mr. bayuk: and i have to -- mr. kaiser: i'm not going to go against your ruling. the court: you are. mr. bayuk: it is argument under appeal. i mean, i have to move for a mistrial. i do not know if -- i'd understand if your honor wants to defer on it, but, i mean -- the court: i'm going to defer on it. end of sidebar conference (the following proceedings were had before the court and jury:) mr. kaiser: you know, by the time the warnings and the cautions were placed on the packs of cigarettes, thomas hardin had been smoking for almost 20 years. for almost 20 years he had been smoking for every day of his lifetime. that is when they are saying, "he should have been able to quit any time after that. it was just his personal responsibility." 4395 you know, who else's responsibility is it to do anything in life? that does not say a word. now his smoking initiation, there was no mention of any health risk and addictive nature of nicotine while r.j. reynolds advertised its products in the '40s and '50s. we know that. we know that they glamorized through their mass marketing efforts and helped normalize cigarettes. we know that. we know that r.j. reynolds manufactured and sold a defective product. that is an engle finding. thomas hardin did not. we know that r.j. reynolds was negligent. thomas hardin was not. we know that r.j. reynolds wanted people like thomas hardin to rely on the advertising. that is what robert heimann said. we know that r.j. reynolds wanted people like thomas hardin instead of quitting smoking to switch to filtered cigarettes. and, of course, they did not come out and say "filters are safer." but dr. proctor said they were marketed as a better alternative without admitting that their products were unsafe. and that is why you have all of these people 4396 switching to filtered cigarettes, leaving hardly any people smoking unfiltered cigarettes in a very short time. and it was r.j. reynolds that concealed information and lied to the public about the health risk of smoking for 50 years, not thomas hardin. so that is how you have to compare fault in this case. you do not just look in isolation a period of time when he had been smoking for 50 years. i also want to go back now to this deposition and let you be the judge. because just a little snippet i want to play for you, and you can gauge whether or not this was a guy who had all his faculties to be able to answer the questions and rely on his -- on his memory. (video clip was played and taken down to the best of the reporter's ability as follows:) by mr. cogan: q. the first warning appeared in 1966. do you recall seeing the warnings when they first appeared? a. i do not remember what year it was that -- q. but i take it you do remember seeing those warnings; is that right? a. (no response.) 4397 q. is there something about my question that is confusing you, mr. hardin? a. i was -- q. the first -- (video clip concluded.) mr. kaiser: and, of course, dr. giakas's explanation was he was short of breath and had problems breathing. that explains that. you did not see him having any problems breathing or being short of breath there. there was an a three-minute pregnant pause in response to a simple question. and you saw how many times that happened during the deposition. actions speak louder than words. when you hear his testimony he did not know if he relied on something; he did not think he relied on something. remember the facts. remember what dr. proctor said, "winston tastes good like a cigarette should. rather fight than switch." this man said the same exact thing, which means what? he saw the ads. dr. proctor tells you these billboards had athletes. they were pitching athletes. they invented baseball cards. and what does mr. hardin say? yeah, i saw 4398 billboards, but it did not say anything about being addictive. and who was yul brynner? a baseball player. and then when you talk about filters, pitching filter cigarettes as an alternative to non-filters. and what did thomas hardin say? he said that he switched to filters because they were better for him. where is that coming from? that is coming from the tobacco industry, the people that were selling the cigarettes, the people that wanted other people to smoke filtered cigarettes. as far as compensatory damages are concerned, you did not hear one word about an alternative calculation for you to consider. so that is -- comes down between my suggestion or any suggestion that you want to employ that you think might be better. that is what we are left with at this time. and, finally, on the punitive damages, remember, every instance i showed you on this board went to r.j. reynolds' intent, not negligence, but intent. they acted willfully and intentionally without regard for human life when they did not tell people what they knew back 4399 in the '40s, back in the '50s when thomas hardin was just starting to smoke. and that is why you should assess punitive damages in this case because we have proved by clear and convincing evidence. this is a woman who, on the one hand, knew her husband in the days when he was vibrant and healthy and then had to resort to taking care of him when he was basically sleeping more than waking while he was suffering from copd and ultimately dying. i ask you, ladies and gentleman, after considering the evidence in this case you find r.j. reynolds liable and you compensate joyce hardin for her pain and suffering and for her loss of companionship that continues into the future for the next 12 years and that you assess punitive damages in this case. and i thank you.