mr. belasic: good morning, ladies and gentlemen. i thank you for your attention and what is the last time that i'll get to respond to you. and i want to mention that right off the bat. when i'm done talking, that is it. i never get to say anything or tell you or emphasize any of the evidence that you heard. mr. migliori, he gets to go first and the last word at the end. i'll ask you to think, if you would, the type of evidence that i would point out is what we discussed. i do not get to respond to anything he said. now, thank you for your service. you have been (inaudible). this case is about a man that chose by his own words to start smoking an legal product that from almost the very beginning when he started smoking it, he knew it could put him into the hospital and could cause lung problems, who knew several years after the start that it caused severe injury to his own wife, and who knew in the first decade he smoked that it could cause lung cancer and death to his loved ones who he 7 specifically said he grieved and watched them bear it. now, today he said he is not responsible. and today he said that he was deceived. today his lawyer said he did not make a choice and he did not know because no one told him that he was specifically (inaudible) -- lung cancer on a certain day. we are going to review the evidence you heard. let me emphasize here that the key witness in this case was mr. harford. and that is because judge block said this is no longer a class action. it is not about a group of people, a group of smokers, it is not about whether the tobacco company did something wrong or if they should have acted differently. it is about mr. harford's claims. he is the only smoker. and when he talked about the verdict form, every question on the verdict form is about mr. harford. it is not about should r. j. reynolds have said something differently in 1961 or 1953. every question that you will be asked to answer is about mr. harford. let us start at the end with what mr. migliori said. he said that you should award not just $10 million plus those lost wages, not just 10 million, but he wants to get even more money for his client in something called punitive damages. 8 and he just told you the reason that he wants you to give not just 10 million, but even more to mr. harford because he said ctr, counsel for tobacco research, ti, the tobacco institute and tirc, the tobacco industry research council said what he said are false things. and you heard mr. harford when he took the stand. and i asked him have you even heard of any of these organizations. have you heard of ctr before your lawyers filed a lawsuit? no, he never'd even heard of them. ti, he would never even heard of it. tirc, he had never even heard of it. now, you just heard the plaintiff's lawyer say, that is his claim. that is what he stated as the basis for getting millions of dollars for a man who chose to use a legal product. and that man -- mr. migliori: objection, your honor? it is twice now violating a limine order. the court: which one? mr. migliori: legal product. twice. the court: all right. so you are advised, mr. belasic. you are aware of what this is? mr. belasic: it is not a violation of the order, your honor. i'm allowed to say it is a legal product. it is. everyone knows that. 9 the court: objection overruled. you may continue. you can deal with it on redirect -- not on redirect, but on rebuttal. mr. belasic: the basis that he gave you for punitive damages is that those three tobacco organizations said something false. we all know that mr. harford said he had never heard of them. i will go down a list and show you his testimony. he said he never heard anything. when we asked this question, what does this have to do with mr. harford, mr. harford's testimony -- not me. it is not a trick. it is not something i'm trying to persuade you by yelling at you or something. mr. harford said ctr, tirc, ti had nothing to do with his smoking. and, of course, one of the first questions i asked him was, you did not start smoking because of advertising. you did not smoke because of advertising. and he agreed. he does not claim that he kept smoking because of that. he did not even claim that he did not want to quit because of advertising. and yet that is what we heard again and again and again. counsel spent a lot of time criticizing a 10 tobacco company for having the nerve to say that a person might be responsible for choosing to buy a cigarette. well, you know who was the main expert who talked about the responsibility of a smoker. it was the plaintiff's expert. it was dr. burns, the man who writes articles and various surgeon general's reports. that is their expert, ladies and gentlemen. and he said specifically smokers, including addicted smokers, are responsible for their smoking behavior. he said ultimately it is up to the individual. and specifically said that addiction does not relieve -- does not eliminate a person's responsibility to control their own smoking behavior. miss baker asked him. he agreed it applies to mr. harford in this case. and, of course, mr. harford did control his smoking behavior. we will go through the evidence. but for 40 years or 35 years he says he did not want to quit. he did not mean it. we will go through the fact that there was only a few occasions in 35 years where he ever tried to stop for more than a few hours. but then when he changed his mind and then when he was motivated, he quit. addiction did not cause him to smoke once he made up his mind, just like addiction was not the cause of his injury. 11 you can debate about it. and we will talk about the evidence whether smoking caused it. but we know that addiction did not cause it. because when he changed his mind, suddenly addiction did not have that power. and dr. burns, their expert, said that smokers, including mr. harford when miss baker asked him, are responsible for their smoking behavior. now, this is what mr. harford said in about the first five minutes when he took the stand and i asked him questions. he agreed he did not start smoking until he was an adult. remember when we heard that for the first time in this case? they never revealed he took a few puffs at age 13. i said, well, that is new. why are you saying that now? and he told me, well, you never asked me when i was under oath at my deposition when my first cigarette was. that was not true at all. you saw me have to read his sworn testimony. when did you smoke your first cigarette, sir? he said, age 19, 1950. after i did that he agreed, yes, that is when he started smoking as an adult. we know he was in the service and we know why he chose to start smoking. he said he wanted to be like the group. most of the men were smoking. 12 but he agreed with me he had that choice and he could have said, no, thank you. there is no way i want to do that. i've never smoked before age 19. i do not want to start now. that was his choice. no one from r. j. reynolds was inside his head. no one from r. j. reynolds could make that choice. and that is when i asked him, advertising, glamorous people in movies, did they cause him to start smoking. he said no. nothing r. j. reynolds did or said caused him to start smoking. now, i want to talk just a little bit about the 1940s because mr. harford was not smoking then even though he said he saw all those advertisements as a kid and he saw movies. but he had chosen not to smoke. and by the end of the 1940s -- by the end of the 1940s he was 18 years old, legally an adult. he had not smoked. he grew up in an antismoking family. his mom did not smoke. his dad did not smoke cigarettes. his dad smoked a pipe. we know his dad did not want him to smoke because we heard that testimony from mr. harford. and we know that his grandfather as he put it was deathly against smoking. now, when mr. harford was 16, this song came out. you heard mr. migliori make fun of it. and i'll 13 tell you why we put that up, what it shows. even in 1947 when there were not scientific surveys, when there were not scientific studies, even then the idea that smoking could kill someone and the idea that you could become a nicotine slave was so common that it was in the hit song -- the number one song of that year. ask yourself, in order to get to a hit song it is not going to be some unknown scientific formula or chemistry. you are going to make a popular song and talk about something, it is going to have to be pretty common. i mean brittany spears is not going to do something about the theory of relatively or some strange, you know, molecule or isotope we have not heard of. so in 1947 when we heard they sang the chorus smoke yourself to death, go up to st. peter, the very lyrics that mr. harford said he remembers, at 16 he was hearing that even on the radio that it could kill you. he never smoked in the '40s because it was his choice. he changed his mind when he was an adult. now, mr. migliori covered some of this. and he actually put down on one of his -- his father did not warn him about lung cancer and someone did not say or warn him about this. let us look though at what he actually said 14 and the information that he had. and one of the things i want to point out, they say, well, if r. j. reynolds had published something, maybe if r. j. reynolds had written in a magazine or published in a newspaper that they agree with some theory of causation, that could have made a difference. first of all, nothing on the verdict form will relate to that question. you will not be asked on the verdict form if r. j. reynolds had said something at a different time, would it make a difference. those are not the questions. but think about this: all of these warnings came from the people that he loved, they came from the people that he trusted the most, they came from the most credible sources. he does not claim to have ever heard -- and let me repeat because mr. harford was very clear. i ran down a laundry list. these are things that r. j. reynolds said, a statement about smoking and health? no. american? no. brown & williamson? no. ctr? no. he does not claim to have heard any of these statements that mr. migliori is playing. they do not apply to him. but what he did hear was from his loved ones. his own father in '51, that is the very first year he started smoking, says, they are no good for you. and 15 he said, well, that means nothing to me. well, it means they are no good for him. and then i asked him what did it mean. and he said, i thought my father was telling me that i would not be able to quit. all right. 60 years later we are in a courtroom -- 63 years later we are in a courtroom and he wants $10 million because he said smoking was difficult to quit. does not deny that he did quit. does not deny that when he made the choice to quit, he has not smoked for 22 years. and he told me on his own that 63 years ago he thought his father was telling him he would not be able to quit. but he says, no responsibility for that choice. now, the same year -- or after that, the year after, '52, he goes into the hospital in japan for a full week. and he says very clearly he believed smoking was causing the bronchitis problems, the throat problems. it is not something we are making up or found somebody to say. that is from the plaintiff himself. so 62 years ago, 1952, he knew and believed that smoking was causing lung problems that were bad enough to lay him up for a week in a hospital. he said, well, i did not know i could get 16 lung cancer, so i had no reason to quit. and now 62 years later he asks for $10 million. the mid '50s, his wife. no one he loved more than his wife. he saw firsthand what smoking was doing to her. and we know that he did not just see it. she told him. she said smoking was causing her health problems. he said it got worse and worse and worse, and that in 1964 she quit. and when i asked him, he said the symptoms were so bad -- in his own words he said they were borderline copd, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. now, she was not diagnosed with it until 2011. but in 1956 it was so severe that she told him it was harming her health, and that she was going to start cutting back and she quit for good. their argument -- mr. harford's argument is your own wife can tell you that the same product that you are using is causing a disease so bad that she cannot breathe, that she is coughing, and that he was reasonable in saying, i had no idea. i had no idea it could happen to me. i had no idea. use your common sense. use your common sense. think about whether or not that makes any sense. so from 1956 to 1964 he said he continued to discuss his wife's health problem. so again year after 17 year he knows that the person he loves most he can physically observe the damage that it is doing, and he argues that meant nothing to me. she was not a doctor. i had no idea. i submit the opposite. the best warnings are from loved ones. the best warning is what we observe. the best warning is what he can see with his own eye. now, he is saying he would not quit when he knew it put him in the hospital 60 years ago. he would not quit when he saw what it did to his wife. he would not quit when he saw his uncles dying of lung cancer. but counsel said if r. j. reynolds had published an article in the new york times and said, we now agree that the statistics that the surgeon general is using proved causation, that he would have quit then. for a man who says he never even read the newspaper, ask yourself if that makes sense. now, 1961. could there be a more direct warning? his own doctor said the product you are using is causing a lung disease. he says dr. rose told him that. he said you have bronchitis year after year. he said dr. rose told him that was the cause and suggested that he quit smoking. 18 that is 1961. that is 30 years before he got cancer, way more than dr. burns admitted would mean that his risk of lung cancer in the future would go back to normal if he had just taken his doctor's advice. now, r. j. reynolds could not make the decision whether to follow his doctor's advice. and r. j. reynolds was not there to say, do not believe your doctor. and mr. harford says that he does not remember anything -- any statement by r. j. reynolds. and yet his attorney said that meant nothing to him. he was not a doctor. and when i asked him, mr. harford, he said, well, i did not listen to him because he was a chiropractor. i went to him for a prescription. that is his position. now, starting in the early '50s when he was in the service, he found out that uncle caleb had lung cancer and it was caused by smoking. there were two others in the '60s, his uncle edgar and his stepbrother. but you think what he is saying. three people in his family -- this is in the '50s and '60s. that is 50 to 60 years ago. a half century ago he believed -- he said he grieved them. that was his words. he said, i was so busy grieving their death from lung 19 cancer that he was told was caused by smoking that he said again the warning meant nothing to him. he ignored it. what could be a more dramatic warning than seeing a loved one die? what could be a more direct warning than having your own loved ones, people that you relied upon say smoking caused their lung cancer? and there is no dispute about that. mr. harford said that his family members told him that smoking killed those three loved ones. and he said, well, they were not doctors. when he comes into court today he said, well, they were not doctors so that does not matter. i was okay with ignoring all of that. and i asked him, well, wait a second. did not uncle edgar -- did not your cousin tell you that uncle edgar's doctor had determined it was caused by lung cancer? and he admitted it. i do not know what their explanation is for that. could there be a more direct warning? this is a half century ago. now he wants 10 million because he chose by his own admission. he never tried to quit after these warnings. we will talk about when he tried to quit. he does not even claim that when his doctor told him to quit, 20 that he did anything. he does not even claim that when uncle caleb and uncle edgar, when they were buried that he did anything. he does not claim that he reacted to any warning. but his lawyer says, well, the whole reason he smoked is because something reynolds said, which his client said on the stand he did not even recall, he is never heard of it. and we know he saw the pack warning. he told me that hazardous, he did not understand what hazardous meant after he was in the hospital in '52 and thought that smoking caused his lung problems, after the doctor told him that smoking caused his lung problems and after he heard that his own family members were getting lung cancer caused by smoking. now, they say this is blaming the victim. r. j. reynolds did not sue mr. harford. mr. harford is suing r. j. reynolds and pointing out the fact -- pointing out the facts that mr. harford agrees to and admits to that he freely gave under oath on the stand. that is not blaming the victim. that is what their own expert, dr. burns, said, the smoker is responsible for his smoking. and claiming i need a definition -- does not mean that he cannot quit. we know he did. it does not mean it alleviates his 21 responsibility. he saw these warnings and he did nothing. now, his lawyer says, well, if the warning was earlier, he would have quit. really? what happened in real life? he did not respond to any of the warnings. he does not even claim that when the warning went on the pack that he quit for even an hour. he does not claim that. he does not claim he ever made an effort to quit because of a warning. i asked him why did you ignore the warnings. and he told me things like i did not ignore my wife. i helped my wife when she tried to quit. and i said, but you ignored her warning. and he said, she is not a doctor, et cetera. could not have been more clear in 1970. dr. burns agreed that if he had chosen to quit, then his risk of lung cancer would have gone back to normal. and in 1985 did he see the warning? did he try to quit then if he sees a warning? his lawyer told you -- his lawyer argued that if the word "lung cancer" had come out, he would have changed it. but we know that is not true because he had three loved ones that died of lung cancer. and every one of them, his family warned him it was the cause. and he 22 did nothing. and when this warning came out. it did not cause him to change anything. now, i asked him twice. mr. harford continued to say, if i knew it could cause lung cancer, i did not think it would happen to me. if i knew it could cause lung cancer, i did not think it was cancer. if we told him it was cancer, maybe he would say, well, you did not tell me it was adenocarcinoma. but can anyone dispute after his testimony that he knew beginning in the 1950s that smoking could cause serious risks to his health, that smoking would put him in the hospital personally in '52, it would cause his wife to be so ill that she would cough and be unable to smoke? can anyone deny that, the effect of seeing three loved ones buried from lung cancer? he told me twice he intended to smoke until and unless he got a disease. and he does not deny it. if he did not get a disease, he would be smoking today. he would not be suing for $10 million. he would be smoking. he told me twice he intended to smoke until and unless he got a disease. and, in fact, he said if he got a disease, his attitude was the doctor could heal it. i said, why did not you just follow your doctor's advice and was talking about how did that -- how can r. j. reynolds be responsible for the decision that 23 happened exclusively between him and his doctor when he admits he never heard r. j. reynolds say anything denying the health risks. and his explanation was -- he said, well, i continued to smoke and i thought he could heal me, he said, maybe i could get some penicillin. we are going to talk about when he really quit smoking. but under mr. harford's testimony, part of the testimony he just said he would smoke till he got sick. and when he got sick, he would quit. and when he got better, he never returned to smoking. he said he changed his mind and made a commitment and suddenly addiction did not have this power. that is what he says. it is not something that r. j. reynolds made up. it comes from mr. harford. now, i'll just briefly mention one of the things that i talked about is when he worked for the american tobacco company and swisher & sons, that that was in the 1960s. and that was already after he had been hospitalized, knew about the bronchitis. it was after the first time in the service with uncle caleb and the lung cancer. it was after his wife was six. and he did not say, well, i'm not going to sell that. and he did not say, when i make my pitch to the customers, i'm going to say, look, it is been harming 24 me. i'm in the hospital. my own wife is so sick she stopped using it. he did not say that because that was his job and he was selling cigarettes. but now he is suing the same company that he worked for because he made the choice that he wanted his customers to make in the 1960s. and you know he was an executive. why are we quibbling about this? he said, i was a member of the young executives. when i joined swisher, i joined a tobacco organization called young executives. and it had cigar executives, cigarette executives, candy distributor executives. he was a member of that group. and for ten years his job was to sell tobacco. for the first two years, '60 and '61, he was selling cigarettes, the very cigarette that he is now suing for millions of dollars for, paul mall, tareyton. the next eight years he was selling tobacco. and he was an executive. he was the division manager. he had seven salesmen reporting to him. he covered all the way from chicago in the west to west virginia and western pennsylvania in the east, all the way from michigan in the north to kentucky. one of the most populous regions in the country, he was in charge of those sales. he is not an 25 executive. does not make any difference. are you kidding? he is selling -- he is selling cigarettes. he is now suing his own company. he is suing his company for he says for not telling him what his own doctor warned him about, a warning that he never gave to his customers. he is suing for what he did. and it does not make sense. you ask yourselves can he seriously say that he was tricked by advertising when he was in the business of putting the ads up, as he said, making the pitch to for the various companies? this was not a man who was a 9 or a 12-year old. he was in his 20s or 30 years old, a tobacco executive in the young executives group who was responsible for advertising. he knew what advertising was. and maybe that is why he told me he never smoked because of advertising. there was no claim in this case that if r. j. reynolds stopped advertising, he would have quit smoking, no claim in this case. and he did not even try to testify. remember who they put up to talk about advertising? it is long ago. it was the very first witness, dr. cummings. dr. cummings showed you advertising. dr. cummings showed you what ctr and the 26 other groups said in the '50s. first thing we asked him is it has nothing to do with harford; right? you are not claiming that it caused him to smoke or continue? and he agreed. and then when mr. harford got up, he said he never even heard of those groups. his lawyers sued because of companies that he had not even heard of. and for the unknown companies that he had never heard of he wants $10 million. we know he quit. and we know more importantly that he has never even wanted to smoke a cigarette again. that is not an addicted smoker. that is not what their experts told you. addicted smokers are supposed to have repeated cravings for many years because they told you their brains are rewired so that they crave cigarettes and will relapse years down the road. there may well be other smokers who could bring that claim, but mr. harford is not one of them. he is not that smoker. by his own admission he has not wanted to smoke since he quit. now, why did we spend the time on whether he quit in 1985? first of all, he had never said that he quit smoking 'in 92 because he was spitting up blood until this lawsuit. 27 in 1992 did dr. scanlon say he was spitting up blood and that is why the patient came to me? no. dr. scanlon said he was not a smoker. he had quit years earlier. this is a version of events that exists only in a lawsuit for $10 million. before this lawsuit was filed when he saw dr. scanlon or dr. dickerson or all of those other doctors, he never told them. plaintiffs agree there is not a single medical record from that time period in the '90s when he got lung cancer that say he is a smoker. all of them say he quit years earlier. so this story that he was spitting up blood, it never existed until the lawsuit. but here's a simple question. who would know best whether he was spitting up blood and quit for that reason or whether he quit in the '80s or whether he always tried to quit? it is the eyewitnesses and the eyewitnesses are his stepdaughter, lana roberto, and his granddauther gina marasco. now, i did not bring the stepdaughter to trial. we had to read her testimony. you got to see miss marasco. the eyewitnesses who lived with him in the '50s and in the '60s and in the '70s and in the '80s for those four decades, either lana or gina, lived with him. and they say they never saw him try to quit smoking. the 28 testimony was clear as a bell. they never saw him try to quit. does that make any sense? if he was trying to quit -- addicted smokers are supposed to be making multiple serious efforts. that is what dr. burns said and that is what dr. werner said. but they did not know about the eyewitnesses and they did not talk about the eyewitnesses. they do not corroborate the story. his own family members, they love him. they have no reason not to tell the truth. they do not back up his story. they say he never even said that he wanted to quit. again, gina marasco and lana roberto say, well, i assume he quit in '92. i do not know. did you ever see him smoke in the '80s? and his granddaughter, who saw him, as she saws, often, said she never saw him smoke again after he came to florida. when did he came to florida? he was here for a year in '82 and '83. and when did he come to florida? '84, '85. that is the eyewitnesses. that is the eyewitnesses. and we know this was his own writing. this was not something a doctor wrote down. mr. harford in his own writing said, i quit in 1985 and he signed it. what is his explanation? what is his 29 explanation? he has none. he says, i do not know why i wrote that. really? you saw mr. harford. mr. harford is a very vibrant and healthy 82-year old man. now, his psychiatrist threw up her hands and said, mr. belasic, he is 82. i do not know. i do not remember the deposition. he is 82. that is what dr. werner told me. and that is right. he is 82. and no one is attacking him or pretending that he should know exactly what happened 52 years ago. but he told me he would never forget the year he got cancer. '92 he says is burned in his brain. he will never forget the year he spit up blood and got cancer. who would? so i asked, well, then if that is the year he quit, it is the easier thing in the world. doctor, i quit smoking when i got cancer. he has no explanation. well, if this just happened by accident, then why -- then why did he put in his own handwriting again that i quit when i was 55? if he was smoking in '92, he would have been more than 50 years old. that is his own handwriting for a second time and why did he in a telephone interview -- a telephone interview say again, i quit in 1985? and why 30 did he tell a different doctor he quit smoking 19 years ago? now, why is that important? well, whether he quit in '85 or '92, we know he had the ability to quit because he did. he is never smoked again. this is not one of those cases about a smoker whose addiction prevents them from quitting. dr. burns admitted it, dr. werner admitted it. everyone knows he has not smoked for decades. but think about the difference. think about the difference. would he tell all of his doctors in the '90s when they were treating him he is not a smoker? why would his own relatives never see him smoke after the 1980s? why would he then tell his own doctors 15 years later before the lawsuit i quit smoking in '85? and then when he comes in and sues for 10 million, he changes for the first time his story. and he says, i was smoking when i got lung cancer. and my mouth was filling with blood and i was throwing it up. you have to be the judges of credibility. but it is undisputed that he never told that story to anyone before the trial started. and dr. scanlon said he was not a smoker when he came to him. that does not make any sense. now, obviously if he is going to sue for 10 31 million, that is a better version of events to say you are quitting because your mouth is filled with blood. you will have to decide. but there is no evidence that that happened. and it is completely contrary to his own handwriting. and he will not take responsibility for that. he says, i do not know. and his attorney says, it does not matter at all. i think it does. you will decide if it does. that is his own doctors. his doctors who treated his lung cancer say he quit in the '80s. his handwriting says he quit in the '80s. why did he quit in the '80s? remember when dr. werner came in? she is the psychiatrist who she does -- she smoked for 20 years. she said -- she claims she did not remember when she quit. she does not remember when she went to medical school. even though she smoked for 20 years, she obviously was smoking in medical school. and she filled out the checklist and said he was addicted. i asked her, is not it true -- and she had read that mr. harford had said that in -- back in the day the thing that made him want to quit was someone insulted him. someone insulted him. he came in from smoking and someone said how bad he smelled. he was not happy. he 32 was insulted. and he said, like a lot of smokers would, i did not notice it. and the guy made another insulting remark. told him pigs do not know they stink. dr. werner agreed, yep, that is what he reported. and he felt like a degenerate. he said that in his words, a degenerate. and dr. werner agreed that is what he had said. now, today he does not tell that story, the story that dr. werner heard that he said under oath before the trial. that is not a health reason for quitting, but it sounds like it was very powerful. and dr. werner admitted it was. so he quit in the 1980s. he told his psychiatrist, he told it under oath that it was because he was insulted. let us talk about the medical question. did he have a primary lung adenocarcinoma caused by smoking? and let me say right off the bat plaintiff tries to imply that what r. j. reynolds is doing is attacking dr. scanlon. no one is attacking dr. scanlon. dr. scanlon came in here and said, i remember very little. what i remember was in about ten pages of his medical records. remember he held those up? and he does not know or remember what the 33 other doctors did. he explained why he wrote what he wrote. and no one is attacking him or saying that he did not think what he wrote was true at the time. that is not the issue. i'm going to review the evidence that mr. migliori left out. i'm going to point out how the evidence is simply the opposite of what mr. migliori suggested. but first remember that it is the plaintiff that has the burden of proof. r. j. reynolds does not have to prove that it was something else. r. j. reynolds does not have to disprove. and back when we were in front of judge mccoun that is one of the first things he told you. you have all taken that oath and of course you have been instructed by judge block. the plaintiff's burden of proof is important. you all agreed to hold it to them. they have to prove every one of their claims, including this one. here's one thing that mr. migliori did not mention. he said that dr. scanlon -- and think of this. think of all the different doctors that you heard in the medical records, all the different doctors that he saw. and the plaintiffs, they could have chosen to bring 34 whoever is available, whoever they wanted to talk to. the only doctor, the only one who actually treated him is dr. scanlon. and dr. scanlon would not say that smoking causes lung cancer. let me repeat that. dr. scanlon would not say that smoking causes lung cancer. it was right at the end. mr. migliori was winding up and was going to be prepared to have the treating physician say smoking causes lung cancer. that is the minimum you would expect in a case where it is their burden of proof. you bring in a doctor, you better have that doctor be able to say that smoking causes lung cancer. not the case. that is not what dr. scanlon said. the first thing that dr. scanlon said when mr. migliori asked him about cause, he said that lung cancer was associated with smoking. mr. migliori explored that. he talked about to statistical association. remember that video they showed where the old man from the american tobacco company was talking in the 19 (inaudible), and he said, we always agreed that smoking was associated, was a statistical association. and the dispute was over the statistics and cause. they say that that is a lie now. they say 35 that is fraud. but in 2014 the plaintiff's own doctor said the same words, lung cancer is associated. he calls it an association, not a cause. well, mr. migliori explored it further and then he said smoking was a risk factor. now, where have you heard that word before? remember when the plaintiffs ran the clip of five or six people from the tobacco institute, the organization that mr. harford had never heard of? one of them was a woman. another one was a man. and they said, we think smoking is a risk factor, but not a cause. and they say that is a lie. they say that is fraud now. mr. harford admits that he never heard any of those. the point is they say those are horrible lies. but mr. harford's own doctor in 2014 said under oath, i regard smoking as a risk factor. the reason i put this down is, you saw the reaction, and you remember the reaction of mr. migliori, he immediately asked him again, doctor, what is your opinion on smoking as a cause of mr. harford's cancer? and he said, i think it is a risk factor. now, that is not r. j. reynolds. that is not trickery. as mr. migliori said, dr. scanlon has no skin in the game. if you bring a lawsuit and you want 36 $10 million for using a product that you have the right and the choice to buy and you say it caused a deadly disease that you did not die of, you bring a doctor in and he says, i cannot say it was the cause of your lung cancer, how have they met their burden of proof? how can you find that they have met their burden of proof when his own doctor, the only one that ever met him, that at least looked at some of the information, he says, no, it is a risk factor. i cannot say cause even when mr. migliori tries to get him to say it. and you know the issue in this case, was it a primary adenocarcinoma, and the reason we brought dr. kumar, one of the top radiation oncologists in the country. they not only did a small test before, they did a little needle biopsy with a small amount of fluid -- we are going to talk about that -- but they did what amounted to a scientific test to determine if it was adeno. that was the radiation treatment itself. everyone agrees that adenocarcinomas are not sensitive to radiation and they rarely, rarely can be cured. under the best of circumstances three to five percent is what the expert says. in fact, dr. scanlon, his own doctor, said it was one to three percent, but in his experience it was lower. 37 now, that is out of all the adenocarcinomas in the world. the ones that are one-centimeter, ones that are nine. that is under the best of circumstances. but this was not a typical adenocarcinoma. it was huge. it was nine centimeters. it was wrapped around the aorta. we knew that is near his heart, it was near his spinal cord. it was outside of the lung, part of it inside the chest cavity. and dr. kumar responded that with those factors, it cannot be cured. now, no one's saying that at the time they wrote down adenocarcinoma, that they did not think that is what it was. but now you have this new factor. you have the radiation. and we know that it could not have been a nine-centimeter adenocarcinoma wrapped around the aorta and be cured. we are going to review the evidence. but here's the important thing. even their doctors -- even dr. scanlon thought that it was such a large adeno that it was not able to be cured. he agreed at the time he made that determination because he told mr. harford you got a nine-centimeter adenocarcinoma around the aorta, he told him that it was incurable. now, thank goodness for mr. harford his doctor was wrong. it was not untreatable. and so is it crazy to point out obviously all of the doctors were 38 wrong. it was not incurable. but why did they think it was incurable? because it was this adenocarcinoma they said. what they have to prove in this lawsuit is a lot different than what the doctors care about. the doctors did not care about whether the cell type was perfectly correct. the doctors cared about treating him. and thank god for him that he was able to be cured. but we know the doctors got it wrong. and they thought it was incurable because they thought it was adenocarcinoma. so logically how could it have been an adenocarcinoma? well, that is why we brought our expert, dr. kumar, the only radiation oncologist. mr. migliori said, why did r. j. reynolds bring these witnesses? mr. harford had dozens of doctors. his choice who to bring. he did not bring the doctor or the lung specialist that it turns out is most important in your decision. he did not bring his radiation oncologist. and dr. scanlon never even talked to him and none of their experts talked to him. he did not bring his own doctor who could have answered the question. so we brought one of the top radiation oncologists in the country. what dr. kumar told you is 39 not an opinion. it is a scientific fact. and he said it is scientifically impossible for this to have been an adenocarcinoma because it is scientifically impossible to cure a nine-centimeter adenocarcinoma with radiation alone. he told you another fact, that in 1992 they could not give as much radiation to the chest without killing the person as they do today. he is the only person that knows the machinery, that knows the technology. they would not let dr. burns or dr. scanlon operate that machinery. they are not qualified, licensed, board certified. dr. kumar is. he said there is not enough radiation in '92 or 2014 to cure an adeno without killing the patient. he said it has to be something else. he said it was absolutely not possible, that it was not physically possible -- that there was no dose known to mankind. and here was the science. and this was basically -- dr. kumar was not just a doctor. he is also a scientist. and he explained when you are a radiation oncologist, all you do for a living is take cancer patient, 6,000 cancer patients that he is seen, and figure out how to get as much radiation onto the tumor with the 40 correct angle, correct dose, correct field. that is what he does for a living. he says this is not -- this is not an opinion. this is textbook science. to cure a one-centimeter tumor it took 6,000 rads. a two-centimeter tumor, 6,600. three centimeters you saw 7,000. four centimeters, 7,400. so he showed a little demonstrative exhibit. this orange ball is four centimeters. this orange ball is about the size that you could cure with radiation alone. if this was an adenocarcinoma, the only expert on this issue says could not have been bigger than this and been cured today. but look what he says was the maximum dose in 1992. the most that you give is 6,600 rads at two centimeters. the most that you could cure with radiation alone if it was an adenocarcinoma is about half of the size of this. now, we know his tumor was not anywhere close to this. we know his tumor was not half this size. we know his tumor was nine centimeters, nine centimeters. dr. kumar says this softball is just a tiny bit less than nine centimeters across, this softball. as he put it, there is no possible dose, there is no way that this tumor can be an adenocarcinoma because the 41 patient would be dead. now, thank god for mr. harford and his family that he is alive, but it could not have been an adenocarcinoma. this is not speculation. it is straight science. there is a formula for how much you can give a patient. it is not i'm guessing what it is. this is what doctors in his field (inaudible), the most that they could have cured would have been an adeno half this size but this was his tumor. it is impossible. and what did they have to say on this? they have nothing to say. they do not call a radiation oncologist. dr. scanlon said, i do not know what the dose is. dr. scanlon did not say, well, it was a nine-centimeter adeno and can be cured. dr. scanlon says very clearly, i'm not an expert on that issue. i'm going to tell you what i wrote down. this is scientific fact. they say nothing to dispute it. it cannot be an adeno and be cured. it cannot be a nine-centimeter adeno and be cured. and their claim is that they can prove it is a nine-centimeter adeno and be cured. that is impossible. that is scientific fact. it is not just an opinion. and so your answer on question 2 should be 42 no. and your answer on question 3 has to be no because it could not have been an adenocarcinoma caused by smoking because it was this size and you cannot do it. it is impossible. so they do not actually dispute his testimony. they call him a liar. and you saw mr. migliori, he said, well, that is the opinion a hundred thousand dollars -- exaggerated. he said, that is the opinion a hundred thousand dollars will buy. he got up here today and he put down the 80 to $100,000 and he said we bought an opinion. i mean, let us not mince words about it. he is saying that i paid someone to lie. that is his argument. well, let us look at his credentials. first of all, this was only the third time he is ever testified. why would he lie about something? he is been reviewing cases since the 1990s. he is only testified at trial three times. they brought in experts that testified in trial 50 times. dr. burns has been paid $3 million. not an expert in radiation oncology. he is not qualified, he is not licensed -- he does not know the dose. they would not let him run the machine. he got paid $3 million over time. 43 i did not get up there and call dr. burns a liar, but that is not the issue. look at his qualifications. 6,000 radiation oncology patients. the plaintiff's expert has treated zero patients. as a profession he plans and administers the radiation therapy, the dose, the angle, the number of times you are giving it, what he calls the field to make sure it does not harm the aorta, the spine, the heart. that is what he does for a living. dr. scanlon, dr. burns, they do not do that, they are not qualified. they are not board certified. they are both pulmonologists. when it comes time to actually give radiation, they get doctors like dr. dickerson and dr. kumar. now, let me ask you this: would a man who the national cancer institute picked to be one of the top investigators of new ways to treat lung cancer, do you think that a man who is devoted his life to treat 6,000 patients, who does research on ways to heal it, and the national cancer institute trusts him to be the principal investigator to find new ways to heal, do you really think that guy would come in here and lie for 800 bucks an hour? that is what they are suggesting. 44 remember, he was a fellowship at the american cancer society. the american cancer society is about as antismoking as you can get. and they call him a liar. he is the one who is published a hundred different times, given lectures. no one asked dr. burns or dr. scanlon for their opinion on radiation oncology. no one asked them for an expert opinion, is not it true it is impossible to have an adenocarcinoma that big because it could not have been cured? it had to be another type of cancer. no one asked them their opinion. they are not in that field. now, dr. scanlon came up and mr. migliori walked him through what he called clinical history, how much he smoked and how he presented and that he threw up blood. in a couple questions dr. scanlon said the cell type, it might tell us if you have a cancer. it does not tell us if it is an adeno. you have congestion and smoking and throwing up blood, it could be anything. and then he said, well, we had an x-ray. and she asked him, did the x-ray tell you what cell type it was? no. and then she said, did the ct scan tell you what cell type it was? no. that was not disputed. again dr. scanlon said he only remembers what was in a very small number of patients in his 45 records. but here's what dr. scanlon said (inaudible). who performed the x-ray? why did not the plaintiffs bring that doctor in? he does not even know. they chose not to bring him. was there a report on the x-ray? we do not have the report and he does not remember. now, the only thing they took from the lung was a needle that they put into the lung and they call it needle aspiration. and that refers to fluid, fluid off the lung. and their own expert, dr. burns, said you put that little needle in, you do not get tissue. you get some liquid that might have a few cells in it. that is all they did. you can look at all the medical records back in the jury room. everything they described, the only thing they actually took was this little needle that dr. burns said had some fluid in it. now, was there a report? dr. scanlon does not remember. we asked dr. scanlon, well, who was the pathologist? who did that? should not that person have testified, ladies and gentlemen? they chose not to bring that doctor. they brought the doctor who does not know who did it. now, dr. scanlon admitted i like to have a core biopsy. that is when the needle goes in far enough 46 you can actually get some tissue so at least you have some tissue from the lung, and the pathologist can look at it under a microscope and try to figure out what cell type it is. emily baker asked him, did you get a core biopsy? he said, well, i like to get one. i do not know. is there any record of a core biopsy? of course not. every time they described it, the only thing they had was this needle who got liquid. no core biopsy, no core evidence. now, mr. migliori with his questions when we put our doctor up assumed that happened. assumptions are not burden of proof, ladies and gentlemen. there is no evidence there was a core biopsy. we have no idea what it showed. there is nothing in the records and dr. scanlon did not know anything about it. pathology. now, pathology is when they do look at something taken from the lung under a microscope. the only thing they had was a little bit of fluid in a needle. so there is no dispute, ladies and gentlemen, a doctor called a pathologist looked at it. and a doctor called a pathologist reached a diagnosis. who was he or her? should that person not have come in? that is the person who thought or decided 47 what the cell type might be. the plaintiffs did not call that doctor. there is no pathology report, so we do not know if the doctor said that it is part of the adeno and part of another type of cancer. we do not know anything about it. and dr. scanlon freely admits he looked in his records. he does not remember the report. dr. scanlon said, it is a good idea to do a staining test because that can help you, but he has no idea whether those were done you can look at all the medical records. they never say the staining tests were run on the materials. and he admits we have no tissue sample. now, dr. scanlon, he said he made the diagnosis that was incurable. it was an incurable adenocarcinoma. and that was wrong. it was not incurable, and the most obvious reason, that it was not an adenocarcinoma. dr. kumar said there are cancers that can be nine centimeters, the size of a softball, and be cured with radiation. and dr. kumar said those cancers are not the ones that are caused by smoking. smoking related adenocarcinoma cannot exist -- it cannot be nine centimeters. it had to be something else. 48 well, dr. scanlon knew the name of the radiation oncologist, dr. dickerson. he did not talk to him before he came. and of course the plaintiffs chose not to bring -- the court: it is been directed, mr. belasic, as you know, not to speculate about why people are not being called to testify. just bear with me. mr. belasic: all right. the court: they have to make a determination based upon the evidence in this case. the plaintiff has the burden. they can decide whether there is sufficient evidence to support the plaintiff's burden. but i caution them not to speculate about why people have not been called into the courtroom. for all we know, these doctors are dead. do not speculate. continue. mr. belasic: and, of course, i'm not asking you to guess or speculate. but i'm pointing out the expert in the key field, dr. dickerson, he did not come to testify. he did not come to testify. and, of course, dr. scanlon said he did not have any information on dose or the field or the information or the type of radiation and he did not talk to dr. dickerson. and yet when our expert came, mr. migliori 49 attacked him and said, why did not you talk to him. did not you know you could do that? and dr. kumar had to explain why that would be inappropriate. not just inappropriate, it is against the law for us to -- mr. migliori: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. do not go that way. do not talk about the law firm. keep your eye on the ball. continue with your -- how much longer do you have, mr. belasic? mr. belasic: dr. kumar -- the court: how much longer do you have? take a pause. it will do you well. mr. belasic: dr. kumar will -- i think, your honor, that i will be about 30 or 40 more minutes. the court: all right. go ahead. mr. belasic: dr. kumar had to explain why he did not do that. but what is important is dr. scanlon did not do that. and he was the plaintiff's only expert in a field that is not -- mr. migliori: your honor, i thought the objection was sustained. the court: i thought the objection was sustained also. continue to something else. mr. belasic: on this issue of diagnostic 50 tests we know that the only thing we have was a fine needle aspiration that has a significant error rate. the testimony was the bronchoscopy -- a bronchoscopy is when they go down the central tube of the bronchus, and they can snip some tissue out. and until this trial -- until this trial there was no evidence that a bronchoscopy had ever been done. and no one involved in this trial had ever heard that until mr. harford testified. and mr. harford said not in response to my question, but in response to mr. migliori, mr. harford told us that for the first time he said a bronchoscopy was done. that was his testimony under oath. i was just sitting there watching. and he said, quote, that that bronchoscopy was inconclusive. we do not have any records of it. all we have is what the man who is suing says. he says there was a bronchoscopy and it was inconclusive. that is the gold standard. that is where you actually get tissue. no one disputed that that would be a better marker. and mr. harford said it was done and it was inconclusive. now, dr. scanlon says he only rests on what he wrote in the records. when he wrote down the cell type, when he wrote down adenocarcinoma, he made it very 51 clear he did not look at the material under a microscope. he did not do any testing. he relied on the pathologist's report. but he does not have the written report. he does not remember who the pathologist was. he did not talk to the pathologist. so when the plaintiff says, well, dr. scanlon did not go over the diagnosis -- it is a little bit of an overstatement. he says -- what dr. scanlon says is he relied on the pathologist's report that said adenocarcinoma. we do not know what the pathologist said. just like eagle eye on the radiation oncologist. and, of course, in the end dr. scanlon says -- would not say that smoking caused mr. harford's lung cancer. now, on this issue dr. scanlon and dr. kumar agreed that they had never seen any patient with adenocarcinoma that large cured by radiation alone. dr. scanlon said in fact he had never seen a patient with adenocarcinoma stage iii survive for 22 years. so if you ask dr. scanlon is there any precedent for this, he readily agrees no. if you ask dr. kumar is it scientifically possible for that tumor to be an adeno, he said, absolutely not. it was scientific fact it could not have 52 been adeno. it was too big to be cured by radiation. it had to be some other type of tumor that he says was not caused by smoking. and no one disputes that specific testimony from dr. kumar. one last thing on medicine. the man -- the doctor who did radiation oncology who actually treated the plaintiff is dr. dickerson. and he said, this is -- if you look at the date, december 1992, this is after the radiation was done. now, how does he describe the tumor? does dr. dickerson, the man who treated him with radiation, does he say it is a primary adenocarcinoma as you are required to determine? no. look what he called it, a very large cancer involving the lung. dr. dickerson did not say it was an adenocarcinoma. dr. scanlon could not say that smoking caused the cancer, whatever it was. that is a failure of a burden of proof. that is plaintiff's own doctors. it is not tobacco lawyers, it is not tobacco witnesses. his next one. all he could say is it was a large bronchiogenic carcinoma. that is a lung carcinoma. we heard how many different types of carcinoma there are. dr. dickerson -- you can look in the records -- after the radiation was done, no, he did not 53 say it was an adenocarcinoma. now, the issue was was mr. harford addicted. questions 1 and 2, was he addicted, and was addiction a cause of his primary lung adenocarcinoma? i'll say right off the bat obviously there is no definition you are required to use. and if you think right off the bat, well, he has to be addicted because everyone who smokes that long is addicted, well, then i remind that you there is two parts of the question. was he addicted? and if so, was the addiction -- not just the cigarettes, not just the smoking, was the addiction a cause of his cancer? and there is two parts to it. i'm going to tell you at least what the evidence was on was he addicted. now, they brought dr. burns, dr. werner and dr. cummings. and they described how addicted smokers act and what the criteria for addiction are. one of the first things that dr. burns and dr. cummings said, addicted smokers relapse. and dr. cummings said, if you are addicted, you can continue to relapse even after that first year or two. now, there may be other smokers who like that, but that was not mr. harford. he never smoked against once he made up his mind for the first time. 54 an addicted smoker makes many, many serious efforts to quit and does not quit. mr. harford said he really never wanted to quit before he made his mind up. and we know that is true because he said, well, i probably did. and i had to read him his sworn deposition testimony again. i said it thousands of times, but i probably never meant it. an addicted smoker has desires to smoke after quitting. and mr. harford never wanted to quit again. an addicted smoker has significant withdrawals. and mr. harford said -- and i again had to read his sworn testimony -- that when he stopped for 24 hours, it never really affected him that much. and, of course, none of his doctors -- none of his doctors were asked to come in, right, to talk about withdrawal. there was no testimony from any doctor -- any one of his doctors that he was addicted. dr. burns gets paid $3 million. this is more than 50 trials for him. he said, when i look at the records he is addicted. but his own doctors never wrote in their medical records that he was addicted. they never diagnosed him that he was addicted. and they did not testify in this trial. 55 and addicted smokers often need professional help. and we know he quit cold turkey. now, of course, mr. migliori said, well, (inaudible). dr. burns gets paid $3 million. dr. werner, who has testified two or three dozen times. all i'm going to say about them is neither of them knew that mr. harford was testifying because mr. harford did not testify until after dr. werner -- mr. migliori: objection, your honor. mr. belasic: none of them knew -- the court: sustained. disregard those comments by counsel. next. mr. belasic: well, ladies and gentlemen, consider the basis for their testimony. they read the deposition. that is what they said. mr. migliori: objection, your honor. mr. belasic: your honor, i'm entitled to say the basis for the -- the court: just one second. stop it, both of you. go ahead. you can refer to the deposition testimony. mr. belasic: all right. they told you that they based their opinion on what they read in the sandra k. provenzano, rpr official united states court reporter 56 depositions. all i'm pointing out is you then saw what mr. harford said at trial. you saw something they never got to read. now, dr. werner said she never read the eyewitness testimony, stepdaughter, granddaughter, the eyewitnesses. the stepdaughter lived with him in the '50s and '60s, and the granddaughter in the '80s. dr. werner said she never read them. dr. burns never mentioned that testimony. dr. werner told me she only read what the attorneys gave her. they did not give her the eyewitness testimony. and they both gave testimony completely contradicted by mr. harford in this trial. and i'll give you two examples. they said, well, he made many serious efforts to quit. and dr. burns said with a straight face. he made many attempts to quit that lasted three to seven days. but when mr. harford took the stand, he said that the average time he would quit was overnight. and that once 25 or 30 years ago he quit for a day. and that once he thinks he quit for two days, but he is not sure. that is not what dr. burns said. and both of them said that he had evidence of withdrawal. but mr. harford said that when he would 57 quit for those periods before he finally stopped, quote, it did not affect him very much. they did not have that evidence. now, we know that he did not make repeated serious efforts to quit because i showed you his own sworn testimony. he said he probably did not mean it. and when he was asked the number -- the number of times that he quit, it was overnight when he was asleep. and think about that. can you really try to quit smoking when you are sleeping? obviously, under that standard all of us would be dieting or quitting coffee or quitting smoking. when he was asleep. but when he did quit, he says he remember new year's 25 or 30 years ago. and in his own words he said he did not want to make a commitment. he did not make that commitment until he quit for the final time. and once he made that commitment, addiction did not cause him to smoke. we know that he did not ask anyone for help. we know that he did not ask his doctor for help. we know he did not throw away cigarettes. we know what he did not do. but we also know what he did, and that was quit. i mentioned the eyewitnesses. do the eyewitnesses support the story and support the evidence on addiction? remember everyone explained addiction, 58 it is not something like a blood test or something internal. it is based on his smoking behavior. and so do the eyewitnesses, his stepdaughter and granddaughter, do they confirm that he had withdrawal? no. they say they never even knew he was trying to quit. do they say that he had a serious desire to quit, one of the criteria? they say they never heard him say he wanted to quit. they never saw him throw cigarettes away, they never saw him make an effort to quit until he stopped. now, if in fact he made all these attempts and if in fact he was going through withdrawal and if in fact he was depressed and disappointed about failing to quit, do not you think the two women that lived with him, the stepdaughter in the '50s and '60s and the granddaughter in the '70s and '80s would have confirmed it? do not you think that they saw him almost every day when he was not traveling that they would have been able to confirm? they did not. they did not back his story. and, of course, they never saw him smoke once he moved to florida in the '80s. now, when you think about addiction and what caused him to quit, remember that the plaintiff's expert said that 55 to 60 million people in america quit. 59 that is an enormous number. it means it is not a rarity. it means it is one of the common things that people do. 60 million people, that is one out of every 5 that is been labeled as addicted, according to dr. burns, and then quit. and addiction does not mean it is done all the time. and we know that mr. harford did it himself. that is why the 60 million people quitting is so important. it means that addiction does not cause the disease. we know that most of them quit on their own, ninety percent. and we know that mr. harford quit on his own. now, when you are asked to decide was addiction -- this is not was smoking a cause. we talked about that. but was the addiction itself a cause? first thing we showed dr. burns is the surgeon general's report that he worked on. and it says cigarette smoking, is addictive. and does it say cigarette smoking, therefore, is a cause of the cancer? no. it says, cigarette smoking is addictive, and the individual smoker must decide whether to continue that behavior. and when mr. harford made the decision, when he said for the first time he made a commitment when he believed it instead of the thousands of times he said he 60 did not, suddenly the addiction did not cause him to smoke. now, dr. burns as we know said that even if you are addicted, you are still responsible for quitting and that you can quit. how can that be a cause? dr. cummings -- remember at the very start of the trial dr. cummings is going to admit that if you are motivated and you stick to it long enough, the success rate is a hundred percent. mr. migliori said that is not true. and dr. cummings says that is crazy. and then i showed you the video and it said exactly that, that the success rate in quitting for a motivated smoker that sticks to it is a hundred percent. and when mr. harford was motivated, not saying before he went to bed he was going to quit, but when he was motivated, whether it was because he was coughing up blood or because he was insulted in 1985 and quit then, once he was motivated, he quit smoking. i'm going to ask you think about this: the question says, is addiction a cause of his lung cancer. when you typically think about something causing something, what type of cause is it where if you change your mind and take action, suddenly the cause does not have any effect? and here's an example. first i want you to 61 highlight the instruction that judge block gave you. to prove that addiction was the cause -- i want to highlight -- it has to be directly -- directly, not indirectly -- and in a natural and continuous sequence which produced or substantially contributed to producing the disease. now, is addiction a direct cause? think about that. one day you are addicted, according to dr. werner, dr. cummings and dr. burns. the next day because you are responsible you stop smoking. dr. burns said you are responsible for making that choice and you can. suddenly addiction is no longer a cause. what type of cause is that where simply changing your mind and making an effort? think about an action movie where someone is going down a mountain and they realize their car does not have any brakes. now, they are going to crash. maybe they will sideswipe a car and slow it down. maybe they will go into the ocean, but they are going to crash. the brakes are out, and that is going to cause them to crash. the person in that car cannot say, i'm going to make up my mind -- i'm going to make up my mind not to get hurt, not to crash. no. they have no control over it. they are being caused to be injured. 62 but the plaintiff's experts themselves say that even if a person is addicted, they still have that control. and dr. burns says they are still responsible. and dr. cummings says when they make a committed decision to quit, they are a hundred percent successful. now, whatever we are going to say about mr. harford, the day after he quit, whatever they call addiction suddenly had no effect. did addiction cause him to smoke or was it his choice to smoke, in his own words, and his choice not to be serious about quitting, when he told us that he never meant it thousands of times until he quit for good. that is not a cause. even if they can prove that the smoking caused the tumor and it was an adenocarcinoma, we know from dr. burns' own argument it was not -- that addiction was not the cause because he could and did quit. i'm going to put up one more thing. remember that it has to be substantial. what does the surgeon general say? does the surgeon general say, well, addiction causes lung cancer because it forces you to smoke or it stops you from quitting? what does the surgeon general say? does he say it is substantial? this is the surgeon general's report that dr. burns told you he worked on. (inaudible) -- even in the best circumstances a measure of tobacco dependence 63 accounts for only modest amounts of variation in the risk of relapse, only modest amounts. they do not say that addiction is a substantial cause of disease. they say it accounts for a modest amount when it comes to relapse. and look what the surgeon general says is important. the finding is consistent with the notion that relapse is a function of multiple person factors. it is the person. and when mr. harford changed his mind, did not change his cigarettes, nicotine did not change, his brain did not change, when he changed his mind he quit. and addiction did not cause him to smoke. if you get to question 4, as mr. migliori said -- and i talked about choice. the plaintiff here chose to smoke. the plaintiff here said that he did not want to quit. he said in his own words when i said to myself that i wanted to quit, i probably did not mean it. i said thousands of times. i did not mean it. that is what mr. harford said, not something that (inaudible). when it came to control, we know he said he did not want to make a commitment. he was on the stand. he was unwilling to make a commitment. but when he did make a commitment, we know that he quit. and he quit without a doctor's help, he 64 quite without nicotine patches or gum or drugs. he quit on his own when he made a commitment. and their own experts say that the smoker is responsible. you could call the smoker -- and call him a heavy smoker. call it a habit. call him a habitual smoker. call him nicotine dependent. call him addicted. in the end though it is a man or woman smoking. and in this case it is mr. harford. and no matter what label we apply to mr. harford, he was the only one who could choose to start, and he did, and he was the only one who could choose to quit, and he did. just like 60 million other americans who bought cigarettes and chose to quit, he did. now, no one in the tobacco industry or no one who was a tobacco spokesman could make a choice for him to start or a choice for him to quit. when he looked at himself in the mirror he said, i'm not going to smoke again. he was the only man who could decide to quit. no one else was making a choice for him. he made a choice. not rare. it happens tens of billions of times. and when he made that choice, he did not smoke. he is the one who is responsible. they can talk about what r. j. reynolds did wrong, but in the end the only thing that made a difference in his smoking was his own decision. 65 now, we know he was surrounded by warnings. i will not repeat it. but you know from '51 to '52 to '56 all of his relatives either getting sick or telling him that it is causing the problems or lung cancer. his own doctor warns him. he is in the hospital. you can go through each and every one of those. and when you see that the plaintiff's own expert says he is responsible and that under the plaintiff's testimony the only reason he quit was his own decision, reynolds is not fifty percent responsible or ten percent responsible. they did not have any ten percent control over what mr. harford did. he made a hundred percent of the decisions to start. and when he quit, he was a hundred percent responsible for his success in quitting. he is the only one -- remember what he said. i said, why did not you just quit when your wife quit? it was '64. it was 50 years ago. why did not you quit then? he said, well, you know -- he even talked about helping. and she said, no. she had to quit on her own. well, of course. but so did he. and he knew then in the '50s that it was causing him damage. and he knew about lung cancer from his family, but he made a choice. and he could not be stopped, and he could not be forced by someone at r. j. 66 reynolds. he made the decision and he made a hundred percent of the decision. and so if you reach comparative fault, you find that mr. harford is a hundred percent responsible for his own choices. i'm going to go straight to the question of reliance. mr. migliori mentioned that. questions 5 through 10 on this -- questions 5 through 10 on this verdict form are going to talk about reliance. i was only about a half hour into questioning mr. harford when he just admitted that he did not rely. and i asked him, you were not smoking because of ads? i asked him, did you rely on advertising? were you aware of any statements by reynolds? no. was he aware of any statement by american tobacco or brown & williamson? he said he had never even heard of these groups. all the time he spent talking on them, the hours that dr. cummings spent on this, he never heard these groups existed. they had no effect on his smoking under his own testimony. he never saw the frank statement. i asked him about did you see any statement by the tobacco organization or tobacco representative? he did not. now, as i understand mr. migliori's 67 argument, he said that he relied on advertising, which is completely contrary to what you heard mr. harford say. he did not smoke because of ads. he did say that after many years of smoking he would choose his brand based on taste. there is not some claim that winston tastes good is some sort of fraud. but mr. harford does not say that he relied on that advertisement to continue smoking. he does not say that he saw a statement in an ad that convinced him not to quit. he said he did not want to quit. he admits that these statements did not cause him to smoke or to continue. and if they had any evidence, dr. burns would have said it. dr. burns would have said, well, he saw a statement and that made him smoke or he saw a statement and that made him not quit. all dr. burns could say is he continued smoking. and that is consistent with people who (inaudible). maybe they could line up some smokers who could come in and make that claim. but in this case they have the wrong smoker because he admitted that he did not rely on these statements. and so from 5 through 10 under his own 68 admission he did not rely on a statement. and you should answer question 5 no question 6 will become unnecessary according to the judge's instructions. questions 7 and 8 are no. no statement and no reliance caused his adenocarcinoma. if you get to the question of damages, i just want you to consider some of mr. harford's own medical records. and none of this is disputed. first of all, we know he was cured. in september of 1992 the radiation was over after three months, from june until september. and shortly thereafter he was told that he was making amazing progress. and that the incurable adenocarcinoma that they had incorrectly diagnosed was shrinking. and he knew after three months that he was having this incredible response. and he knew by 1993 that he was in remission and was headed for a cure. and ever since then it has never recurred. it is never recurred. now, he is 82 years old. he has lived 22 years since he was cured. he is an 82-year-old man. he is fit and healthy for an 82-year old. he is driving, he is taking care of himself, he is living on his own. he drives an hour to visit his granddaughter. he does some yard work. he exercises. 69 here's what his records have said when he was in his 70s. the patient says he is doing great. he is back to working at albertson's. he doing yard work, cutting grass. he says he is doing great and does not lack the energy. and in this one -- he was almost 79 years old in this record. and he says he is exercising once a day, 20 minutes a day, outside work. he told me he still uses the treadmill. and no one is saying -- and do not let mr. migliori suggest that when you get cancer, it is not scary. and no one is saying that anyone wants to go through radiation. but he was cured. he has now lived to age 82. and he is living by his own accounts a happy and productive life. his statements on anxiety, he says he was not anxious in 2007, that he was not concerned. now, he says for 22 years he has lived in fear that his cancer will come back. did you see any testimony from his loved ones, from the eyewitnesses? would not they know, the ones that lived with him all this time, the ones that talked to him? would not his granddaughter have been able to corroborate that? he told me for the first time, and i asked 70 him about this. for the first time he is taking antianxiety medicine. i asked him when was that. i was taking it at my deposition, but i forgot to mention it because he said he was only taking cholesterol and hypertension pills. he was diagnosed with lung cancer 20 years ago. and during that time in 1992, there is no record that he went on antianxiety or depression medication. there is no record from his doctor that he was being treated all during that time, including when he went back to work in '96, nothing. we know when he sold his house that he said they let him live it in for a year. and he sold his house and he promptly bought another house. that is what we know. now, all of this time there is no evidence in the medical records of any -- of any severe mental distress. there is no evidence from his family members of any severe mental distress. and he had other cancer. he had prostate cancer and surgery. and that must have been scary. and he said he is had 40 or 50 incidents of skin cancer. he says they are not related to smoking. so none of that caused him to go on medication. we know he loved his wife very much. she 71 died in 2011. and we know he did not go on medication then, and there is no record of that. now, what we have for the first time now he says that he started taking antianxiety medication in 2013. is that really caused by his lung cancer 20 years earlier? for 20 years he never took it. it is when he started having to testify in this case he said around the time of the deposition he first took anxiety medication. the final question, was mr. harford entitled to punitive damages. judge block read to you it is a higher and much more difficult standard. it is not just a preponderance of the evidence. you would have to find clear and convincing evidence. it has to be precise. no confusion and no hesitation. and in considering that, you have to look at a choices he made. and the choice that he says to start, the choice that he says he made not to quit, and the choice to quit that when he made it to quit he was able to, over 50 years. the instruction on punitive damages requires you to find that it was intentional misconduct and it was intentional misconduct that caused mr. harford to develop primary lung adenocarcinoma. and here's the reason i bring that up. when mr. migliori started off, he said that is the reason that 72 he is entitled to not just $10 million, but what would he have asked for if the cancer had not been treated? what would he have asked for if mr. harford had died? he is asking for $10 million. he is been cured for 22 years. but mr. migliori said more money in the form of punitive damages because the counsel for tobacco research and the tobacco institute and the tobacco industry said things that he said were false that mr. harford said he never even heard of. he filed a lawsuit and sued on those claims. he is never even heard of them. had no effect on him. whatever else we believe from the evidence, we know it did not have anything to do with those organizations. and that is what mr. migliori stakes his claim on. but you should find no on the entitlement to punitive damages. they say that the lies were whether or not smoking caused cancer. we know that the dispute was over statistics. you saw the video that uses statistics. the surgeon general said himself back at the time of the controversy that statistical methods cannot establish prove of a causal relationship in an association. fifty years later they brought his own doctor, dr. scanlon, who said that smoking was an association with lung cancer. he would not say caused. 73 he was not committing fraud. and either were they when they said this. causation was a legitimate dispute. the surgeon general -- i read you most of the figures (inaudible), much less be persuaded by statistics, which is what they showed that the tobacco companies (inaudible). and then their own doctor said statistical association. he would not say cause. their own doctor said, i call it a risk factor. he would not agree with mr. migliori that smoking caused mr. harford's cancer. it was a legitimate dispute. it was not a basis to give him even more money in the form of punitive damages. you know that an internal secret memo that they did not think would be read told the r. j. reynolds employees to make a safer cigarette, if at all possible. dr. burns explained it is just impossible. you cannot light tobacco on fire and have it be inhaled safely. that is common sense. they instructed their own employees to cooperate with others. and what the plaintiff called lack of cooperation is a lack of agreement. they did show you someone saying that the '79 surgeon general's report, that they were trying to ban smoking or move towards deciding to ban it. 74 and he had the nerve to say they opposed it. but that is not the same thing that is entitling mr. harford to more money. he never saw any of those statements. he said he never even heard of the group. that he would never heard a statement from r. j. reynolds or american tobacco or anyone. finally, they argue that they deliberately engineered cigarettes to be addictive and all these modern advancements. well, the only expert on cigarette design was their expert. and dr. cummings said that today's cigarettes are not more addictive. and look what he said. we asked him about role your own. you just buy your own tobacco and roll it yourself. he said those smokers are more addicted than the people who smoke commercial cigarettes. and we know from the government's own study that today instead of having people be more addicted, there is a higher percentage of people that only smoke occasionally. basically it is a behavior change consistent with less rather than more addiction. well, i'm about to wrap up. i'll leave you with one thought on punitive. you heard from dr. cummings and dr. burns all the changes that have happened. that warnings are on the pack. that ctr, ti, 75 tirc, they do not exist. they have been disbanded. you heard the evidence yesterday. the industry is now under fda regulation. i read that to you at the end. the fda can regulate the cigarettes, the marketing and the distribution. the fda can control the product standards for nicotine. they can set the nicotine yield. they can reduce, or they can eliminate the constituents in smoke as appropriate. the industry is now a regulated utility. there is not anything that they call intentional misconduct that was somehow intended to kill or harm mr. harford, that mr. harford was affected by. they say it was the statements of ctr that he never heard of. now, in the end it is scientifically impossible for it to be an adenocarcinoma. it is just a matter of scientific fact. they did not bring anyone to dispute that. his own doctor that did the radiation does not call it an adenocarcinoma. and they did not bring any doctor in the field -- they did not bring any doctor who was a radiation oncologist or a pathologist. mr. harford smoked for 35 years until 1985 by choice. and by his own testimony, he quit by his choice. and whether we call him addicted, frequent, 76 habitual or a heavy smoker, in the end his choice controlled whether he smoked and his choice controlled when he quit. it is not something the tobacco companies are making up. it is what mr. harford told you himself. ironically, after all of that he got a type of cancer that was not an adenocarcinoma. and his own doctor -- his own doctor came in here under oath and did not say that smoking causes cancer, no matter how hard mr. migliori tries. dr. scanlon said, cause, no. it is a risk factor. thank you for your attention. i know it is been a long trial. i'm at the end. i do not get to say anything. mr. migliori gets a free shot at me. i ask you to consider the evidence that i've discussed. and, of course, you will reach your own conclusions. thank you.