mr. migliori: thank you very much. thank you very much, ladies and gentlemen of the jury. on behalf of my client, on behalf of mr. harford, on behalf of mr. baker, my partner, my team, the folks who have been here for two weeks trying to bring this case to you, thank you. i know this is taking a lot out of your lives. is our one chance to bring this case to this point and so we appreciate you taking the time. thank you sincerely. this as the judge indicated to you, we need to have six jurors deliberate and to do that, you all have to stay healthy and you kept your promise. did not, i got sick, and so my voice is going to be a little soft and i'm going to try to project over that, but please bear with me. through this and hopefully we can do it together. i'm going to muscle i the judge said something very, very important he said this is a level playing it is an extraordinary thing in this country in the beginning. field. a man like mr. harford, who that we can do this. has lived a good, clean, simple life, a veteran of our services, he is able to come here and stand on 53 equal footing with the tobacco industry and with r.j. reynolds. and he is able to ask you to resolve an issue that is been raised by another court completely. and that question is simply: does mr. harford belong to be with those other florida smokers who can satisfy those first questions? is he a member of the class of people entitled to those very findings that r.j. reynolds is negligent? r.j. reynolds is negligent under those so did he have the pattern of smoking in did he have the addiction? findings. florida? addiction cause his lung cancer? question that you will be asked is was it the primary adenocarcinoma? did that and the other i'm not going to ask you to rely on me because i'm asking you to find for him. i'm asking you to rely on your common sense, your good judgment, and your own eyes. look at the direct evidence that is in this case and i think we will get through the question of whether mr. harford belongs in this class with everyone else. and if he does belong in this class with everyone else, then we can answer the question is there a compensation that he should be entitled to, and then is that amount of is there an amount of money that he should be entitled to for it? money, should that be apportioned, should that be divided in a way which reflects mr. harford's responsibility and r.j. reynolds's responsibility for that lung cancer. do we get there? that is it in a nutshell. how "egregious conduct." they and when questions were asked about you heard the term from the judge and you have paired with that is there is no clearer example read it: serious public wrong. that i could ever argue to you of a company that completely disregarded the health of smokers. knowingly sold, marketed, developed, designed, manipulated a product so that smokers would keep smoking. whether it was going to cause an injury, they set out in an organized fashion in 1954 to confuse, to confound, to create doubt and controversy. for one more cigarette. that. because if a smoker cannot internalize why cigarette smoking is harmful to the smoker, he will buy one more pack, and what does that she will buy one more carton. mean? they can get you hooked are bigger bags of money to why? and then one more after and then one more after that. that is sales. the only thing they need if bring to the bank. where else have you seen in the history of this country a more clear example of egregious nobody came here to say that 400,000 conduct? people do not die from smoking. r.j. reynolds did not present evidence that that does not happen each and every year from cigarettes. they are perfectly comfortable with the idea that people smoke, get addicted, question it, put it off, try to quit, cannot quit, smoke another pack, buy more cigarettes. cancer, if they develop some other disease, their answer is what? nobody can blame us. and if they die, if they develop a lung nobody even believes us. everybody knew. yesterday you saw counsel for r.j. reynolds well, why should we believe them here? show you polling data about how nobody believes tobacco companies. how could you possibly believe them? if they are that unbelievable, why should we believe them here? because if their strategy is to sell, make money, and then not take care or take responsibility for their choices, that is why you are here. jurors is to take the choices that r.j. reynolds made and make a decision with respect to this one that is your job as jurors. your job as 56 gentleman in this courtroom, what percentage of fault falls with r.j. reynolds. you will have the opportunity to decide whether or not there is a fault that goes to mr. harford for you will have the ability to not quitting sooner. apportion whether or not he shares in that. but it is not okay for r.j. reynolds to walk on this. this is a system where you get to decide whether he belongs in that class of people that are entitled to something that is already been found as a matter of law, which is their product is dangerous, it hurts, it kills, and it causes the disease that mr. harford has. other smoker in the state of florida in what jury found under what are called the engle findings. and should he participate with any now, i'm not going to rehash all of the testimony, i'm going to try not to, but what i do want to do is i want to put the testimony in the right boxes; that is, choice, for example, is not a question of did he choose to smoke or was he choice is whether or not he shares some addicted. but addiction, that is a medical -- responsibility. nobody that is a medical term. from r.j. reynolds came here to tell you that he was not addicted by a medical diagnosis. that is a diagnosis. 57 you heard about a compulsory medical examination that lasted three hours and dr. werner told you that test, when given to psychiatrists, is supposed to take 30 minutes. where is that person? where is that witness who spent three hours talking to mr. werner about addiction? person here talking about the fact this is not an addicted person? why is not that so i'm going to take topics and put them in and my first point is choice does choice is not a the right box. not belong in the first question. question of addicted or chose to smoke. belongs in once addicted, if addicted, does he bear some fault himself. along. i'll try to do that as we go choice but i cannot help myself, i have to start at a company comes into here and says the beginning. to you and shows you evidence that florida, in 1906, i think it was, put up a statement that nicotine is addictive. secret. yet what do they do in 1994? under oath, hands up in the air before the united states congress. suggest that somehow it was not great and these same companies, they are holding mr. harford to that. exhibit number 67, please. [video clip played.] 58 mr. migliori: we are in a forum where we are they go before congress individual, supposed to be on equal footing. r.j. reynolds corporation. and say that nicotine is not addictive, and yet they are trying to hold mr. harford and the individual smoker in florida to a different standard. read reader's digest. believe us. they said is that we were not good liars. believed what we were saying. that is not okay here. they did not say they did not lie. they should have known. you heard when the united states surgeon they should have they would not have had to what nobody that is not okay here. general in 1979 tried to get the message out about lung cancer, the disease mr. harford had, you heard what they said about the message to the public about lung cancer. exhibit 245. [video clip played.] mr. migliori: the arrogance to go before the public and say that lung cancer in 1979 is still a question when it comes to smoking. but it was not just arrogance, it was not just this desire to be louder or stronger in the media. -- not my words; their words. successful campaign to create doubt and controversy it was a campaign it was a very 59 from the early 1950's when mr. harford first started smoking through the 1980's and into 1990 when he quit. in '94 they are still telling congress it is not addictive. it is not just to hold their line, it is to keep smokers smoking. is another sale. every next cigarette let us go to the verdict form. all play out in the verdict form? be asked in the very first question, "was mr. harford addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine manufactured by r.j. reynolds?" how does this you are going to can everybody see fine? now, this will not be on the verdict form, but i've put photographs next to the witnesses who came before you to talk about various aspects of this very question. dr. cummings was the first person up here and he spoke to you at length in the beginning about smoking behaviors, how doubt and controversy causes smokers to keep smoking, causes people -- as reported in the ftc reports, causes people to not appreciate for them that the risk is really theirs. dr. werner came and talked about the medical diagnosis of addiction. doctor about addiction as a diagnosis. she spoke as a medical she used 60 you heard about three different tools to do that. k.h. fagerstrom and the dsm-5. she did not just say that they were slightly addictive; she made medical diagnoses of addiction, and nobody, nobody came here to refute that. this is an unrefuted question about addiction. and dr. burns, dr. burns came and he gave you his bases for addiction in mr. harford, but he provided the important link of why that is related to so we have three people -- two medical his disease. doctors and one scientist, behavioral scientist -- telling you why addiction is consistent with what was described by mr. harford as his life as a smoker. the next slide. nobody came to refute that. let us go to in a sense the tobacco now, r.j. reynolds appreciated what addiction is and was and they always have in the relevant time of mr. harford's life. industry maybe thought of it as being a specialized, highly ritualized and stylized segment of the pharmaceutical industry. tobacco products uniquely contain and deliver nicotine, a potent drug with a variety of physiological effects. r.j. reynolds in another internal document says in essence a cigarette is a system for delivery 61 of nicotine to the smoker in an attractive, useful form. next slide. but in 1988 the u.s. surgeon now, it is important to understand that this information was never shared with the u.s. surgeon general. general did come out and issue a report. reviewers and writers for that report were here, dr. cummings and dr. burns. conclusions of the '88 report was after carefully examining the available evidence, this report concludes that cigarettes and other forms of tobacco are addicting. two, nicotine is the drug in tobacco that causes addiction. one of the major two of the defendants did not. you will not see in the instruction a definition of addiction, but we brought one to you through our experts. the only definition brought to you is, "addiction is defined as a chronic, relapsing brain disease that is characterized by compulsive drug seeking and use, despite harmful consequences." that harmful consequences may result, but what causes you to keep smoking is the nicotine, the need for the nicotine, the compulsive need. it contains an idea you all remember in the very beginning i showed you this and it probably did not make as much 62 but back in 1988 the tobacco institute, sense then. of which r.j. reynolds was a founding member, talked about these very types of cases and they said that the lawyers remind us, i'm told, that the entire matter of addiction is the most potent weapon a prosecuting attorney can have in a lung cancer case. we cannot defend continued smoking as free choice if the person is addicted. nobody here has come here to say he was not addicted. addicted. choice. in 1980. mr. harford was he was addicted. and you can suspend that with free that is what tobacco institute lawyers said it is true then, it is true today. next slide. surgeon general continued and "basic told us more about smoking and its powerful effects with respect to nicotine addiction. observations and experimental research indicate that cigarette smoking is not a random or capricious behavior that simply occurs at the will or the pleasure of those who smoke." it is not just a choice. and pharmacologic factors that lead to highly controlled or compulsive use of cigarettes." the evidence that is in this case. "rather, smoking is a result of behavioral that is next slide. we went through a lot of these 63 but the most important one, it is a it is not a i'm not going to go through each one of addiction is a disease. it is a disease that has to be treated. factors. them now because we have covered them pretty extensively. disease. choice. so when people like dr. cummings talk to their patients and they say you can do it, you just have to put your mind to it, they are not saying it is that simple, they are not saying it is a matter of turn it on or turn it off, they are saying you have to start with a need, with a desire, with an ability to fight this thing because it is pharmacologic and it is behavioral. and in a smoker of 35-plus years, you have to overcome a lot because it is a behavior that is been learned and memorized and part of his body physically and behaviorally over decades. you have to overcome a lot. and, importantly, despite the 60 million that defense counsel refers to of people who have quit, only 3 to 5 percent of people who try to quit successfully quit every year. the fact that 60 million have quit, that means people who start and start that do not have the same duration, that means every type of smoker there is. and by the way, that also means how many more are actually smoking. next. so obviously the stories come out through the different witnesses, the addiction is a matter of medicine and nobody here is to refute it. we have mr. harford's testimony about his need to smoke and his inability to stop and his various attempts. we have dr. werner's three different tools used to say that he is both severe and addicted, and dr. burns' testimony about addiction and again, after three hours of which you heard. bringing -- compelling mr. harford to go before a psychologist to determine whether he was addicted, r.j. reynolds made the choice not to bring that person here. unrefuted. addiction, question number one, it is it is unrefuted. let us go on. now, the second question is a it is become pretty black this is where i say do not believe me, little more simple, but in some ways it was a little more energetic. that is, this is a debate yesterday that was pretty strong. and white. i'm not asking you to believe that he had a primary adenocarcinoma of the lung because i want you to. did not pay as an expert a witness to come here to tell you that what is in the medical records, what is exhibit 3005.001, the medical records, i was not -- i i 65 did not need an expert to tell me what is written here is not true. i asked you to look at the records and read and you will see throughout what was in the records. the records that this was diagnosed, treated, and subsequently reviewed by the very doctors who had every element of the case at their disposal. they had the pathology, the radiology, they all said this was a primary adenocarcinoma and that is how they they kept that treated it and it was successful. diagnosis, they never backed off that. and you do not have to infer that from records because we brought the diagnosing physician here. dr. scanlon -- when the judge talked to you this morning about direct evidence, dr. scanlon could not be any more direct. when they had a question about lung cancer, dr. scanlon was called in to make the determinations. he is the one who ordered the x-rays, he is the one that ordered the cts, he is the one that ordered the pathology, he is the one that took all the information that he ordered, he is the one that reported in the medical record that this is a primary lung cancer adenocarcinoma or non small cell carcinoma of the lung that spread into the mediastinum, not the other way. we did not need an expert to interpret what happened and we brought the person here who wrote it to say that is exactly what it was. now, the difficulty is that you have to you heard understand that this is not common. dr. burns and dr. scanlon say that the cure rates are like 3 to 5 percent. dr. scanlon said it is my only patient. reason there are statistics that say 3 to 5 percent is because there are 3 to 5 percent, 3 or 5 people out of a hundred will have the same fate as mr. harford if treated this way. in his own practice but the so the evidence is clear, you do not have to but dr. scanlon, trust my advocacy, you do not even have to trust dr. burns if you do not want to. who was there, who wrote it, who treated it, who saw the great response, who thought this was a very interesting case because it did so well -- trust him. health and wellbeing of his patient. and so he could have changed his mind, he could have done anything between today or last week when he testified and the day he first diagnosed him on july 14, 1992. because the only thing he cared about was the he could have done anything to say 67 but he did not. that was not the right cell type. he is just very, very proud of what they did, although he thought it was inoperable, although they thought it was forever, his terminal sentence, it did not happen that way. and that is a good thing. and that should not be a punishment to mr. harford. now, remind you, it took four years out of his he had over 39 rounds of radiation which he lost four life. absolutely devastated him physically. years of employment. home, thinking they had to put their things in order. about the scarring in his lung. wheezing. you hear him speaking right now. he and his wife sold their you heard you hear the this is a man who lives well. he is not asking he wants r.j. reynolds for sympathy, he is not asking for charity, he is asking for accountability. to pay their share of what happened to him, what was taken out of his enjoyment. as a person in his 60s, he lost so much with his wife, who unfortunately passed before he did. you do not get those four years back. rjr to have its share of responsibility for the choices rjr made to keep him smoking. those years do not come back. he just wants let us go to the next one. now, you heard in 68 the instruction the actual legal issue here which is the addiction need not have been the only cause of the disease. when you go back, you do not have to only say that addiction was the only cause. as a so if you legal matter addiction may be a cause. remember, i went through twice. r.j. reynolds wrote all over it the first time, so i went back and i wrote it again. to find it was a primary cause. but you only have counsel for but dr. burns went further, he said not only is it a cause, it is the cause, it is the overwhelming cause, it is the substantial cause of mr. harford's adenocarcinoma. the addiction, but for the need to keep smoking and have that one more exposure to carcinogens, the addiction is what caused the lung cancer in mr. harford. you heard from dr. scanlon -- again, this is not an expert who is looking for the evidence that helps his testimony. you heard from dr. scanlon and he said the test i used to find out what the cell type was for mr. harford is ninety percent accurate. actually, he said greater than ninety percent accurate. he said i did think it was inoperable, i did think he was going to die, i did tell him that you should have radiation or some combination of other things, 69 but it is going to only be palliative, it is only going to be trying to comfort you as you die, you are going to die, mr. harford. that is what he said. but we do not, unfortunately, because of the time, because of the way these lawsuits evolve over time, we did not have the ability to capture records that existed then that were not purged in the ordinary course of business. records are purged after a certain numbers of years. today i think it is seven years. that is, doctors' but what we do have and what we have been able to gather and what we have been able to capture support not only the diagnosis of primary adenocarcinoma, but that this adenocarcinoma was in the lung primarily and it was caused by his smoking. dr. scanlon was unequivocal about whether the smoking played a role in his lung cancer. dr. scanlon said it was the most significant risk factor for his smoking -- for his lung cancer, the years of -- 35-plus years of smoking. another very important fact. dr. burns said it does not matter the precise date that mr. harford quit, does not matter if he quit in '92, '90, '88, '85. than sufficient to be a cause, the cause, the the risk factor of that much smoking was more 70 substantial cause of mr. harford's adenocarcinoma of the lung. again, trust your eyes. dr. scanlon talked about the clinical presentations, all the things that showed up when he got there, all consistent with primary adenocarcinoma of the lung. even dr. cumar yesterday agreed with me that these clinical presentations were consistent with somebody with primary adenocarcinoma of the lung. shortness of breath, spitting up blood, heavy smoking history, weight loss, pain. then he said another objective bit of evidence was the radiographs, the films, the x-rays, what was in the lung by looking further with imagery. dr. scanlon relied on those, dr. scanlon ordered those, dr. scanlon used those as the primary pulmonologist diagnosing this disease and he found it was a primary lung adenocarcinoma. and as everybody will say, including dr. cumar, the highest level of evidence that we have in this case about this being an adenocarcinoma is the pathology. pathology, the doctor who went and wrote the report about the pathology, he came here and he said i ordered the biopsy, i ordered an aspirate, i usually the doctor who ordered the 71 order a core sample, it is very reliable, 90-plus percent reliable, and i did it and this was by pathology, by clinical presentation and by radiology and by my years of treating patients with smoking-related illness, dr. scanlon, without a dog in the fight, said this was primary adenocarcinoma of the lung. question number 2 is simple. the answer is "yes" to question number 2. next. look through the record, you will see it all, i've highlighted it, i'm not going to go adenocarcinoma -- when you see through it again. adenocarcinoma, when you see in the lung, when you see upper lobe, those are all descriptions of lung cancer, not some other part of the body that invades the lung. tumor going into the lung. every description by the radiologist or the doctors was the cancer is growing out of the lung which means it is primarily in the lung and growing out. there was never a description of the next. you have seen this, i'm not going to bore you with it other than to say mr. harford's smoking pattern was exactly like every other smoker in that cohort, that is in that population of american smokers. he started to smoke when people were 72 and you heard mr. heimann starting to smoke. yesterday from the american tobacco company, you heard him talk about the direct correlation. as advertising goes up, the consumption goes up, the influence of the tobacco industry to send the message of the pleasures, the enjoyment goes up. and as information starts to come out there are dips and bends, but the smoking rates go down as true, accurate information goes in. why is that important? mr. harford is being held to a totally different standard than the r.j. reynolds company if you do not agree that he can only know what is accurately told to him. and if it is not accurate and complete, if it is not part of a doubt and controversy campaign that gives him the psychological crutch you have seen to keep smoking, then it is not about his choice, it is about his addiction. so the one battle in this courtroom was with i'm just going to mention, he was a nice dr. cumar. gentleman, i do not doubt for a second that his intention -- mr. belasic: object to the personal opinion, your honor. mr. migliori: i'll withdraw it, your honor, 73 he he said that clearly. he i'll withdraw that he was a nice gentleman. does not diagnose cancer. job is not to diagnose; his job is to treat. came in here to suggest that he diagnoses lung cancer and he does not. that is not his specialty, that is not what he does, that is not what he is in the medical field. his he is one aspect of the treatment that dr. scanlon ordered and it is the final aspect. what do you do to set the right amount of radiation into the body to cure? he did not tell you that the statistics -- he just said it was the best case scenario, but mr. harford is not entitled to the best case scenario. statistic of 3 to 5 percent was wrong. he did not tell you that 3 to 5 percent of people that only have radiation are cured. he just said that in his experience no one like mr. harford would have gotten it. but he did not tell you that the but he did that without any pathology. he did that without any films that showed the actual tumor. he admitted he did not know what the tumor looked he like. did not know how immediately responsive it was. he did not give you another answer. he did not know how wrapped up it was. and he did not give 74 he he could only create doubt in your mind. you "it is x" because he said he could not. he could only create could not tell you what it was. i doubt. should say he could only try to create doubt in your mind as to what it was because doubt is a powerful weapon in this litigation. but we have to show you what it was and all i'm asking you to do is listen to the doctor who was there and read his notes. piece of paper in the file. it is as plain as the he did not review the pathology, he did not he does not even do needle biopsies. speak to mr. harford, he did not speak to mr. harford's medical team, he did not perform needle he biopsies. does not read slides of pathology, he does not know the radiation dose mr. harford received, he does not know the frequency, duration. he talked about the design of the radiation and how you set it to attack in a certain way. dr. dickerson used. he does not know the design that he does not know the shape of the actual tumor. he brought a softball, he brought a golf ball, and he cannot tell you that that even looks remotely like what was in mr. harford. that it was 9 centimeters. all he can tell you is that is all he can tell you. nine centimeters was known before they even so if made the diagnosis of adenocarcinoma. dr. cumar's testimony is based on the fact that a 9-centimeter adenocarcinoma could never be mr. harford's, understand that 9-centimeter was known even before they did the pathology. the pathologist knew that size. the first june x-ray said 9-centimeter tumor. that the pathologist came back with an adenocarcinoma diagnosis by cell type. you will see the records. after the size did not have any impact on the best the fact that gold standard of what it is that diagnoses cell types in cancers, which is pathology. it was large had no bearing on scanlon, on the pathologists, on the radiologists. and it is as plain on the paper that is in evidence and as plain as the testimony you heard from dr. scanlon. it is what it is if you remember, the judge told you that sometimes when you look at a witness's behavior, sometimes that can help you in making your own and when you point to decisions about truthfulness. a word on a page that describes the tumor going into the mediastinum and you will not agree it went into the 76 mediastinum, or he points to a medical record and says ah, dr. scanlon is wrong because he had a typo, that is somebody in my view that is being evasive. mr. belasic: objection; opinion again, your honor. the court: go ahead. speak. no, you can comment when you mr. migliori: that is what you get to weigh. you get to weigh whether or not that is a person who and as the court told you this is being fair. morning, a lot of these doctors, a lot of these experts testify in a lot of cases. are the engle cases. court. $100,000 for this case. this witness got between $80,000 and it is extraordinary. the engle cases everybody gets their day in next slide. so we get to the first two questions and then the next question becomes sort of the ultimate question. you answer these first three questions yes, mr. harford then, in your opinion, your decision, mr. harford belongs in that group of florida smokers entitled to the findings that r.j. reynolds put out a product that was unreasonably dangerous and defective. and i will not repeat it. you heard, the second question is was it a primary 77 the second question was was that adenocarcinoma. caused by the nicotine in cigarettes. dr. burns is the only person who says that it is the addiction and the nicotine that causes the lung cancer. dr. scanlon said importantly is not that, he said i treated him, i know he smoked, i know that smoking caused his lung cancer. what dr. burns then fits it into the engle and and you heard about and the answer is yes. did the addiction to the nicotine in question. r.j. reynolds' cigarettes cause -- was it a cause of mr. harford's lung cancer? for all the reasons we just went through. dr. burns said that explicitly. the way it comes in, nicotine and carcinogens go into the cigarettes into the system. to get the dose of nicotine you want, you have got to get everything else, you have got to get all those carcinogens with it. the number of puffs that mr. harford had of r.j. reynolds' product, between 3 and 4.5 million doses of carcinogen from r.j. reynolds' product that if you find that he is a member of this class, that unreasonably defective product over 4.5 million puffs from r.j. reynolds into mr. harford. and you heard the calculation, next slide. let us go to the next. i do not 78 mean to -- we talked about this. cause, which is all you have to find, but it is the cause, the substantial cause, and the overwhelming cause. it is not just a next slide. now, you will see in the instructions to prove that addiction to smoking cigarettes containing nicotine caused him to develop primary lung adenocarcinoma, mr. harford must prove by a preponderance of the evidence that is a little more than not, that is 51 percent, mr. harford has to prove that such addiction directly and in a natural and continuous sequence produced or substantially contributed to producing the disease, such that it can reasonably be said that but for the addiction, the disease would not have occurred. but for the need, but for the compulsion, but for the behavioral, but for the pharmacological need to keep smoking, this would not have occurred. that is interesting because as you go back to the documents and if you remember we had this trip report going back to 1958, plaintiff's exhibit 158, this was known in the '50s when mr. harford started. with one exception, individuals whom we meet believe that smoking causes lung cancer if by causation we mean any chain of events which leads finally to lung 79 cancer and which involves smoking as an indispensable link. when hill & knowlton talks to the researchers of the different companies, including r.j. reynolds, they all say -- except for one person -- we think cigarettes cause it if by that you mean it is for you to decide. definition. the disease, but r.j. reynolds knew back in 1958 exactly that this question one day would be asked to a jury like you in an individual's case like mr. harford's. but it is almost the exact same so not only do these cigarettes cause next slide. we have to do this by showing it is more likely it is more likely than not true. true than not. so the judge told you about the class, it relates to florida smokers, you only see this in florida. you have to make the findings and if you find on the first three "yes", then mr. harford is entitled to this. nicotine in cigarettes is addictive. smoking cigarettes can cause lung cancer. placed cigarettes on the market that were defective and unreasonably dangerous. decided. does mr. harford get the benefit of that that is already been r.j. reynolds 80 decision -- that is your decision on the first three questions. r.j. reynolds was negligent. it failed to exercise the degree of care that a reasonable cigarette manufacturer would exercise under like circumstances. whether mr. harford is entitled to that. you do not decide that. you decide this is where we get into the choices r.j. reynolds knowingly a jury has already found that. r.j. reynolds made. concealed or otherwise omitted material information not otherwise known or available concerning the health effects and/or the addictive nature of cigarettes. i've shown you some evidence of that. they did not share with the surgeon general the hippo lab results about addiction in the 1950's. 1960's. r.j. reynolds' scientists, knew about carcinogens in cigarette smoke and did not share that with the public. you saw how rodgman and teague, now, you saw how sorry, now, r.j. reynolds says well, other people knew about some -- knew about them, but we did not. they will not come here and tell you that they were candid about it. in fact, they will come here and tell you that because people were starting to talk 81 about it, they had to create the doubt and confusion about it. the engle jury has already told you they kept you do not have to find you just have to decide whether or not this stuff from the public. that. they are responsible for those choices. you get to the percentage of fault. to be held responsible for those choices? that is when are they going and finally, r.j. reynolds entered into an and you heard the this is good old-fashioned they agreement with other cigarette manufacturers to conceal or omit material information. this is conspiracy. conspired to keep information. story about meeting at the plaza hotel in new york, putting out the [inaudible] statement, making two promises which they would not keep: a promise to cooperate for the public health and dr. burns, who was the public health -- he was in the middle of it, writing, editing, part of the surgeon general reports. he told you that once we found the documents from the tobacco industry in the late '90s, early 2000's, we realized they did anything but [inaudible]. the other promise they broke was they would they said if ever we found make health paramount. 82 anything so bad in cigarettes that was causing cancer and things like that, we would take that product off the market. that did not happen. that. "yes", what you are finding is that r.j. reynolds is liable. we are going to look for it. another jury has already found so if you find the first three questions next point. then you have to decide the at this point the judge says how the percentages. that is, if you find "yes" on the burden shifts. first three questions, that means r.j. reynolds is liable, they are responsible. they are one hundred percent responsible until you listen and rule and make decisions about the evidence that they present. it is their burden at this point to say how much of that responsibility should shift back to mr. harford. you find "yes" to those first three questions, they are liable, they are responsible. because the engle jury already said if go to the next slide. so r.j. reynolds now has the burden to say to you, you know what, we may have done all that, we may not have, i'll show you some polls that say so what, people do not care. it is all his fault. quit. he listened to a song, country song in the he could have quit. but he did not 83 '40s, he should not be -- he should have one hundred percent of the burden. next slide. r.j. reynolds wants people to buy cigarettes, to smoke them, to buy another pack. they want repeat business. reinforce their message. smoker for smoking two packs a day. you have heard from mr. cummings. and they will not fault a that is what they use advertising to you saw this slide in the beginning. not from from mr. belasic. he wants you to judge me. mr. harford based on these principles. asking is to do the same for mr. harford. principles to judge the conduct of r.j. reynolds. they made them. r.j. reynolds had choices. all we are use these we went through them in the beginning. engle jury told you what the effect of those choices were. r.j. reynolds chose to create an environment where it was a social norm to smoke cigarettes. saw the ads, saw the testimony, the military service men, the sports, actors. r.j. reynolds chose to create a product that was mass marketed and highly addictive. they chose to engineer it in a way that they could control anything, any amount of nicotine delivered to the brain. you saw the testimony about the kick, giving a little kick so that smokers get it faster. 84 r.j. reynolds chose to create an environment where there was doubt and controversy about the health hazards instead of publicly disclosing what they knew internally about the risk of causing lung cancer. and they have chose to sell a product they knew was hazardous, leading to the deaths of more than 400,000 people here. that is a choice. that is a choice. i'm sure mr. belasic will ask you the mr. harford became a smoker in '51. question, well, how does this relate to mr. harford? in every way. he became addicted to cigarettes. addicted for four decades. without full knowledge, without full appreciation, without full understanding how it related to him, and he was diagnosed with a terminal lung cancer that very fortunately was cured. he smoked cigarettes he remained who had the control over all these choices? who controlled the choices to put this stuff on the market, knowing the damage it was doing to people? reynolds had that choice. r.j. reynolds had that control. decisions. cigarettes. that they could do anything, they could move up and they controlled the design of the you saw one document where they said they had the ability to control their 85 down the tar, the nicotine. they controlled the mass marketing. you saw the testimony that they spent $10 billion a year, $250 billion on advertising. talk about how that was directly related to the number of sales. on the advertisements and the advertisements when mr. harford started smoking did not say anything about lung cancer risks. that is, it worked. and you heard heimann people relied do not forget, the first lung cancer warning on that is 35 years after he started smoking. the package, the first one that mr. belasic showed you was 1985 that said smoking causes lung cancer. 1985. and that only appeared, by the way, on 25 percent of the packets because it was a rotating warning with three other warnings. control over internal studies about the they actually addictive nature of cigarettes. talked about the meeting in the plaza about who is going to do what, or internally versus through the tric about studying addiction and health. they had control over the decision to create doubt and controversy about the health dangers of cigarettes. they not only have the control, they set out with this plan in 1953, they executed it, and then 86 they actually bragged about they bragged about it. the success of this campaign because it kept smoking the public smoking, they kept the smoker smoking. next. so where is the responsibility? where is r.j. reynolds' responsibility for all this? that is what you get to decide. that is what the whole case is about, you getting to decide. if you answer "yes" to the first three questions, you get to decide what is r.j. reynolds' responsibility for it. percent. up to you to decide what r.j. reynolds' responsibility is. you may say it is fifty percent. you may say one hundred percent. you may say it is but it is i can tell you r.j. reynolds came to you to say that it has no responsibility. said it has no responsibility for it. they blame mr. harford. that is their approach. it did this, it they deny and next. you saw the ads. they are very you heard mr. harford talk about prevalent. winston. he was very drawn to the fact of taste. and that was the slogan for winston, "tastes good like a cigarette should." next. you saw the testimony about mass marketing, desirability. [inaudible] reports that cigarette advertising -- you saw in the early 1967 this is now. years of smoking history -- cigarette advertisements depicted satisfying cigarette and associated with desirable, pleasurable activities, and they put in the advertisements nothing, very little about risks, certainly none about cancer risks. the rise and fall of every gram of consequence why is this important? has been traced in detail and the [inaudible] studies is shown to be the direct result of consumer advertising. because you are going to be asked about reliance. be asked and whether mr. harford relied. he accepted the representations in these accepted. ads and mr. heimann told you that they expected him to accept the representation in those ads. you are going to he virtually every american who can either read or understand the spoken word saw these advertisements. we will go through, you have seen it, i'm not going to repeat it, but you know. hill & knowlton, back in 1953 when they started the doubt and controversy campaign, they said that the founding members and the research directed to all the companies knew that smoking caused lung cancer. you saw the nicotine memos and the hippo 88 studies and how they would tell that from the surgeon general and never shared that with the public in 1963. they talked about how you maximize the amount of nicotine such that you are keeping the smokers coming in and going out at equal levels so that sales do not go down. and of course the nordine study, they actually say in 1982 -- this is the tobacco industry saying in 1982 that many but not most of those who would like to stop smoking are able to do so. that. on them with the doubt and controversy campaign. they knew and that is why they preyed most people cannot quit. they knew that. they knew it was a poison. they described it they knew it was addictive internally as a poison. and they intentionally withheld that information going back to the 1963 effort by the surgeon general's advisory committee to get the word out. you saw this video and yet despite all this knowledge going back to when mr. harford is a young smoker, they are still in 1994 denying it. slide. next so they design their cigarette around getting how do you get the right amount the proper dosage. to the smoker? you leave them just slightly 89 that is an how do you engineer the cigarette unsatisfied so they have another one. engineering idea. to give enough dose to satisfy, but not too much dose? and how do you keep that smoker smoking? they were engineering a cigarette to do exactly what happened to mr. harford, which was keep smoking that next cigarette, that next puff, that next exposure to carcinogen. this is the be all and end all. they did it in a way where they were highlighting the exquisite nature, the attractive forms, the dosages of nicotine, and intentionally downplayed the tar. they intentionally kept from the smoker the idea that the tar, that the carcinogens in cigarettes are what kill you. there was also testimony in this case that the winstons that he smoked were two and a half times more carcinogenic than other cigarettes. you that in a minute. i'll show but the important thing here is this same the tobacco industry in 1980 celebrated statement. this effort to keep smokers smoking by creating and they knew that if you have an addicted doubt. smoker -- like mr. harford -- in a lung cancer case -- like mr. harford -- that choice was going to fall 90 out of the picture because addiction is what causes the lung cancer. words, not mine, and that was appreciated in 1980. that is the tobacco institute's next. and so you heard and read the document, it is what more "let us provide the exquisiteness "a cigarette is a perfect type of pleasure. exquisite, and leaves one unsatisfied. can one want?" and hope that they, our consumers, continue to remain unsatisfied. larger bag to carry the money to the bank." a company called [inaudible], a sister company of brown & williamson. responsibility [inaudible]. brown & williamson's all we would want then is a that is they made those decisions knowingly, as the engle findings say, knowing that their product is killing 400,000 people a year. it is a decision. it is a motive. continue to sell, continue the doubt and controversy, even though we know the statistics about death and injury from our products, all we need are paper bags of money. and there is no evidence disputing that the cigarette companies are in the nicotine business, they designed and engineered the product to sustain that, and they had the knowledge about the health effects and the addictiveness of it going back into 91 the early stages of mr. harford's smoking, and they denied it. next. you saw the evidence. i'm just going to refer you to allen rodgman and claude teague. two [inaudible] r.j. reynolds. their findings -- they are not just saying cause of it, they are actually finding the component parts of their product and saying this is what is causing cancer. they do not share that. in in fact, they deny it. fact, you heard heimann in 1986 talking about denying it then. about it early on and even shared that information with hill & knowlton, their pr company, who they hired to create the doubt and controversy campaign. they denied it. and yet they knew continue. so they created the tirc which became the ctr, that was their so-called research institute, and they created tobacco institute. as i told you, they made two public promises in early 1954 and they broke both of them. cooperate with the public health and they did not cooperate with or treat health as a paramount concern in their research. and they did not you heard dr. cummings testify that of all the work done at ctr, only $60 million of it, only $60 million worth of research over that entire 92 period of time had anything to do with tobacco and health. ten percent, he said, of the research done by ctr actually related to smoking and health. grants went to other areas. so broken promises. next. go through the whole thing again. video i want to play for you. 11. controversy works. and this is the concept that doubt and i'm not going to but there is one it is exhibit number [video clip played] mr. migliori: it was not a quiet campaign, this was an active campaign and it was a repeated campaign and it was a celebrated campaign. go right to exhibit 56? can you how do we know it worked? we know it worked even the polling that because there is data. counsel showed you yesterday where roper writes to the surgeon general, i think, and says the data is accurate, we just do not agree with your conclusions. well, the data is the data and you can decide what the data means, but the data, not the conclusions, are very clear. this is exhibit 129, the 1981 ftc report. it says even if it is assumed that every consumer is aware that smoking is hazardous, the evidence 93 indicates that many consumers do not have enough information about the health risks of smoking in order to know how dangerous smoking is. dr. burns talked specifically about next. this. he said that mr. harford in his smoking pattern, in his way, he developed a lung cancer because he did not really believe it related to him. and the tobacco company's effort to create doubt and controversy was specifically targeted at the smoker like him who tried to quit, wanted to quit, could not quit, did not quit, and whether he quit in '85, '88, '90, or '92, the campaign was successful because he had enough dose in him to cause lung cancer. next. there is no evidence disputing that r.j. reynolds knew that cigarettes were hazardous. the cigarette companies want their customers to remain unsatisfied and the cigarette companies created a pervasive campaign of doubt and controversy. that is how it relates to mr. harford. both dr. cummings and dr. burns talked about the tobacco industry's interaction with the public health. you saw the development of the doubt and controversy campaign. and just towards the end of the trial you saw in 1960 the american tobacco company, for which you saw the various representations. 94 r.j. reynolds is responsible, trying to find a successor to its member on the ama committee because he had been so successful at that point at keeping the american medical association from saying anything about a causative link between smoking and lung cancer. they are celebrating their successes of keeping this information not just from mr. harford, but from doctors, associations of doctors like the american medical association. they do not share their full knowledge. you saw the ti institute's -- earlier today, the ti institute's director talking about how calafana was only cared about a media affect. you saw the attack that they had on that report in 1979 as being irresponsible. constrained by his addiction. talk about choice and how that relates to the percentages of fault, mr. harford's choices were constrained by his addiction. mr. harford's choices were if we are going to surgeon general even recognized that tobacco as an addiction is critical for both treating the tobacco user and for understanding why people continue to use tobacco despite known health risks. this is not advocacy, this is not me trying to convince you that this happens. this is something 95 people understood, appreciated, and talked about. like mr. harford continued to smoke because of this impact of addiction and information. and we went through his smoking history -- i'll let you rely on your memory of his testimony -- that he smoked for 35-plus years and he smoked between a pack and a pack and a half a day. he smoked before going to bed, he smoked first thing in the morning. of running out. cigarettes. many times. irritable, restless, moody, all the things that are consistent with addiction, all of the things that constrain choice. he bought cigarettes in anticipation he could not imagine life without he unsuccessfully attempted to quit and when he did try to quit, he felt next. he did not fully appreciate it. you but you heard the testimony. heard his testimony. and there was a lot of dispute about which uncle or which aunt or which person said what. you heard when he learned, what he learned, how he learned, and the only information that actually comes out in the wash is that he did not know and appreciate that smoking caused and would cause lung cancer in him. did not appreciate how addictive they were and that they were addictive. he 96 he did not internalize what his wife went and he did not interpret a warning or a through as being a risk for him of developing lung cancer. message to say that "caution, this may be hazardous" would result in his fate, what he got. not just him saying that; that is consistent with what the surgeon general says about folks who are smoking, addicted, and hear or may have heard about the health risks. he just simply did not think this was going to happen to him. and that is there is no evidence that his parents ever no evidence that the no evidence that the united states air warned him that cigarettes caused lung cancer. there is no evidence that mr. harford's wife ever warned him. force warned him. r.j. reynolds or the american tobacco company ever warned harford that cigarettes cause cancer. evidence about his doctors warning him. he read those reader's digest or newspapers that counsel showed you. no evidence that prior to 1985 that the cigarette packages contained warnings that cigarettes caused lung cancer. no no evidence those are the warnings, counsel showed them to you see that they are rotating and you see that you. they start in 1985. 97 now, there is some comment about how he worked remember, he received on-the-job he was not an he sold mr. harford worked for american tobacco. for american tobacco for one year. executive counsel tried to suggest. cigarettes on the road. training and american tobacco never told him that cigarettes were dangerous to his health. american tobacco also wrote to its employees long after mr. harford left in 1968, gave them a copy of an article that said there is no connection between smoking and lung cancer. american tobacco did not tell its employees that smoking causes lung cancer. in fact, it told him the opposite: evidence supporting it. there is no then he went to swisher cigars. he was not an he was a person who did his executive there either. job, had a family, had a beautiful relationship with his wife of 55 years, had a beautiful relationship with a daughter and a granddaughter. granddaughter and a grandson communicate with him daily to this day. and a the daughter testified he quit in '92. the granddaughter testified he quit in '92. testified he quit in '92. '85. one record says '88. the medical records say he actually wrote once he 98 you heard his testimony. he "1985 for 35 years." told you outright, i do not know why i wrote that. he gave you a very specific recollection that when he worked in the '90s in his job, he remembers smoking with his supervisor. the truth. so he is telling you and if you are going to engineer a story, if you are going to make up a story, you are not going to do it where the documents say something different. you are not going to do it where you are going to create more confusion. he is not making this up. and he told you as sincerely as he is, he quit in 1992. the important fact is it does not matter whether he quit in '85, '88, '90, or '92, it does not matter. because he quit and he stayed quit because of a terminal lung cancer diagnosis. number 5, "did mr. harford rely to his detriment on statements by r.j. reynolds?" he did. the advertising is designed to be relied upon. he told you that they were relying upon it, that they expected them to rely upon it, he did rely upon it. he took every single bit of what was positive out of the advertisements in, and there was nothing negative, nothing warning, nothing that said in 1951 99 or in 1953 when teague found out, or '56, nothing saying this is going to cause lung cancer. certainly nothing in any of the advertisements that he relied upon that said that the ones that he chose to smoke for taste were two and a half times more carcinogenic than the other cigarettes. and go to the next one. you saw r.j. reynolds they are still, in 1984, an important date, ads. '84, because we are talking about things said after 1982 in some of these questions. r.j. reynolds is still putting out advertisements saying that there is no link between smoking and lung cancer. next. '84. they have put out in 1984 in the in 1984 cigarette controversy, "smoking is neither a sufficient nor a necessary cause." 1982 date. they are still saying it. next. 1984. after the "when were these statements on which mr. this is for you to decide. harford relied made?" but you saw what they said about addiction in '94 to congress. you saw what they said in advertisements in '84. it is for you to look at the before and after 1982. evidence and decide if he relied on these statements and if so, when. we think these statements were made both next. 100 you heard heimann, he told you about reliance next. he he stated he stated that people are and how they expected everyone to rely. wanted the public to believe that cigarettes are not injurious to health. justified in relying on that statement. that when people smoke the company's cigarettes, they are doing exactly what the company wants them to do. deposition. that is not a public, i do not want to mislead you, that was said on television; that was sworn testimony under oath. american tobacco company, for which r.j. reynolds is responsible, is still saying in 1986. he made those statements in 1986 in a but that is what the next. "was the reliance a cause of william harford's primary lung adenocarcinoma?" listen, if he relied and he kept smoking and he did not internalize it and he did not appreciate it and he is the subject of this doubt and controversy which caused him to keep smoking, he relied on it. did he reasonably rely to his detriment on statements made in furtherance of r.j. reynolds' agreement with the other cigarette manufacturers to conceal or omit material information concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking? simply, yes. he relied and it caused him to have lung cancer. and the tobacco institute made its statements in 1988, it said after years of well-founded research it is not been established that cigarette smoking produces a physical dependence on nicotine. in 1994 they go to congress and they say it again. press release in 1988, this is ti, r.j. reynolds, a founding member, "claims that cigarettes are addictive are irresponsible and scare all tactics." part of doubt and controversy, all statements made both before and after 1982, thus we think you should check off "both before and after 1982." they are saying this in the media. was it a reliance which was the cause of mr. harford's primary lung carcinoma? all the reasons we talked about. it was, for and then r.j. reynolds, as dr. cummings told you, understanding and appreciating for so long the risks, kept it from the public, created this doubt and controversy, kept the smoker smoking, and as dr. burns told you it was directly related to him. that campaign of doubt and controversy started in 1953, it continued past 1982. next. so, question 11, this is sort of the ultimate question at least with respect to 102 you are going to be asked, so if you compensation. answer the first three questions "yes," addiction, adenocarcinoma, and then cause, you are going to have an opportunity to apportion fault between r.j. reynolds and mr. harford if you decide to. in 1991 he made $35,000. this number that you come up with in question 11, if you get to this question, is going to be the number that those percentages are applied to. for example, if you found -- you heard testimony from mr. harford that he worked before getting the diagnosis. halfway through 1992 he had already made $25,000. diagnosis and as a result of the treatments, he you get to could not work for four years after that. decide whether he was making $35,000 a year, whether he was on track that year to make $50,000 a year. if you get to this question about lost earnings, you get to put a number in of what he lost by not working for four years because of the devastating impact of those radiation treatments and what it took out of him. after the let us say, for example, that number comes out to $200,000 if you choose $50,000, or come out to $140,000 if you choose $35,000. you understand how that apportionment works, when in the end, just so you say that mr. harford or r.j. reynolds is one hundred percent responsible, then they would be responsible for one hundred percent of that damage. say that they are 75 percent responsible for $200,000, then they would be responsible for $150,000 of that damage. i just want you to understand how the process works. if you same would be true about medical expenses. the only evidence in the record is that he had $35,000 in medical bills. the contrary. inappropriate. appropriate thing to compensate him for the cost of his medical care during that period of time for the lung cancer. we think that that is absolutely the law provides for it. there is no evidence to it is an the third area is the one which is really not defined by a rule -- i should not say that, it is a law. but this is something where you get to decide if anything is justified for the pain and suffering that mr. harford had. this is a number that you will come up with and it is for any pain and suffering from the lung cancer, from the treatment, or from what was left of the treatment, the disability or physical impairment, if you think the wheezing is related, the mental anguish of going through that, 104 the inconvenience, the loss of capacity for the enjoyment of life in the past and in the future, for any future concern he may have about lung cancer. let me show you some of the facts about that but you will come up with a pain and suffering and then i'll tell you how that plays out. you will add up all three of those and you will have one number. number, lost earnings number, and then a number for medical bills. you add all that up and then that is where the percentages are applied, against that one number. so if anything is awarded to mr. harford, it will be the percentage that he is not responsible for of that total amount. and the court will make that calculation, not you. go to the next slide. i want to go to slide 91 here. this is the clear and how do we will end with this pain and suffering is the convincing. you decide pain and suffering? before the lunch break. most difficult thing for a jury to come up with. you have to take in what he went through and you have to decide what it is that you can compensate him for that recovery. go through all this? there is no formula to plug in. that is, what is it worth to there is no set standard. this is your common 105 but i want you to think about he sense, your judgment. what we are talking about in mr. harford's case. coughed up blood by the mouthful beginning in november of 1991. inoperable terminal lung cancer at 61 when he was 35 years married. he was diagnosed with an he had to go through emotions of telling his daughter and granddaughter of the diagnosis. he had that long ride that he talked about of silence with his wife and the ride home. what his wife would do in their 60s with him no longer around. order so that she could be closer to family. he sold his house to get things in he had concerns over the radiation devastated him. we know of at least 39 rounds of radiation where this guy sat and was exposed to intense doses of radiation which ultimately cured him, but each and every day, five days a week, wiped him out. he was worthless from july through september just from the treatment to cure this cancer. anguish, depression, physical problems, extreme fatigue. he lost 20 pounds during this process, pounds leading up to the diagnosis. he could not work for four years. you heard everybody, including defense expert, talked about that created all sorts of mental 106 the scarring in his lung just from the radiation alone and how that kills a portion of the lung. and you heard yourself in his voice in his speaking, the wheezing that he suffered. he continues to this day and as is reflected in the medical records in 2000, 2004 and 2005, every time he hears that there is something wrong with his lungs, every time he has to look into what is going on, why he is feeling the way he is feeling, he has this constant and actually appropriate fear because as a smoker, as dr. burns told you, as a smoker he is at an increased risk of further smoking-related illness including cancer. he has a constant fear. not just that he is going to die; he is 82 years old. but he is going to have to go through that again, go through those months and years of pain, suffering, anguish, depression, and inability to function. that is what you consider when you decide if there is a value of pain and suffering that you should award in this case. infiltrates appearing all over his lungs. he is had to have x-rays worried of future illness. and cat scans reviewed and re-reviewed by dr. scanlon to make sure it is not the recurrence of what it is. 107 dr. scanlon talked about the uniqueness of this, but he also talked about the extreme, the extreme therapy that he had to go through and how what was left behind in all those times that he was fearful that his cancer had come back was actually just damage from the treatment that cured him. so the final question is, same place where we started, you heard the evidence, there is no greater example of egregious conduct, there is no greater example of serious public wrong than a company that puts out a product that it knows kills and that when it comes time to take responsibility, because they had the choice and they had the control and it is time to take responsibility, when it is time to take responsibility, they blame it on the smoker. one hundred percent on the smoker. and choice belongs in your decision about whether it does not you will hear that mr. harford could have or not there is an apportionment. belong in the decision about whether he was addicted. quit any time he wanted and it is simply not medically true. suffered was severe, it was something that lasted for years, and the fear continues to this day. the pain and suffering that he and when he came to you to ask you whether he 108 belongs in this group of people who should be entitled to the findings that r.j. reynolds did what it did and did it with the cooperation of the other tobacco industries to harm smokers, he asks you please put me in this category of people, please understand my medical picture, and please hold them accountable for their share, we think that you should return a verdict. and when you fill out that form and you fill out those lines, we think that the lost earnings are anywhere between $140,000 and $200,000. $35,000. he went through, for what he went through and for what he continues to go through is worth $10 million. that is r.j. reynolds' responsibility, you put that in the appropriate line. r.j. reynolds takes responsibility for its actions because it had the choice and it had the control. we think that the medical bills are about we think the pain and suffering, for what and when you figure out how much of but make sure that i cannot thank you enough for the time you put into this trial, your attentiveness and your willingness to give mr. harford his day to decide whether or not he belongs in this group of people. thank you very much. [#deleted recess#] mr. migliori: thank you, your honor. ladies and gentlemen, again forgive me. i think it is getting worse as we get into the afternoon. the only thing that was left was the last question on the form, and this is the question that is on the board right now about punitive damages. do you find by clear and convincing evidence -- and the court explained to you what that is -- that punitive damages are warranted against r. j. 5 reynolds under the circumstances of this case? when you marshal through all of the questions and follow here and follow back and go back, when you get to no. 12 we ask that you check off yes. and all i need to say in reference to the evidence that supports that is you have been here all this time. you know that the tirc and ctr and the tobacco institute started in 1954. they publicly stated and promised their tobacco products were not injurious to health. they kept that misrepresentation through 1998, long after the 1982 in the prior questions. and so we ask on this point that you hold them responsible in a way where -- when i wrote on the board, their egregious conduct which severely impacted the public health be punished. that is what you are here for to decide, and we hope that on this question no. 12 you check off yes. again, thank you for your time. and i'll have a moment to speak with you after mr. belasic is done. thank you. mr. migliori: i do not think i'll use the whole time, your honor. good afternoon. so this is the end and this is my last time to speak with you. and i got to tell you there are two things after that summation by mr. belasic that strike me the most. now, one, he said that r. j. reynolds is not going to blame mr. harford, the smoker, and yet for an hour and a half that is all he did. not once did he take responsibility for r. j. reynolds' part. not once did he acknowledge r. j. reynolds' part in making mr. harford a lifetime smoker. mr. harford is not here saying it is all r. j. reynolds' fault; he is saying it is time under the law for a jury to decide what fault r. j. reynolds bears in his disease. that is what he is asking. he is asking for sincerity. mr. belasic also apparently tried the case against me. i've never been more disparaged in a closing. i'm not here, ladies and gentlemen, to try to convince you of anything other than what is in front of you with the evidence that we have tried so hard to put before you efficiently and honestly. 79 mr. harford suffered from an adenocarcinoma that was diagnosed by dr. scanlon. there is no record dispute. there is nothing in the record or from dr. scanlon that contradicts that. that is the second most important question on this form, what was the cancer. the reason why we brought dr. scanlon is very simple. dr. scanlon diagnosed the condition. he is the doctor. he is the pulmonologist that ordered the pathology. he is the doctor that ordered the radiology and he is the doctor that asked for dr. dickerson, the radiation oncologist, to take care and treat him. why did not you bring dr. dickerson? that was the question raised by mr. belasic. you do not bring the radiation oncologist because they do not diagnose. the question that you answer on the form is is this a primary adenocarcinoma. that is a cell type. that is defined by pathology. you look at the record, it does not say who the pathologist is. it just says what the pathologist told the doctor who diagnosed it given not just the pathology, but the radiology and the clinical symptoms. we brought you the doctor who diagnoses patients. and dr. kumar told you himself he does not 80 diagnosis cancer cell types. he cannot answer that question. and he did not answer that question. and he offered no other explanation. why? radiation oncologists are not the doctors who answer question no. 2 and 3, pathologists are. and the doctor who took the pathology information from the pathologist to make the diagnosis and set out the course of treatment, dr. scanlon, he is the one who came here. he is the one who diagnosed him. he is the one that you turn to to answer the question was this a primary adenocarcinoma of the lung. do not forget dr. kumar would not even say that this was in the lung. he would not even agree with all of the medical records showing that it was in the lung. this is a primary adenocarcinoma of the lung. and the records show that. and i ask you to go look at the medical records yourselves. now, dr. scanlon said twice that the single largest risk factor in mr. harford's life was the 35 years of smoking when it came to that adenocarcinoma. he used the absolute best description of causation that he has, which is it was not asbestos, it was not chemicals, it was not environmental. the single most important factor in my 81 patient's cancer, which pathology told me was an adenocarcinoma, was the 35 plus years. and he did not say it once. he said it twice. the second time he said it just before he sat down he called it the most significant risk factor for lung cancer. and it was. and dr. burns came in here to talk to you about the role of addiction and how that links up to question no. 3. there is not a single person who came into this room and said that mr. harford was not addicted by the medical definitions that were provided to you. again, three hours r. j. reynolds compelled mr. harford to sit through a compulsory medical examination about which mr. belasic spoke at length during the trial, for three hours. mr. belasic had a transcript of the three hours that their doctor, their psychologist who is talking about addiction with mr. harford directly. had a transcript of that interview. and yet r. j. reynolds did not bring that psychiatrist to this courtroom. they did not bring that person here with three hours' worth of information about addiction about our client. without my involvement -- the court: but let me just interject. i'm 82 going to give you the same admonition to treat each of you equally that i gave to mr. belasic. references to people not brought into the courtroom is a problem. all right? the jury once again will have to base its decision upon the evidence in the case, the inferences to be drawn from it, the absence of evidence. but when we talk about people being brought into the courtroom, i'm a little bit of a stickler on that because i cautioned the jurors that we do not to speculate about that. so the same admonition i gave to mr. belasic i'm giving to you. okay? mr. migliori: if i may, your honor, this is different. this is an expert hired about which he spoke. the court: just continue with your comments. mr. migliori: so where is the evidence that he is not addicted? where is the evidence that mr. harford is not addicted? they did not have evidence to support it. they did not even vigorously cross on the fagerstrom or any of the points of the dsm-v criteria of dr. werner. dr. werner and dr. burns gave you that testimony and it is unrefuted. so getting through this form again is 83 simple. first question, was he addicted. he was addicted. and that is unrefuted. the second question, was it a primary adenocarcinoma of the lung. it is as plain as the paper and the testimony of dr. scanlon. and was that addiction to the nicotine in r. j. reynolds' cigarettes the cause, was it a cause, was it the substantial cause, was it an overwhelming substantial cause? all of those answers were provided by dr. burns. you do not get the dose of carcinogen without the addiction to need another cigarette. and do not forget the cigarette that he smoked was two and a half times more carcinogenic than the other cigarettes on the market. the winston cigarettes were two and a half more times carcinogenic. where did r. j. reynolds ever tell anybody, including mr. harford, about that? and i'm going to trust you. i trust the system. this is my career. i'm going to trust you to understand that the facts that you have just heard were as loose as i've ever heard before. mr. belasic: objection on that opinion, your honor. the court: overruled. 84 mr. migliori: mr. harford said that if he had known and appreciated and understood the risks, he would have quit sooner if he had appreciated it. why does that matter? because r. j. reynolds actually set out to do exactly this. this was their plan. can i have exhibit 84. was it 84? can you blow that up, please. i'll move out of your way. this was their plan. they planned to do this. for nearly 20 years this industry has employed a single strategy to defend itself on three fronts. the first front, litigation. politics and public opinion. while the strategy was brilliantly conceived and executed over the years, helping us win important battles, it is only fair to say that it is not nor was it intended to be a vehicle for victory. on the contrary, it has been a holding strategy consisting of creating doubt about the health charge without actually denying it. i ask you what is dr. kumar's testimony other than trying to create doubt without giving an answer? he came here to create doubt about a diagnosis by doctors who physically examined, talked to, followed up five days a week, 39 treatments. those doctors called it an adenocarcinoma. and dr. scanlon came here to tell 85 you that. dr. kumar is part of this strategy -- mr. belasic: objection, your honor, it violates the court's order. the court: sustained. mr. belasic: page 14 -- the court: sustained. do not go there. go ahead. mr. migliori: this is not an unclear case. this is not an unclear case. this is not about whether or not a song was played and therefore mr. harford knew. one of mr. belasic's slides actually said mr. harford knew in the 1950s, relying on uncle caleb, relying on all these people. how do you say that mr. harford knew when in 1984 r. j. reynolds is saying in its advertisements throughout the country it is not known. how do you say in this courtroom that mr. harford knew in the '50s and publicly deny it through 1998 through your tobacco institute and your center for tobacco research? how do you do that and then have the audacity to ask you that you not hold them responsible for their share of what happened to mr. harford? he is not asking for him to -- he actually paid the ultimate price. he got cancer. 86 to the extent you decide that there is a choice issue, i'm telling you that that choice issue is not a question of addiction. it is a question of how much fault belongs to him. and if you think he has some fault because he has choices that he could have made even if they were constrained choices because of addiction, then you give him a percentage of fault himself. but how do you come into this courtroom and say you have no responsibility to the smoker when you set out a strategy to keep the smoker smoking and not tell them the truth, not tell them the truth? truth matters. dr. cummings told us that the reason why that chart starts to fall off and people start to quit -- mr. belasic showed you 60 million people quit is because truth matters. and in 1999 and 2000 when these documents became publicly available it mattered. it caused people to quit. and it kept new people from starting. it is a different world. and when i met you back in front of the magistrate judge to pick this jury, that is what i asked you. can you be fair, because you do have to put yourself back in time. you have to go back in time to understand when mr. harford started. nobody was talking about it. and r. j. reynolds certainly did not tell that you the product he 87 started smoking was two and a half times more carcinogenic. they did not do anything to make him feel that what he was doing was something he was doing at his own risk. to the contrary, they spent $250 billion talking about the pleasures of the cigarette without any warning, $250 billion that were directly tied to market share. they knew the more they spent on advertising, the more their company would have the presence in the market. and now they come here and have the arrogance to say they should not be held accountable for their share. you may not think the number's 10 million. you may think the number is 1 million. you may not think it is that much. that is your decision. mr. harford is only asking you to come here to listen to his story, to understand the facts and to give him a fair trial. and if you think he is addicted, you have to put yes on no. 1. if you think it is a primary adenocarcinoma, like dr. scanlon and dr. burns testified, you have to answer yes on question no. 2. if you think the nicotine which caused him to smoke those three to four and a half million puffs of carcinogens of r. j. reynolds' products is the reason -- is a cause, not the only cause, but a cause of his 88 primary adenocarcinoma of the lung, you have to answer yes to no. 3. he talked about this being a legal product. i'll tell you what the law is again. this is a case about florida law. and under florida law if you say yes to those three questions, you are told that r. j. reynolds is liable to my client. you are told that their product unnecessarily, unreasonably was defective. you are told that r. j. reynolds misled the public. you are told that r. j. reynolds conspired with other companies to mislead the public. the law in florida is that there are a group of people who are entitled to those findings. that is the law. the fact that he smoked a product that he could buy in a store does not change the law that r. j. reynolds in selling that product put him in a place where he was exposed to carcinogens that he did not appreciate were going to cause the disease that he had. now, i heard i think -- i heard him say that it is absolute science. absolute science that this could not have been adenocarcinoma. that is insanity. mr. belasic: objection, your honor, unfair commentary. right. the court: all right. all right. all 89 disregard the reference to insanity. go ahead. mr. migliori: how could that be? it is a cell type. it is a cell type. you look at that under the microscope. dr. kumar came here and he actually said, i do not know what the shape of that tumor was. i do not know what it looked like. we do not know because we do not have the films. and now we look at softballs and golf balls as if to describe something that is absolutely crystal clear, absolute science. please just be fair. trust your understanding. trust what you heard. that is all we are asking. i'm not asking you to do anything other than apply florida law, which says this company if we prove those three facts is liable to my client. and to the extent you think that mr. harford bears a responsibility beyond the -- the price he is already paid of having a lung cancer, having damage to his upper left lobe of his tissue from the radiation to cure it, if you think beyond that price he is paid he should pay more, then you give him a percentage of fault for his choices. that is the law in florida. that is the 90 law about this legal product. there are so many things that r. j. reynolds could have done and did not do. and not one of them -- not one of them did mr. belasic come up here and explain away. it is almost as if we say, r. j. reynolds, yes, we did all that. the engle findings are accurate, but it did not matter because we did not convince this person. how do we know it affected this person? how do we know that mr. harford falls in that category of people affected? because when i showed you that graph of the rise of smoking and the fall of smoking, he fits in that graph exactly how other people affected by the same advertising, affected by the same messages, affected by the same doubt and controversy campaign. he started to smoke when it was cool. and he stopped -- whether it was '85, '88 or '92, he stopped when information became available. and if you believe mr. belasic that this really was 1985 and everything else mr. harford came before you about quitting in '92 is a lie, if you believe mr. belasic, think about the one thing that happened in 1985 that made a difference maybe. 1985 was the first time lung cancer was put 91 on the package. 1985 was the first time lung cancer was put on the package. if mr. belasic is right, is not that curious? we are talking about how information matters. doubt cannot prevail in this courtroom. not only should there be an award for compensatory damages once you find the first three answers are yes, but you should find like every other smoker on that rise up and on that rise down, mr. harford was susceptible, was a product of the direct advertising of all the benefits and none of the risks, just like that initial document said. and he did not quit until it was too late. and it caused an adenocarcinoma that almost killed him. and thank god it did not. but if three to five percent of the people survive this and he is one of the three to five percent, he is here as a person with great fortune to be able to tell this story and to be able to ask you not just for compensation, which he is asking for -- i'm not hiding behind that -- but he is asking for accountability. and here in the united states, just like i said to you when we picked the jury, this is the only place where you get to do that. what an extraordinary thing. this is the only place where a jury gets to hold 92 a corporation accountable if we prove our facts. that is what we are asking you to do. we are not asking you to do anything -- i'm not trying to convince you of something that is not on the paper. i'm not asking you to try to convince you of something that is not what a treating doctor said. i'm asking you to be fair. and i trust this system and i trust your recollection of the facts, not necessarily what you just heard. i'm not going to go through the timeline of knowledge. i'm not going to go through the engle findings again. but what i'm going to say is your document, your instructions that you will have, they have everything in there. the engle findings are there. read them. understand what that means when you get to that point. understand that this was a successful doubt and controversy campaign. and it did as dr. burns told you, it did directly impact this person who relied on their statements. it is your right to make a decision if they need to be punished for this. and they should be punished for this. and we are asking you to hold them accountable for all those things that in an hour and a 93 half mr. belasic did not once defend. thank you for your time. i apologize for my voice. but thank you for staying healthy through the week. i'm very proud to represent mr. harford, and i really appreciate what you have given us in terms of your time. thank you.