ms. london: thank you. good morning. in a little while you will go back into the jury room and you will have three very important jobs to do. first, your job will be to answer the questions that are on the verdict form that the judge gives you. the second will be to follow the law that the judge instructs you on. and the third is going to be to talk to each other about how you feel about the evidence and united states district court 44 what you think we have proved in this case. so for the next hour i'm not going to read through all this evidence that you heard, and i know you were paying careful attention. what i am going to do is give you some help or some ideas for how to talk to each other about how you feel about the case. so as i told you, about a week-and-a-half ago, there is three reasons why we sued. the first was because the cigarette companies violated the safety rule that you have to tell the truth about the dangers you knew about in your product. and the cigarette -- well, the cigarette companies' witnesses they told you themselves, and i think mr. jupe said, he said, "individuals are entitled to know the truth about their products." cigarette companies violated this rule in three ways. first -- thanks, jeff. you can take that down. first, they did not tell the truth about what they knew, when they knew it about their cigarettes causing disease and death. and instead they spent 50 years creating a campaign of doubt, denial and controversy. the second way they did not tell the truth about the way that their products were so addictive or what they did to make them as addictive as possible. and the third way is because they did not tell the truth about filters, and low tar, and light cigarettes that united states district court 45 those did not do any good, did not make the products any safer at all. the proof of all this, you saw, came from their own documents. and the surgeon general of the united states who came and looked at all this evidence too reached the same conclusion. so the cigarette companies they should have followed the basic rules we have for all manufacturers. you have to tell the truth about what you know when you know it. if the cigarette companies had followed this rule and had told the truth then mr. harris and millions of other americans could have made a fully informed choice before it was too late. the second reason i told you that we sued is because the cigarette companies violated the safety rule that you have to make your products as safe as reasonably possible. they violated this rule by making them as addictive as possible. and again, the proof of this came from their very own documents, and professor proctor he explained that to you. the cigarette companies should not have made those cigarettes as addictive as possible and here's why. dr. burns explained to you that the addiction is the key danger, the key danger in cigarette smoking. it is the addiction that causes people to smoke day-after-day, year-after-year, decade-after-decade exposing their bodies to united states district court 46 chemicals, the thousands of chemicals and smoke that cause all of the diseases that you see up here on this chart and that we have talked so much about in this trial. if the cigarette companies had not made their products as addictive as possible, if they had followed the basic safety rules, then mr. harris would not have gotten so powerfully addicted and we would not be here today. finally, the third reason that we sued is because the companies violated the basic rule that if you are going to market a product, you have to do it responsibly. they violated this rule by going out and targeting young people with their advertising, their promotion and their design. the proof of this, again, was in their own documents. and the united states surgeon general looked at all the evidence and reached the exact same conclusion that they targeted, marketed and designed cigarettes for kids and still do it today. the cigarette companies should not have done that. they should not have marketed their products irresponsibly. and again, dr. burns explained this to you. the younger someone starts the more likely it is that they are going to get powerfully addicted, and the more likely it is they are going to get a disease and die. that is why marketing to children is so dangerous and why it is a violation of this safety rule. if the cigarette companies had not done this, united states district court 47 then mr. harris and millions of others would not have been enticed to start smoking so young when even their own witnesses agreed their brains were vulnerable and would not be very good at evaluating risk. now, i told you in the beginning that your main job in this trial would be to figure out how much responsibility the cigarette companies bear for what they did and for the pain and suffering that they caused. now remember, mr. gentry, one of the cigarette company witnesses, even he agrees cigarette companies ultimately have the responsibility for their products. so let us -- we are going to talk about that. how to go about figuring out how much responsibility they have. but i want to talk to you, a little bit, about the instructions that the judge is going to give you. and again, one of the jobs i told you will have to do, you have to follow the judge's instructions. it is very, very important. so i want to talk to you about instruction no. 13. all right. you have heard a lot about this, about the burden of proof, and we talked about this when we talked a week-and-a-half ago about what the burden is that we have to prove. and here's what this jury instruction says. jury instruction no. 13, it says, "we have to prove you must be persuaded, considering all the evidence, that the proposition is more probably true than not true." and that is what we united states district court 48 talked about from the very beginning. we have been talking about this all along. more likely right than wrong, even just a little bit, even just by a hair. more likely right than wrong. tip the scales just a little bit in our favor. so if during deliberations if somebody says, "i have doubts. i'm not sure. i'm not certain." remind them about this burden. it is okay. it is okay to have all the doubts in the world. it is okay not to be sure. i would not expect you to be. in this case that is this hotly contested, you do not have to be sure, you do not have to be certain. all we need to prove more likely right than wrong, more probably true than not, even if by a hair. and if you find that, then you have to find in our favor on that question. all right. thank you, jeff. you can take that down. as the judge told you at the very beginning of this trial, this case comes after a big class action case. and this was a big class case against these cigarette companies and these defendants here involving a class of florida smokers who got addicted and sick from smoking cigarettes in the early 1990's. it was a long trial. there were a lot of exhibits and a lot more witnesses than you saw here. in that case the jury reached a verdict on some very important things, very significant and important findings after hearing all the evidence in that case. and you will hear more about united states district court 49 that a little later. some of these findings includes that cigarettes are addicting, that they caused a number of diseases on the list and that the cigarette companies concealed and conspired with one another to hide information. those are very important findings. anyone who can show that they were part of this class, this group of florida smokers, those findings will apply in that case. so that is why we have to first show you that mr. harris was a member of that class. that is going to be the first threshold issue that you all are going to decide. that pretty much comes down to this: whether mr. harris' addiction to cigarettes was a cause of his heart disease or -- and/or a cause of his oral cavity cancer before november of 1996. mr. cofer: objection, your honor, misstates the standard. it is a legal cause. the court: rephrase if you would. you can actually use the instruction, if you like, at this point. ms. london: all right. we have to prove that it was a cause. it was a legal cause. that is what we have to prove that addiction to cigarettes was a legal cause of mr. harris' heart disease or oral cavity cancer before november 21, 1996. and again, if anything i say deviates in anyway from what the judge is instructing you, you have to follow what the judge is saying. absolutely no question united states district court 50 about it. all right. so once you figure that out, once you figure out that basic question, then we will talk about how to figure out how much responsibility the cigarette companies bear. and to be clear, mr. harris' fault, any other causes, any other faults, anything else that is going to come later, that is not what this class membership question is about. let us focus on what that question is. no. 1. (can you put that up, jeff, question no. 1?) all right. the first question is, "whether more likely right than wrong the plaintiff, mrs. harris, has proved that it is more likely than not that mr. harris was addicted to the nicotine in cigarettes." okay. so you have heard a lot about this in this trial. i'm not going to rehash everything. what does addiction mean? addiction is defined as a chronic relapsing brain disease characterized by compulsive drug seeking and use, despite harmful consequences. it is considered a brain disease because drugs change the brain; they change its structure and how it works. now, dr. burns who wrote the chapter on nicotine addiction, in that medical textbook, the one used by medical doctors all over this country, he explained to you how he and other treating doctors figure out whether somebody is addicted and meets that definition. and he used the accepted united states district court 51 published definition from the surgeon general from the national institute on drug abuse. and he told you what it really comes down to is compulsive use despite harm. well, he concluded more likely right than wrong and beyond that he is certain that mr. harris met that definition. that he was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, and we showed you his work. you saw all the evidence. you saw that all throughout this trial. you saw that he smoked first thing in the morning to relieve his withdrawal symptoms. every 30 minutes throughout the day, last thing he did before night, 1-, 2-, 3-packs of cigarettes a day, that is 20 to 60 cigarettes a day, for nearly -- for more than 40 years. he had to leave movies to go smoke, leave restaurants to go smoke, he got cravings, nervous and edgy when he tried to stop. that is what his neighbor told you. and he even tried to smoke after he physically no longer could and had a hole in his throat. that is the definition of addiction. that is the picture of it and you saw it here in this courtroom. again, despite harm, we know that, despite the fact that he had a heart attack, despite the cancer on his vocal cord and even despite the cancer in his oral cavity mr. harris continued to compulsively smoke despite the horrible consequences. and beyond that, mr. harris' doctors, the ones who actually treated him, evaluated him, interviewed him, all united states district court 52 that, they wrote down right there in the records history of tobacco use. dr. burns, our medical doctor, who reviews medical records all the time, who treats patients, he told you history of tobacco abuse that is a synonym for nicotine addiction. well, in the face of all that the cigarette companies, what did they do? well, they brought you dr. kaplan. he disagrees with the medical doctors who treated mr. harris. he is never written anything in this area, never researched, never published on anything, does not work with the surgeon general, does not think the surgeon general is authoritative, disagrees with the surgeon general. he did not rely on anything from the worlds leading sources. he did not rely on surgeon general reports, national institute of drug abuse, national cancer institute, american medical association, none of these organizations. he did not rely on any of the world's leading authorities on nicotine addiction at all. what else did not he rely on? he did not even look at the millions of pages or any of the pages of the cigarette companies own documents where they wrote about nicotine addiction, what it is and how it works in their customers. you heard those are publicly available on the internet, did not even look at them. instead he relied on three things. he relied on the medical records that he pulled and united states district court 53 picked and cherry picked things out of. he relied on his clinical work of which he told you only one percent of what he does is treat people solely for nicotine addiction, and the diagnostic and statistical manual, which even he had to admit he used to say was not the right one to use. one that itself does not even address addiction, and, of course, one that cautions using it in a setting just like this. there is simply no comparison, none at all, between the depth and breadth of dr. burns' experience and dr. kaplan. there is just no comparison at all about that and what dr. kaplan came in here to tell you, which is that nicotine addiction played no role, had nothing to do with why mr. harris smoked at all, but even then he had to admit, he had to admit mr. harris smoked for nicotine, and he had to admit that he smoked despite the harm. so during deliberations if someone says, "well, mr. harris stopped smoking, how could it be he was addicted?" remind them. remind them what dr. burns said, and that is, that even if you stop smoking, even if you break through addiction it does not mean you were not addicted in the first place. as long as you meet that definition you fall into this category. and again, if somebody says, "well, i think he smoked for other reasons. i think he may have enjoyed them." remind them, of course, and -- remind them, nicotine changes united states district court 54 brain, it creates these receptors, when you smoke and that dose of nicotine to make your brain feel normal, that feels like relaxation, feels like enjoyment, feels like other things. so remind them that you can be addicted and feel enjoyment. absolutely. that is what you heard from all the witnesses who talked about that. so the answer to question one, more likely right than wrong, frankly, beyond that, is that mr. harris was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine. addicted to the nicotine in the cigarettes. all right. question 2. next question is whether mr. harris has -- mrs. harris has proved that more likely than not mr. harris' oral laryngeal cancer, or oral cancer manifested before november 21, 1996. all right. what does this word "manifest" mean? the judge will instruct you, this is instruction no. 16. (jeff, if you can pull that up.) it simply means the point in time when his body began to suffer symptoms of the disease rendering it diagnosable, not necessarily when the exact nature of the diseases was diagnosed by a physician after sufficient testing, but when it became diagnosable. all right. (you can take that down.) now, you saw the evidence. you saw the doctor who did the radiology on three of mr. harris' cancers, one who explained it most in detail on the records. he told you it was in 1996. you also saw a medical record from one of mr. harris' doctors saying it started in october of 1996. united states district court 55 now, if somebody, during deliberations, they say, "well, i do not know. there were a lot of records that said 1997." remind them what dr. burns said. there is no inconsistency at all. these records all worked together. more likely right than wrong -- well, first of all what he explained to you was that first you get the cancer, then you get radiation and then you get surgery. all of the records work together. more likely right than wrong mr. harris got the cancer, they found out he had the cancer, in october of 1996. then he had radiation, and then he had surgery in may of 1997. perfectly consistent. all these records worked together. now, the lawyers for the cigarette companies they sure kicked up a lot of controversy about it. they showed mrs. harris and dr. burns, they showed them record, after record, after record, but here's what they did not do. they did not bring in any medical doctor who knew what they were talking about to come in here and corroborate this theory that this cancer only came in 1997. now, i think it is interesting they did bring you a medical doctor who was board certified in internal medicine. somebody who spent hundreds of hours reviewing all the medical records in this case. i think it is pretty interesting they did not ask him to corroborate this theory that they had that this cancer only came after november 1996. united states district court 56 more likely right than wrong. and again, you are allowed to have doubts, you are allowed not to be certain. all you have -- if, though, more likely right than wrong, even just by a little bit, we have met our burden to show that mr. harris' oral cavity cancer, more likely right than wrong, manifested before november of 1996, you must find, without question, in our favor. all right. the next question is whether his addiction -- let us look at this. we find whether the plaintiff has proved that it is more likely than not that mr. harris' addiction was a legal cause of mr. harris' coronary heart disease, or mr. harris' oral laryngeal cancer. all right. well, let us break this down in two parts. all right. (you can take that down.) let us break it down in two parts. the first real question is was addiction a cause, a cause why he smoked cigarettes? a cause why he continued to smoke day-after-day, year-after-year to get enough smoking, to get enough chemicals in his body to cause these diseases? and this is really important, so i want to show you this instruction. (can you pull this up?) all right. in deciding whether mr. harris' addition was a legal cause of either his coronary heart disease or oral cancer plaintiff need not prove that addiction was the only reason that mr. harris continued to smoke. as long as addiction was part of the reason, as long united states district court 57 as the addiction made a difference, as long as the addiction played a role, then, yes, his addiction was a cause, a legal cause why mr. harris continued to smoke so much to get so sick. so let us talk about that. as long as -- well, something that made a difference. what do we know about how the role that nicotine addiction plays and why people smoke? what did we learn about that? i do not want to go through all the details. you heard it. i know you were paying attention, but i want to point out a few things in case somebody brings it up in deliberations, "well, i do not know. we do not know. how can we be sure that nicotine addiction really caused him to smoke?" so here's what we know. we know it causes changes in the brain. witnesses from both sides agreed on that. we know that people smoke to fill those nicotine receptors to get more -- to feel normal. we learned that from both witnesses. you saw in the internal cigarette companies' documents, right, there was a whole document where it talked about pre-learners, learners and addicted smokers and why they smoked. this is part of the study they were doing about why people smoked and had "plus, plus, plus," under addiction. that is under nicotine. that is why people who are addicted smoke, to get that nicotine. to keep pushing the united states district court 58 levers to keep getting that reward to their brain every 30 minutes. not because it is fun. not because you love it. not because it is enjoyable. because of addiction. because of the nicotine. and here's what else we know. nicotine addictions is the fundamental reason why people persist in smoking cigarettes that cause so much death and disease. that is what the surgeon general has told us. even mr. gentry, it took a while, but even he admitted nicotine addiction is a fundamental reason why people continue to smoke day-after-day, year-after-year and get enough of those chemicals in their body to get sick. and we also know that nicotine addiction is very powerful. we learned about this. dr. burns explained this to you. seventy percent of people who smoke want to stop, fifty percent of people try, and only three percent, three, every year manage to get off of them. that is the power of nicotine addiction over why people continue to smoke. now, if in deliberations somebody says, "well, i think it was his choice. i think he made a choice." remind them what dr. burns said, that addiction creates a demand that can override choice. remember he told you that. that is how addiction works. and also remind them that we do not have to show that mr. harris smoked only because of addiction. just that it played a role. that it was a part of the reason united states district court 59 that he smoked. you can find both that he was addicted and that he chose to smoke so long as his addiction was a cause of why he smoked. all right. (you can take that down, thanks.) all right. now, you are allowed to find that multiple things, multiple things combined together to cause mr. harris to smoke. no question about it, so long as addition is one of the reasons. if you find that more likely right than wrong, even just by a little bit, addiction was the reason he kept exposing himself to all those chemicals that got him sick, then you are going to have to find for us, at least on that part of the question. the second part of the question is whether the cigarette smoking that he smoked so much of was a legal cause of the diseases that he got. for this purpose we are only talking about two. remember, we are just trying to find out if he gets into this class. and the only ones that matter for this purpose are the coronary heart disease and his oral cavity cancer. let us put up what this means, this legal cause. what does it mean to say this is a legal cause. this is important. it is going to be instruction no. 19. okay. in order to be a legal cause of injury the condition need not be the only cause. something may be a legal cause of injury or death even though it operates in combination with the act of another, or some natural cause or united states district court 60 some other cause, if the condition or conduct contributes substantially to producing the injury or death. bottom line, it just has to be a cause. a cause. not the only cause. just a cause. dr. burns told you that more likely right than wrong, and beyond that he is sure, that mr. harris' addiction to cigarettes was a cause of his coronary heart disease and his oral cavity cancer. and he explained to you why. he showed his work. he talked to you about what smoking does to the cells in your throat, how it breaks down the defenses, how they mutate and they grow over time and become a cancer. he explained to you what cigarette smoking does to damage the blood vessels, how that happens over time, it creates narrowing, narrowing, narrowing that causes the heart disease. now, again, the question is not what caused his heart attack, it is not what caused his stroke, it is what caused his coronary heart disease, which as you were shown, was diagnosed in 1994. dr. burns also told you that cigarette smoking is known as a major cause of these diseases, and that mr. harris' smoking history 1- to 3-packs of cigarettes a day, for nearly 40 years, how that contributed substantially was a cause in this case. now, the cigarette companies they brought you united states district court 61 dr. furman. i'm not really sure what to say about dr. furman. he did spend a lot of time talking to you about the same things dr. burns already told you about. he agreed smoking was a major risk factor for coronary heart disease. agreed mr. harris was a heavy smoker, that he was a heavy smoker when he got the coronary heart disease. agreed that when you start smoking young you are more likely to get it. and he agreed -- this is really important, he agreed if he quit smoking in 1980, his risk would have declined significantly. meaning, it made a significant contribution. so i'm not sure how dr. furman got from all that to come in here and say it did not cause it. i do not know. i do not know at all. the court will instruct you, you can disregard anything and all of his testimony if you want to. now, if in deliberations someone says, "well, but mr. harris had a number of other risks factors for heart disease," tell them, "of course. no kidding. that is what dr. burns told you. no question." but remind them what dr. burns told you and that is if all those things, all those risk factors of heart disease if you take off smoking from that list, his risk of getting heart disease goes down fifty percent. that is substantial. period. it is a substantial contribution. and again, if during deliberations someone says to you, "well, there were other risk factors for that oral united states district court 62 cavity cancer," again, dr. burns said if -- that is right. absolutely. no question about it. but that is not the -- the question is not whether cigarette smoking or his addiction to smoking was the only cause. it can work together in a combination of other causes just so long as it contributed, made a difference. remind them also we put up what the national cancer institute said and that is that cigarette smoking -- i'm sorry, most oral cancers, like the one mr. harris had, more oral cancers are attributable to cigarette smoking. remember it said the magnitude of the effect, large. remind them of that if anyone in deliberations is worried about the other risk factors. again, i hate to repeat myself, but you are allowed to think more than one thing caused or contributed. that is fine. dr. burns told you that, but if you find that mr. harris' addiction to cigarettes, the cigarettes he smoked for 30 years, 40 years, even if you find that was one of the things, just one of the things that caused, more likely right than wrong even by a little bit, then you have to find on question 2 -- i'm sorry, question 3, you have to find in our favor on both. all right. moving on. if you answer these questions and you found that mr. harris is a member of the engle class, meaning he is part of this group of smokers that united states district court 63 get the benefit of all those findings that jury made before you, you should pull out your engle findings. those are going to be in instruction 16, i think. this is what the other jury found. all right. i'm not going to read these all to you. you will have them back there with you. but these are the key significant important findings that once you find mr. harris is part of this class, these are going to apply in this case and you are going to use them in deciding the rest of these questions. mr. cofer: objection, your honor. may we approach briefly? the court: i'll see you at sidebar briefly. you may stand if you wish. (sidebar conference held.) mr. cofer: i apologize for interrupting. i believe no. 3 was excluded. the court: yes. you were not here. mr. cofer: they displayed no. 3. they should not have. the court: just take a marker over -- mr. cofer: sorry to interrupt. ms. london: that is fine. mr. bielby: all our demonstratives are based on prior drafts, and since the sequencing change this morning, united states district court 64 in the order of defendants, it is a non-substantive point, but all of our demonstrations are going to use the different order. the court: you do not have any problem if the defendants are out of order on the display, you do not object, do you? all counsel: no. the court: you are fine with that. okay. (back before the jury.) the court: just so you know, there is a technical problem. there was a matter deleted in the jury instructions that we just debated before you came in this morning and that had not been modified yet. that is what the issue is here. ms. london: let us put that back up. these are the engle findings. these are the ones that will apply in this case. so study them carefully and remind each other you cannot question these. these are the law. these have already been decided and they will apply. okay. so you can take that down, and we will go into those a little bit more later. question 4, the next question. all right. the next question is whether the plaintiff has proved that this is more likely than not that smoking cigarettes manufactured by the following defendants was a legal cause of disease or diseases not resulting in mr. harris' death? okay. this verdict form is kind of long and cumbersome and that is for united states district court 65 legal reasons you should not worry about. but there are going to be some questions that have to do with diseases that caused mr. harris' death, the lung cancer, and the ones that did not. so a lot of these questions are just going to be duplicative questions. one will have to do with the diseases that did not result in his death, and those will be defined for you, and the ones that did, the lung cancer. okay. so i'm going to talk about them in groups because they are really the same, the same issues, but you should know you will have to decide for both. so let us talk about this, whether mr. harris' smoking of each manufactured cigarettes was a legal cause. there it is again the word "legal cause," whether it contributed, whether it was a cause, does not have to be the only cause, whether it was a cause, made a difference, contributed. so you heard from mrs. harris and you heard from their neighbor mr. jennings, about the brands that mr. harris smoked on a regular basis over the years. and there is no dispute at all that these brands that you heard about they were manufactured by these cigarette companies. you will have -- you were told about that. mr. byrd he stood up and he read those stipulations of fact to you. that is not in dispute. dr. burns explained to you that it was all -- that united states district court 66 it was all the cigarettes. every single one of them that caused and contributed to mr. harris' addiction, diseases and death. we explained to you that it was philip morris' cigarettes, lorillard's cigarettes and r.j. reynolds' cigarettes, every cigarette he smoked caused, contributed, made a difference in mr. harris' multiple diseases and death. the defendants did not bring you anyone to say anything different at all. now, if somebody in deliberations they say, "well, i'm not sure. we do not know exactly how long he smoked any particular brand. we do not know that." remind them that -- what dr. burns said that each one of the cigarettes made a contribution, added more nicotine to his brain through the nicotine receptors, added more disease to his airways, narrowed his blood vessels, froze the scillae that defend his lungs. every single cigarette made a contribution. now there will be another place on the verdict form for you to divide up how much responsibility among the cigarette companies. you do not have to worry about that here. this part is just if more likely right than wrong, even if just by a hair, even by a hair, that these companies' cigarettes made a contribution to disease, you have to find for us in our favor and check the answer yes. it should be, "yes, yes and yes," on this question. and that will go same united states district court 67 for question 6. right. so this is for the diseases that did not cause his death, and question 6 will be for the ones that caused his lung cancer and death. now, dr. burns explained to you how it was that mr. harris' addiction to cigarettes caused mr. harris' lung cancer and death. he explained to you how it is that the chemicals that came into his body over multiple, multiple, multiple decades eroded the defenses in his lungs, got rid of the natural defenses, got into his blood stream, mutated, changed, became a cancer, spread to his bones and spread to his brain. he explained to you how it is that the smoking of these cigarettes caused his death. he also explained to you that 85 to ninety percent of lung cancer is caused by smoking. so there is no question that lung cancer is caused by smoking. now, if in deliberations somebody says, "well, he stopped smoking 12 years before that lung cancer. i cannot be sure." remind them what dr. burns said that even after he had been stopped for 12 years, his risk was 3- to 400-percent higher than that of a nonsmoker, and, by the way, that mr. harris had no other risk factors for lung cancer. again, the cigarette companies did not bring you one witness, not one to tell you otherwise. remember they had a board certified internal medicine doctor sitting in that chair who has given opinions on pulmonary diseases before, curious they united states district court 68 did not bring him in to talk to you about that. so the answer is to those questions, "yes, yes and yes." every cigarette contributed. the next area, and i'm going to talk about these questions together, the four questions all are around the same topic and that is fraudulent concealment and the conspiracy, and it is very technically dense, and you will have that question back there. the bottom line for all of these questions is whether the cigarette companies' concealment -- whether their fraudulent concealment that we have talked about, and whether their agreement to fraudulently conceal whether that was a cause, a legal cause of mr. harris' injuries and death, and there will be four different questions that go to that issue. some that have to do with the diseases that did not cause his death, and some that did, and one question about each company's fraud and their concealment, and each company's contribution to this conspiracy, but they really all go together. so i'm going to talk about them all the same. now, good new is there are things you do not have to decide. (if you can go back to the engle findings, jeff.) okay. so here's what you do not have to decide. the cigarette companies we know they concealed or omitted material information not otherwise known or available. knowing that they omitted -- knowing that the concealed or united states district court 69 omitted information was false or misleading. okay. we know that. you do not have to decide that. and we know that the companies agreed to do this together with the intention that the public and smokers would rely on what they said. this has already been decided. remind each other that you do not have to decide this part, and that is key. so if somebody during deliberations says, "well, but what about the readers digest articles, what about all the things of warnings on packs, all that stuff that came out over the last 50 years, surely there was information out there in the public that smoking could be bad for you, could be bad to quit." so if someone says that during deliberations remind them, this case is about what was not known, not available, that is what this case is about. and here's what was not known or available. nobody outside the industry knew that these filters, these lights, these low tar cigarettes were gimmicks, not any safer, would not deliver any less tar or nicotine. quite to the contrary. the public completely believed the opposite and so did the surgeon general of the united states. they were all fooled. nobody knew outside of the industry what they were doing to rig the cigarettes, to make them as hard to quit as possible. they kept all that under wraps. nobody knew that. nobody knew how they were designing the cigarettes with the ph, and the optimum nicotine, and all the rigging they were united states district court 70 doing. that was all secret and kept in their files. and nobody knew outside of the industry that these competitors, these competitors were working together behind closed doors to deny, and doubt, and lie about what they all knew to be true. nobody knew that outside of the industry. that was not otherwise known or available. and, of course, none of that came out until when? until when? until mr. harris already had been physically unable to smoke, until all the damage that was done to his body was already done. so this question, this question about concealment, and conspiracy and all that, the question only is whether it is a legal cause, a legal cause, did it make a difference, did it contribute? so there is two ways, really, that these omissions and concealments can make a difference. i realize its hard to think about how a concealment or omission of fact how does that cause a disease. i think it is kind of a complicated and hard thing to think about. they way i look at it is, what we do not know can hurt you. right. another way to look at this is what if it was the opposite? what if they had come clean? what if they had told the truth back in the '50's? way back here instead of going to the meeting at the plaza hotel in 1953 saying mr. harris -- what if they came clean when they knew that their cigarettes had chemicals in it they could not take out? united states district court 71 what if they came clean then? what if they came clean and they knew that filters were just an illusion of filtration? what if they came clean then? what if they came clean when they knew how addictive their cigarettes were? why do people smoke "addiction"? if they had come clean back then, if they had come clean with all these points along the way would that have made a difference? well, here's what we know. dr. burns we asked him and he showed us what the world would look like, how different the world would look if they had come clean on any of these points along the way, how much less disease and death we would have in america. he showed us that. how do we know? because now that they cannot lie about some of these things so many fewer people smoke. so we know that it made a difference in the world. now would it have made a difference to mr. harris? i think what you have learned about him absolutely it would have. this was a man who loved his family, provided for his family. this is a man who wanted to stop smoking, told his neighbor -- by the way, has no skin in this game at all -- told his neighbor how much he wanted to stop and how much he could not stop. we know that if mr. harris could have stopped, if he would have known -- we also know he was confused. again, his neighbor had talked to him, no skin in the game, he told you he was confused and did not know the risk, did not fully understand united states district court 72 it. remember what dr. burns said, this whole campaign, this whole thing, this was directed exclusively at people like mr. harris. people who were addicted. people who would be susceptible to this notion of doubt and controversy because of cognitive dissonance, and he explained that whole concept to you. mr. harris was squarely in the target of what they were trying to do with this whole campaign of doubt and denial. would it have made a difference to him if they had come clean when it was easier for him to quit way back when? absolutely it would have made a difference. it does not have to be the only thing that caused his disease, by the way. you can find other things caused his disease. for example, addiction. for example, other things. so long as the fact that they lied, and hide, and denied, and worked together to do it as long as that was a cause, made a difference, contributed, then you have to find on this question in our favor, "yes, yes, and yes," on questions 8, 10, 12, and 14, i think. and by the way, you are -- well -- all right. now, there is a second part of these questions, though, that you also have to answer. (can you put that up?) about the may 5th, 1982 -- all right. so for each of those questions there is also going to be a question to find out whether the lies and the concealment, whether that happened before united states district court 73 may 5, 1982 or after. again, do not concern yourself with that date, why it is there. it is for legal reasons. but we showed you that the truth is right up here. they lied before may 5th, 1982. they lied after may 5th, 1982, about whether their cigarettes caused cancer, about whether filters, lights and low tar cigarettes were any safer, and whether cigarettes were addictive before, during, and after, all along the way until 1999 when they had to come clean, at least on some of it. and mr. harris we know he kept smoking those filter cigarettes, the lights, the low tar cigarettes, he kept smoking all those back in 1982 as well. and we know he was confused about the risk and he talked to his neighbor about that and we think that happened in the '80's as well. so the answer to this would be, "yes, yes, yes, and yes," more likely right than wrong. i'm sorry, it is not, "yes," it is both before and after. for each one of these defendants. none of them came clean, by the way, in the '80's. all right. (you can take that down.) okay. so at the beginning of this case i told you that i would have -- i'd have to show you the harms and the losses because at the end of this case you would have to figure out an amount that would fairly compensate for harms and losses. harms and losses only, not sympathy, of course we cannot bring mr. harris back, and not for any other reason but harms and united states district court 74 losses. so you are going to be asked to put a dollar figure because that is what justice can do, that is what we can do here, that is what justice requires. now, compensation means an amount to make-up for. not too much, not too little. an amount that just compensates. an amount that makes-up for. so let us start with one number to help you figure this out, and that is the medical bills. and the judge told you that was going to come into evidence and you will have it back there. here's what -- the medical bills that we have. this is a summary of the medical bills in this case. the total number $1.4 million and some change. that is what the medical bills are in this case. that is for the hospitalizations, that is for the hospital beds, the equipment, the hospice workers, all of that you heard so much about. so that is one figure of the losses and the harms in this case. but of course there is so much more than that, that you heard about. if you could put up a pie chart for how to think about it. all right. so there is the medical bills. that is a piece of the pie. but the judge is also going to instruct you there is other elements of damages that you have to consider, pain and suffering, disability, mental anguish, inconvenient, loss of capacity for enjoyment of life. these are all the factors that you will need to consider in coming up united states district court 75 with amount that fairly compensates mr. harris for his loss. now, i want to be clear there are two damages here. there is mr. harris' harms and losses. i want to talk about that first. then there will be mrs. harris' harms and losses, and there will be two separate numbers on your verdict form. let us talk about mr. harris' harms and losses, but i want to give you a way to think about this. the way to think about it is let us talk about how great was the harm, how long was the harm and how much did the harm interfere with? okay. so let us start with how bad was the harm? imagine if somebody caused you to sprain your ankle. okay. it hurt a lot. you were in a cast for a couple -- maybe even a couple of weeks. it interfered with your ability to go about your daily life. maybe you could not dance at a wedding. these are things that should be compensated, but not a lot. this is a lower kind of harm. this is the kind of harm where you have to come in and to compensate for that would be somewhere in the thousands of dollars. okay. now let us move up the scale. the kind of harm where, let us say, your leg is crushed, and you have got pins and needles in your leg, and you are laid up for, let us say, even a couple of years with surgeries and rehab, and it interferes with your ability to work. you cannot do the kinds of things you wanted to do. you could not go on vacations you united states district court 76 planned or scheduled. you could not help out around the house. that is the kind of harm that is a midlevel kind of harm. that certainly takes more money to make up for that kind of harm. that is a couple $100,000. all right. now we have to go to the top of the scale, to the worst kind of harm. the kind of harm where you cannot talk, where you cannot walk, or your brain is still alert but you cannot communicate, you cannot get across even how much pain you feel. you cannot be the dad you want to be. you lose your relationships with your family. it takes away the one thing that all of us, i know all of us plan for and dream about, and that is your retirement. it takes that all away. it interferes with your life in the most possible kind of way, and the kind of harm that is permanent, forever, for the rest of your life. i'm not going to go into more detail about that. you heard all about it, but this is the highest kind of harm. the kind of harm where i have to ask you for a verdict, i told you, was going to be significant. this is the kind of harm, to make up for that, well that is in the millions. so this is -- i think when you look at all that mr. harris suffered, all the diseases that he had, all the damage and everything you heard about in this case, i suggest, when you figure out the medical bills and the rest of it, it will add up to about $9 million, but, of course, united states district court 77 that is up to you. it could be more, it could be less based on the evidence that you heard that we proved more likely right than wrong is fair, just compensation for this kind of harm. all right. now, let us talk about mrs. harris for a moment. it is the same analysis. how bad was the harm? how long was the harm? how much did it interfere with? okay. now, let us say that somebody sprained -- somebody causes your spouse to sprain his ankle and that is hard. you have to see him in the pain, and you have to help out extra around the house, do more things. it interferes with your lives. maybe you have to postpone a vacation. that is a loss, a small one. the kind of one that falls lower on the scale, maybe a couple thousand dollars. all right. now let us talk about a midlevel kind of harm. let us say someone causes your husband to be in a coma. mr. cofer: your honor, this is all violating the golden rule. it is improper argument. the court: rephrase, if you would. continue. ms. london: sure. let us say somebody, um, injures someone else's spouse and they see -- and that spouse has to go into a coma, that is the kind of harm that is much, much worse, right? this person loses their spouse for several years, is worried about them. they cannot help around the house, loses their companionship, loses their time and united states district court 78 affection for a couple years. that is a midlevel kind of harm. that is certainly the kind of harm that requires a couple -- hundreds of thousands of dollars. then there is the highest level of harm, the kind of harm you take away someone's husband for the rest of their lives, your husband of nearly 40 years, take away their companionship. the kind of harm where you have to see them suffer, waste away in the hospice bed. you cannot do anything except sit with your own guilt and feel bad that maybe you had something to do with any suffering that he had, and that you did not have him with you. and the judge -- as you will see back in exhibit 400 -- what is the exhibit, no. 13 -- mr. byrd: 16. ms. london: 1316. that will be the mortality tables that will help you figure out how long it is that mr. harris and mrs. harris would have lived together had this not happened to him. and you will see that it was at least 12.4 years. you will see that. there it is. this is the life table that you will see. and this is what you can consider that at age 72 he had 12.44 more years to live if this did not happen to him. so when you consider all the harms and all the losses to mrs. harris in this case, the highest level kind of harm that you heard so much about, consider the years that they lost together, and the time he was in hospice and she had to watch him suffer, and all they united states district court 79 went through, i suggest to you, in this very high level kind of harm, i suggest to you that this together 12.44 million for all the time they would had left, and 1 million for the time that they lost in that hospice. but again, this is up to you. what you think the damage shows, the harms and losses. what we proved more likely right than wrong. that number will be completely up to you. now, if in deliberations somebody says, "well, we just cannot bring him back, or this seems like way too much money for one person, or awards like this, this might drive up the cost of everything for the rest of us, or might encourage more lawsuits," remind them those are outside reasons. that is not harms and losses. in fact, there is a jury instruction on this. jury instruction no. 2. it says this: "you are to perform the duty without bias or prejudice. the law does not permit jurors to be governed by sympathy, prejudice or public opinion. the parties and the public expect that you will carefully and impartially consider all the evidence, follow the law and reach a just verdict no matter the consequences." so remind the jurors that. and if somebody insists on following an outside reason, whether it is too much money for one person, or whether it is going to encourage more lawsuits, or we cannot bring him back, there is nothing we can do, i want you to knock on the door and tell the judge, "i'm worried united states district court 80 that someone is not following the law." you have the right to be on a jury that follows the law, and i believe that every one of you will do that. all right. now, i want to go back, and there is two questions, and this is where i told you later on you get to decide how much fault, how much responsibility to allocate among the parties. that is questions 5 and question 7. and this asks you what percentage of responsibility goes to each side. and again, this will be for the diseases that did not cause his death, and then, the ones for the lung cancer and causes his death. ever since -- from the time we are little we learn that you have to look out for yourself and for others, take reasonable care to avoid harm to yourself and others. and if you do not, then you are responsible for the harm. so i want to give you an example of how to think about this. if you are a pedestrian and you do not look both ways and you just run out in the middle of the road and a bus driver is coming your way, cannot see you and you get hit, well, you are one hundred percent responsible for that. you did not look both ways. you did not take care of yourself. now, imagine if that bus driver is text messaging and does not see you. you do not look both ways and both of you could have avoided this harm, well, then both of you, 50/50, right? united states district court 81 now imagine if this bus driver knows this intersection is particularly dangerous, knows that the people who are running into the road there are kids, and knows that it is very dangerous to text in that intersection because of that, but they do it anyway. now it is starting to look like 60/40 on the bus driver and the pedestrian. and let us take this to the next step. let us say the bus driver has hit ten other people before, knows, in that intersection how dangerous it is and texts anyway. now we are moving up to a little more fault, 75 percent on that bus driver and 25 percent on the person that is walking in the middle of the road. and then, we go even further, let us say that bus driver knows that it is going to kill one out of three people that walk into that intersection and has done it hundreds, thousands of times before, and knows that the people walking in the intersection are vulnerable, and even worse, puts up billboards all over town that says, "do not worry. come into the intersection. it is safe. it is cool." drives through, texts anyway and kills one out of three people. that looks a little different. that is the kind of thing where the bus driver now has about ninety percent of the harm. and so, well, that is -- that example, that is not even as bad as what the cigarette companies did, and you heard all about what they did. how they entice people to united states district court 82 start smoking young. how they rig the products to make it as hard as possible for them to quit. keep those exit doors closed, keep them pushing that lever like a pavlov's dog, creating doubt, targeting these people, knowing they were addicted, knowing that they were vulnerable, created all these gimmick products, the filters, the lights and the low tars and say, "hey, come over here," intercepting you on your way to try to take care of yourself and still lying all the way through all of it. so far more than 90 -- at least ninety percent on them. but unlike them we have said look at mr. harris too. we accept responsibility. look at his actions too. and here's what you saw. he started when he was 13, long before there were any warnings on any packs. when there was a culture of smoking created, sustained and maintained by billions of dollars from these companies. and we know that he switched to filtered cigarettes, ultra light cigarettes, low tar cigarettes. we know he did all that. we know he heard the kinds of things they were saying over the years. we know he took some steps to try to help himself with those products even though he did not know they had no benefit at all. we know he tried to quit. we know he put the patch on and he made an effort. now, maybe did mr. harris cling too long to the kinds of things the cigarette companies were saying over the united states district court 83 years? maybe. could he have tried harder or even sooner? sure. you should evaluate all that when you consider all -- how much responsibility goes on him. but what is really important, just like that bus driver, what steps did the cigarette companies take to avoid harm? what did they take? now, mr. harris, he did not know what his risk was of getting a disease. he did not know. could not have known that he had one out of three chance. we have all seen people like this, people who smoke like chimneys until they are 90 years old and do not get sick at all. he could have been one of those people. but here's what the cigarette companies knew. they were the bus drivers. they knew that one out of three people were going to die. it was a certainty. they knew that. what did they do to avoid harm? nothing. nothing at all. in fact, they made it worse. not only did they recognize that they were killing people, they did more to get replacement smokers to fill in the people they were killing on the road. the court: five minutes, counsel. ms. london: thank you. so bottom line is when you are deciding how much fault in this case, and that will be completely up to you, if on the cigarette companies it is their burden to prove to you how much fault goes on mr. harris, as far as how you divide up the fault among the rest of these companies, frankly, i do not have much to united states district court 84 suggest about that. all their cigarettes caused, all of their cigarettes contributed. that will be up to you. all right. and there is one last question that you all will have to decide. we talked about this, again, from the very beginning. a big part of this case is about punishment. it is about punitive damages. we talked about this when you and i were all together about a week-and-a-half ago. and this is question 18. and this is whether you find by clear and convincing evidence that punitive damages are warranted against each of the cigarette companies. and i just want to show you and highlight some of the language that you will see in the instructions about how to figure this out. so here's what you need to decide. you need to look at whether this conduct was so gross and flagrante as to show a reckless disregard for human life, an entire lack of care, that the defendants must have been consciously indifferent to the consequences, whether they were recklessly disregarding the safety and welfare of the public and whether this was intentional. those are the four different -- and only one of those, by the way, we have to show. not all of them. even though, i think, not only more likely right than wrong, beyond that it is certain that what the cigarette companies did was intentional, it was reckless and definitely in the conscious disregard for the health and safety of their united states district court 85 customers. you know that. you know that from the cigarette companies' own documents. you know the words they said. you saw them on video. we had to put them on video and bring them here to show you. we were worried they would not bring anyone here at all. these things all speak for themselves. no witnesses came in here to dispute that what they did was intentional. so the engle findings themselves, they say it right there, they agreed to conceal, at the bottom it says, "with the intention that the smokers and public would rely." and even mr. heiman, that video we played at the very end, he told you that they intended for customers to rely on what they said. so we know it was intentional. was it reckless? was it consciously indifferent? well, they engineered the cigarettes to keep people hooked, to stop sales from dropping. they lied. they put in a campaign of doubt, denial and reassurance to stop their sales from going down. intercepted customers who were smoking to keep their sales from going down. that is okay to run a business in america. that is the american dream. that is fine, making a profit, there is nothing wrong with that, but you cannot do it this way. you cannot do it this way. so it is clear their acts were intentional. were they reckless? absolutely. they knew sure as united states district court 86 i'm standing here that 1 to 3 of their customers were going to die. even though, by the way, that is not a number they keep close in their mind, as they told you. 480,000 people die every year. mr. cofer: objection, your honor. for the record, williams/state farm. the court: all right. overruled. you may continue. ms. london: do these companies need to be punished? absolutely. for the tobacco epidemic that was caused by their aggressive tactics deliberately. spewed on the american people that caused an epidemic, an epidemic that took the lives of 20 million americans, including mr. harris. and there is more. they do not just deserve to be punished. it is also necessary to deter them. to deter them, by the way, because they still do not get it. they still do not get it at all. they want to take what they did off the table. they came in here and said, "nicotine addiction is not even a problem. it is not even a public health problem. we are not doing anything to make our cigarettes any less addictive." do not admit it today. do not admit they studied and marketed to children. by the way, that woman who came up and told you, "oh, we do not market to kids." right. that is the same company, by the way, "high school is the base of our united states district court 87 business." they do not get it. they do not admit it at all. so it is not just to deter them because they clearly need to be punished and they clearly need to be deterred. but it is also, by the way, a very important tool to deter all companies so no other companies can do anything like this. you have a very, very powerful tool, and a very important job, and very important responsibility and other manufacturers are looking at you. they want to know. i wish it were so. i wish it were so that we did not need to deter companies from doing things like this, but unfortunately, we need this kind of deterrence to say you have to tell the truth about what you know when you know it. you cannot conceal it. you cannot cover it up. you cannot wait, hope no one will find out while people are dying. cannot do it. you need to be plain and clear. the court: we are at one hour, counsel. ms. london: and for that, we ask that you find yes on all three of these. thank you. ms. london: thank you, your honor. good morning. it is okay to defend yourself when you have not done anything wrong, but when you have, you do what we are taught as children -- ms. baker: objection, your honor, pretrial ruling. the court: see you sidebar briefly. i'm sorry, ladies and gentlemen. you may stand if you wish. (sidebar conference held.) the court: this does not come off your time. ms. london: thank you. the court: i'm sorry, i'm not getting the objection. ms. baker: i apologize, your honor. i should have brought it up the pretrial ruling. there was a motion in limine granted in defendants' favor that they cannot criticize our right to defend ourselves in this lawsuit. the court: i think everybody has a right to defend. we can be defending an amount. so let us get off the topic. ms. baker: there should not be a suggestion that we cannot defend ourselves -- united states district court 159 court: right. ms. london: well, hold on. excuse me. first of all, this lawyer has violated more than four pretrial rulings during this argument, during her argument about arguments she was not able to make. i did not have a chance to come up and explain that. beyond that, i'm not saying they should not be allowed to -- the court: you can argue they should be responsible, but the argument that they should come in and confess, i'm not going to permit that. that is the ruling. mr. cofer: another thing is that our defending is not contending fraud (inaudible). that is not part of -- ms. baker: thank you, your honor. (back before the jury.) the court: you may continue. ms. london: thank you, your honor. in the last week-and-a-half you did not hear anything from these cigarette companies except excuses. everyone else is to blame. it was not our cigarettes. if it was our cigarettes, then it is not -- it is some other company's cigarettes. and even if it is their cigarettes, it is his fault for getting addicted. even if is not his fault, it is mrs. harris' fault for not doing enough to help him. everyone else in the family, it is their fault too. oh wait, it is the surgeon general's fault because they are the united states district court 160 ones that said the lights, the low tars, the filters. they did not do enough to warn people. everyone else's fault, right. it is not them, like they did not even exist. mr. cofer he told you he did not come in here and blame mrs. harris. well, that is not what i heard. throughout this trial these companies came up and told you she did not do enough to help. they blamed her, even suggested throughout this trial that she might have done something to kill her husband, and of course they did not bring any witness to prove that to you. they just threw it out there, put it out here in this courtroom, in this prestigious hall of justice and put it as a matter of public record, a public accusation, an insult to her injury. so i had to stand up and i had to object a lot to that, to protect her from this smear tactic. now, i told you before there is nothing you can do bring him back, and there is nothing you can do to fix, but actually there is, by coming back with a verdict, a just verdict and explaining exactly who is responsible here. explaining -- showing exactly who bears some responsibility here, that can bring back her name, her good name that they tarnished in this court. set the record straight. now, counsel just got up here and said this is a case about one smoker. well, that is true. it is how much responsibility the cigarette companies bear for what happened united states district court 161 to this smoker and his family. that is what i told you from the very beginning. that is what this case is about. no other jury has heard about the harms and losses, the extensive harms and losses that you heard about in this trial. no other jury had any opportunity to compensate this family. cigarette lawyer -- company lawyers also came up and they wrote 100 fault to mr. harris, blaming him one hundred percent. now, remember, they have to prove to you, they have to prove to you that he was unreasonable. and i think it is interesting, i think earlier in this trial they told you, well, his decisions were rational. now they are saying he is unreasonable for buying their products and doing exactly what they told him to do. beyond that we also showed you in this trial to compare apples to apples. compare with other men of his generation who grew up when he did, at the time he did in the midst of all of this conduct of what the cigarette companies were doing. so let us compare apples to apples, not just some hypothetical people who quit, not 60 million, or this, that or the other thing. let us look at the men and compare him against them. all right. this is who you compare him against, men who grew up when he did. look at that. almost seventy percent of men of his generation were smoking. and look united states district court 162 how slowly that line declines. more than half, half of the men of his generation who started smoking were still smoking even when mr. harris finally stopped and could no longer smoke. squarely in the middle of the men of his generation. that is who you compare him to. other men exposed to the same messages, who had the same power of addiction at that time in their lives. that is who you compare him to. they have not shown you anything about how he was unreasonable when you compare him to the right set of people. thank you. now, you heard also a lot during this trial about alcohol. dr. kaplan went in detail about that. you heard some testimony from a deposition of mr. harris' ex-wife. apparently just to remind you, "oh, yeah, he drank. oh, yeah." then throughout this trial they have cobbled together a theory that, "well, he quit drinking so he could have quit smoking, so therefore, we all go home." but i think there is another way to see that. mr. harris was a strong man, boat captain. he worked hard. he did what he could to provide for his family. he told his neighbor, "i want to quit. i'm trying to quit. i cannot. i'm addicted to it." so i think the way to look at that, about alcohol, i think that goes to the power of addiction more than anything else. the addiction to nicotine. united states district court 163 now, interestingly counsel for the cigarette company he said, "oh, it is just not true, not true at all that nicotine addiction is more powerful than alcohol addiction." well, i do not know, we did not hear any evidence about that. certainly no witness came in here and compared the addictiveness of these two substances. but here's what we do know, and even dr. kaplan agreed with this. we know that even if he used the same tools, the same tools that he used 20 years earlier, we know how likely his success of quitting would be. that is what we do know. dr. kaplan agreed less than five percent of quit attempts succeed. why do not you put up that slide for us. he agreed it was less than five percent. the current slide it is only three percent. so even if he used all these tools that these companies came in here and kept reminding you about, that is how likely he was to be successful, three percent. that is the power of nicotine addiction. that is the evidence you heard in this courtroom. nobody came up here with anything like this on alcohol. so do not be distracted about that. thank you. you can take that down. all right. and counsel talked about there being no consensus on the definition of addiction. so what did -- we brought you the world's leading expert on addiction to talk to you about what it meant. what did the cigarette companies united states district court 164 do? well, he told you we brought you dr. kaplan, but here's what is interesting. they did not bring you any definition. all he did was say, "well, i have this book." never showed you the book. never showed you the criteria that he used. did not do that at all. did not give you anything to check his work. not at all. just said, "trust me. i know." well, believe me, as we showed you in cross-examination there is plenty of reason not to trust him. he is the same man that used to come in here to other juries just like you and tell juries, "no, nicotine is not addictive, or i'm sorry, it does not meet the classical technical definition." the same party line the cigarette companies were saying during that time. now he moved to that new definition that he claims he used to be against it now he is for it. plenty of reasons not to trust him. he should have shown you his work. you were entitled to that. you did not get it. dr. burns sure did. and you can check it against everything you heard in this case, all the evidence. all right. now legal cause. um, counsel for the cigarette companies they gave you a nice story about somebody with skin cancer and does not go to the doctor, does not get it treated, what is the cause, what is the legal cause? but what he did not tell you and what your job will be in this case is not to decide whether it is only one legal cause and not -- if united states district court 165 it is one legal cause, it means the other one was not. so if he does not get it fixed, it does not mean that the sun did not cause it too. they both can be legal causes. absolutely. that is what the judge will instruct you, and that is what you can absolutely find. and even if you find that his failure to quit, or his inability to quit was a legal cause, it does not mean that his addiction was not also a legal cause. and as we showed you throughout this trial, those two things work hand-in-hand. what does addiction do? it makes you keep smoking. it makes it harder to put it down. that is what addiction is. that is what our doctor showed you. that is what we told you. that is what the companies knew, by the way. that is what the companies have been studying for 50 years. they knew exactly what these products do. they designed them to be that way. so it is amazing to imagine that somehow addiction to a product cannot be a legal cause if your failure to quit it was. it just does not make any sense. the way to look at it it is like, a bicycle built for two. they both go together. they both push the ball -- push the bike forward. they work together. so long as addiction was one of the reasons that he kept smoking, got sick, you have got to find in our favor. all right. counsel also came up here and said, "oh, we did some dumb things. we were wrong-headed." but where was any witness from these companies to come in and united states district court 166 look you in the eye and tell you that? none. you know what the company executives said, right? they said, we have been a responsible company. we never meant to deceive. we are a moralistic company. that is what i heard. i did not hear anyone say, "oh, we were dump. oh, we were wrong-headed. we did not mean it." no one came in here to say that. and then, in fact, i'm actually quite shocked that counsel for the cigarette company said way back when, back when the surgeon general's report came out, gosh, we were wrong. we are sorry. what we really should have done, we should have just kept quiet. i think that is what he said we should have just kept quiet. well, actually i think they should have really done more than that. they came out on tv over and over with their paid spokespersons and said if we find anything in our products we will take them out. we are working hard to research this question and we work and cooperate with those whose job it is to protect the public health. they should not have just kept quiet with what they knew. what they had been studying. they should come out and tell the truth. that is what their executives say. their executives say we should tell the truth. so i saw no evidence whatsoever, any executive from these companies come into this courtroom and tell you that anything they did was wrong. that they admit united states district court 167 it. they get it. it did not happen. and, in fact, we expect far more even than what that lawyer said. all right. a couple other things. talked about how all these things that they did over the last 50 years, how that would not have made a difference to mr. harris. would not have made any difference at all. well, why would you do it then? why would you spend billions, and billions, and billions of dollars and work with your competitors to put out ads, to deny it, why would you do it if it would not make a difference? they spent more in one day than all the public health authorities spent in one year trying to help warn people to quit. why would you do that if it just would not make any difference at all? you do not sponsor an ad on the superbowl because you do not think it will make a difference. come on. that is just not credible. and then, we also heard some about these internal company documents, and allegations that i showed you just a few snippets here and there, that did not tell you the whole story. interestingly one of the documents apparently to show you that point they put up a list of the possible carcinogens. remember that, mr. cofer put up on the screen and said, "look, we sent these possible carcinogens to the surgeon general. that means, ms. london she was trying to fool you." but what he did not remind you about was that the united states district court 168 cigarette companies also told the surgeon general those are insufficient amounts to cause cancer, which is of course not what they knew. and we saw this again when the man up on the video he said again, he was being interviewed by a television reporter, and he said, "well, yeah, there is poly (inaudible) hydrocarbons in our products, but not enough to cause cancer. so i do not know what that was trying to show you, but certainly if there were any other documents that you needed to see to disprove all that we showed you about what these companies knew, and when they knew it, and what they did and why, they should have brought that to you. they should have brought somebody in here to explain it to you and they absolutely did not. by the way, of course mr. harris could not have relied on what these companies said inside their files. they did not come out, they were not made publically available until it was after -- far too late for him. you also heard a lot about conversations that did not happen, things mr. harris never said. he did not say about -- this about an ad, or he did not say this about the tobacco institute, but even the cigarette company executive, we brought her here on video, she said, "well, of course you do not expect people to talk to their spouses about that. that is not the way advertising works. that is not the way united states district court 169 that this strategy worked." the companies knew that. it was wallpaper. it was virtually impossible for people to miss it. that is what the ftc -- when they studied this, that is what they found. virtually impossible to ignore. and, in fact -- well, there is another thing that you are going to be instructed on and that is that you can -- you can put two-and-two together. so what you heard from counsel from lorillard is, "well, gee we have no idea why mr. harris would have picked kent iii cigarettes. no idea whatsoever. we have no evidence about it." well, that is not true. now, first of all, you know -- well, we do not have mr. harris to tell us here exactly why he smoked kent iii. that is true, we do not. but let us talk about instruction no. 5. can you put that up, please? all right. and this is called a chain of evidence. you can put together a chain of evidence and draw on conclusions. it says -- can you highlight that. "you are not limited to the bald statements of the witnesses. you are permitted to draw from the facts that you are found to be proved and such reasonable inferences as seen justified in the light of your own experience. that is to say, from the facts that have been proved you may draw an inference based upon reason and common sense." okay. so we know mr. harris smoked kent iii united states district court 170 cigarettes. we know from the documents why the cigarette companies marketed them because they wanted to catch people and intercept them from quitting to switch to these supposedly safer cigarettes, and that is how they marketed them, exactly how they marketed them. you saw the ad. all these fancy low tar this, us government this, and tested by this and low tar technology. all of these lies, right. now, they said the ftc approved that ad. well, how could the ftc have known what they were concealing? they did not. so they put out this ad with the message. we know mr. harris smoked them. we know he was trying to quit. we know he put on the patch. you can make one -- you take each of these facts, put them together and conclude that mr. harris relied to his detriment that he believed what he saw and that is why he smoked these cigarettes. that made a difference. of course the judge will instruct you that the law makes no difference between direct evidence, meaning testimony or documents, and this circumstantial evidence, the evidence that you put two-and-two together. they are the same under the law. i'm about to wrap up. now, counsel for reynolds talked about mr. harris' choices. talked about respecting the choices and the decisions that he made. well, how does a united states district court 171 company show respect for their customers' choices? do they hide the truth about the dangers that they know about? do they rig the products to make it as hard as possible for them to quit? do they try -- she talks about all these exits on the highway. well, we know they tried to close all the exit gates, keep their customers smoking as long as possible. you treat them like pavlov's dog, you treat them like replacement smokers, you do not even know how many of them, fresh in your mind, you kill every year. that is no kind of respect for your customer. no kind of respect for their free will or their choices. certainly not when you are doing everything you can to inhibit it. and do they know all this? oh, yes they do. you saw this exhibit during the trial. it is exhibit 94. go back there and look at it. what did they write before they came in to be held to account back when they thought no one was looking? "oh, we cannot defend free choice if the person was addicted." so finally, what is this case all about? well, the lawyers for the cigarette companies said this is all just a bunch of coincidences. a bunch of random acts that had nothing to do with anything. nothing they did had anything to do with mr. harris, spent billions and billions on ads, oh he missed it. the aggressive campaign of doubt and denial, the one they said was brilliantly conceived and executed, united states district court 172 that kept them from being in a deplorable position, the one that made their sales go up, and up and, did not have an affect on him. he just missed it. the reassurance with the filters, the ultra lights, low tars, did not work on him. all that work. like i said from the beginning, two stories one from before when they did not think anybody was looking and now when they are being held to account. so mr. cofer said this case had three questions. now, to be clear, your verdict form has very different questions, and those are the ones that you will be answering in this case. and we showed you beyond just more likely right than wrong, beyond that, that we met our burden on these cases -- on these claims. the court: we are right at twenty minutes, counsel. you can finish up. go ahead. ms. london: okay. thank you. so if i may suggest to you, why did mr. harris smoke based on the evidence? he was addicted. why did he wait so long to quit? he was addicted. oh, and the campaign of doubt and denial. and did they do something that caused him to smoke and get sick? yes. what was that? did not tell the truth, made their cigarettes as addictive as possible, targeted young people with their advertising from the 20's all the way to today, conspired for 50 years to create doubt, controversy that mr. harris even told his neighbor he was united states district court 173 conflicted. he believed that. that is what this case -- we have shown you, we have brought you the evidence, and at the end of the day, the very last thing i'll say. you can take that down. thank you. i appreciate your patience. the cigarette companies came up here and they said, "well, all this money if you give a punitive damage award it goes to mrs. harris." i think that was to try to discourage you, try to play on your passion or prejudice about that. so let me be very clear why it is important. if you do not award punitive damages in this case no one will. the public health communities, the charities that work on these cases, they cannot do it alone. they cannot stop this epidemic alone. the public relies on you, relies on you to hold them accountable to punish them in the only way that the law knows how. punish and deter. we ask that you do that. and thank you very much for your time.