mr. cofer: thank you. may it please the court, counsel, mrs. harris, members of the jury, good morning. i told you in opening statement that we believe that this case comes down to three pretty straightforward questions. why did mr. harris smoke? why did he wait so long to quit? and did the defendants do something that caused mr. harris to smoke and get sick? and if you remember, i told you what the evidence would be. i told you the evidence would be that mr. harris smoked because he liked to smoke and everyone in his family smoked. that by no later than 1974, mr. harris had the tools and experiences that he needed to quit smoking whenever he made up his mind that he wanted to quit and made an effort to quit. and finally, i told you there would be no evidence that anything that defendants did or did not do, said or did not say caused mr. harris to smoke and get sick. so let us look at question 1. why did mr. harris smoke? dr. burns told you that one of the most important factors in whether someone smokes is whether their friends and family smoke. he told you that if a person's parents, and brothers and sisters smoke, it is more likely that they united states district court 89 will become a smoker too. he told you that smoking tends to cluster in families. and it is undisputed, members of the jury, that is exactly what happened in mr. harris' life. his parents smoked, his brothers and sisters smoked, his wife smoked, his son smoked, his daughter smoked, his friends and coworkers smoked. we have all heard the old phrase that "birds of a feather flock together." that exactly describes mr. harris' smoking experiences. there was no evidence, none whatsoever, that anything the tobacco companies did caused mr. harris to become a smoker. no one knows when mr. harris became a regular smoker. no one knows the circumstances of his first cigarette. all we know from the evidence, members of the jury, is that everyone in his life smoked. is it really a surprise that mr. harris smoked too? let us go to the second question. why did he wait so long to quit? while it is true that cigarettes can be addictive, it is also true that even addicted smokers can and do quit smoking. dr. burns told you that all smokers, including addicted smokers, have the choice to quit. dr. burns told you that. he told you that just because someone is addicted does not mean they cannot quit. do you remember what else he told you? he told you by definition a person who does not try to quit will not quit. dr. burns told you that the 1990 surgeon general's united states district court 90 report found that more than half of the people alive at the time that used to smoke had already quit smoking. by the time of mr. harris' death in 2012, 55 million americans had quit smoking. dr. burns told you that he believes the vast majority of those 55 million americans were addicted, but he also told you that when they made the choice to quit and they made an effort to quit, they did quit. and what is the single most important factor in quitting smoking? it is motivation and persistence. the bottom line is, members of the jury, you have to want to quit and you have to try to quit. and there is very little evidence in this case that mr. harris actually wanted to quit smoking, and that is critically important because we know for a fact that by no later than 1974, mr. harris had the tools and the experiences he needed to quit smoking. you heard from dr. burns in 1974 mr. harris got into an automobile accident. that accident was the tipping point that finally got his attention and motivated him to quit drinking. it was important to his family that he quit. so mrs. harris asked him to quit. his family supported his efforts to quit. he made up his mind he was going to quit, so he went to the doctor and he got a prescription for antabuse. he took action. and when the antabuse did not work, he did not give up. he went to aa. he kept at it. he united states district court 91 sought the help he needed to break his addiction to alcohol. but mrs. harris told you the most important factor that allowed him to quit drinking, do you remember what she told you? she said his family. she said the support and encouragement of his family, and that mr. harris did not want to disappoint his family. dr. kaplan told you yesterday that any time he wanted to, mr. harris could have taken those experiences and those tools he learned to quit drinking and applied them to quit smoking. you know, the truth is, you did not need an expert to tell you that. i mean, that is common sense and that rings true. the plaintiff would have you believe dr. harris -- i'm sorry, dr. burns you would have believe that well, the reason he kept smoking is because nicotine is more addictive than alcohol. well that is not true at all. you know what the difference was? the difference was that drinking, for mr. harris, it disrupted his life. it threatened his family, his marriage and his livelihood, but not smoking. for nonsmokers it may be hard to understand, some people like to smoke. remember dr. proctor told you that nicotine is unique in that it is biphasic. remember he said, you can use it to either calm yourself down or you can use it to give you a lift. for some people they like the smell, and taste and united states district court 92 ritual of smoking. they find it pleasing. they find it enjoyable. some people like to smoke when they have a cup of coffee. some people like to smoke when they get home from a hard day's work and are tired, and they sit down and they have a cup of coffee and they watch the evening news. some like to smoke when they get up in the morning and read the paper. these days most people do not smoke. but, members of the jury, that smoking was just an integral part of the way the harris family lived their lives. they all smoked together. smoking has been a tradition in the harris family for generations. now, dr. burns told you that a smoker is able to quit smoking when he or she makes up his or her mind they want to quit, and when they muster sufficient internal resources and are provided with sufficient external support. do you remember him telling you that? what that means is they have to want to quit, and it is very helpful if they ask their friends or loved ones for moral support, for help, to pitch in to help him quit. dr. burns told you that the kind of support that a family gives can either help or hold back a smoker's willingness and ability to quit. dr. burns told you it is very clear from the literature that family support is an important aid in helping people successfully stay off cigarettes, but unlike drinking, he never asked his family united states district court 93 for help in quitting. no one in his family encouraged him to quit because they were all smoking too. mrs. harris told you that during the course of their 40-year marriage she never tried to quit. ms. london: objection. mr. cofer: during the course of their 40-year marriage she never tried to quit. the court: this only relates to mr. harris' smoking, not mrs. harris. she is not in trial here. you may continue. mr. cofer: we are talking about why mr. harris did not quit. that is what the purpose of this testimony is. and mrs. harris told you that she smoked with her husband. she never tried to quit. she never encouraged her husband to quit, and they never talked about it. ms. london: objection. the court: again, i think the jurors understand this is about mr. harris, but she may come into play. it is only as it comes into play to his smoking. you may continue. mr. cofer: but here's what is even more important, remember what else she told you? she told you she does not know if her husband wanted to quit. she does not recall him indicating a desire to quit. she does not recall any time he told her that he wanted to quit smoking. members of the jury, it is certain if you do not try to quit, you are not going united states district court 94 to quit. that is common sense. that is true of everything in our lives. if you want something you have got to try. so question 3, did the defendants do something that caused mr. harris to smoke and get sick? i told you the evidence was that there would be no evidence of anything the tobacco companies did or did not do, said or did not say that caused mr. harris to smoke or affected him in any way. so let us go back again to mrs. harris. she is the only fact witness plaintiff called in this case who knew her husband. mrs. harris admitted her husband never said that he wished a tobacco company would have given him more information, or if the tobacco company had said something to him sooner that it would have made a difference. now, if you can remember back a week ago during opening statement i suggested to you, i said, listen to the evidence. you should ask yourself what does this have to do with jerry harris. and no better example of that is plaintiff's first witness, dr. proctor. do you remember what dr. proctor told you, one of the very first things he told you? he specifically said he did not have any opinions about jerry harris. dr. proctor told you that. he said, i'm not here to talk about mr. harris at all. i'm here to talk about the tobacco companies. and then he did give you a fascinating history of how tobacco has been viewed throughout time. but as i listened to his testimony, i kept asking united states district court 95 myself, okay, but what does this have to do with jerry harris? how is this testimony going to help the jury decide whether mr. harris was a member of the engle class? and the answer is, it does not, and that is because dr. proctor's testimony had nothing to do with mr. harris. he showed you ads for brands that mr. harris never smoked. he showed you snippets of documents that mr. harris never saw and did not influence him in any way. so why then did plaintiff call dr. proctor? and why did they call dr. proctor as their very first witness in this case? because they want to make you mad. they want to manipulate your emotions. they want to divert your attention from mr. harris. ms. london: objection to the characterization of counsel. honor. mr. cofer: it is not counsel, it is plaintiff, your the court: the objection is overruled. mr. cofer: let me make this very clear, lawyers represent clients. when we are speaking to you, we are speaking on behalf of our clients. i am not disparaging ms. london and mr. byrd. they represented their clients with zeal and passion. i want to be very clear. the purpose of dr. proctor was to divert your attention from what mr. harris knew, and what mr. harris did and what he did not do. united states district court 96 dr. proctor and dr. burns spent a lot of time talking about cigarette advertising, but there was no evidence whatsoever that cigarette ads had anything to do with mr. harris' decisions. and we know that because mrs. harris testified and she told you that she and her husband never discussed cigarette advertisements. to her knowledge mr. harris never purchased a cigarette brand because of ads. she told you he was not the type of person who bought things because of advertisements. that he was not influenced by ads, and that he made up his own mind. yet she had two witnesses talking with you about cigarette ads, when they had nothing to do, members of the jury, why jerry harris smoked or why he chose the brands he did. let us talk about filters. dr. burns talked a lot about filters and low tar cigarettes, but mrs. harris admitted that she and her husband never talked about filters or low tar cigarettes. he never told her why he smoked them. he never said he thought filters or low tar were safer. he never said he thought lower nicotine cigarettes were safer. instead mrs. harris told you that her husband smoked four brands of cigarettes. all were filtered. one was an ultra light. he smoked them interchangeably. she told you he did not have a favorite brand. she said sometimes he would make a decision based on price. that was all the evidence you had on why mr. harris smoked the brands he smoked. that united states district court 97 was it. now, dr. burns told you that the tobacco companies mislead the public into believing filters were safer. well, members of the jury, as i showed you on cross-examination, it was not the tobacco companies who told the public filters were safer. the public health community and the surgeon general told the public filters were safer. and the surgeon general never said cigarettes were safe. the surgeon general said they were safer. and the reason why the surgeon general told the public that lower tar cigarettes were safer, because there were dozens of epidemiological studies that reported that people who smoked lower tar cigarettes had lower risk of lung cancer. and here's one example. this is an interview you saw. it is dr. hammond on the nbc news. it will come up in just a second. (videotape playing.) mr. cofer: so what you heard during trial was there is no way really to take the bad stuff out of cigarettes. you cannot selectively filter it. so the idea was that if tar is bad, then less tar is less bad. it is a dose response. one glass of wine may relax you and make you feel good. if you chug a quart of tequila, you may stop breathing. so that was the whole idea, if tar is bad, less tar is better, and that is what the epidemiology showed. but now we know that if people compensate by smoking more united states district court 98 cigarettes, or by smoking their cigarettes differently, they may get the same amount of tar as someone who smokes a full flavored cigarette. well, members of the jury, people have known that for a very long time. remember i showed you the article may 1976 from consumer reports and we walked through the article where it said, "less tar/less nicotine. is that good? nicotine is an addicting agent for most smokers. when cigarette smoke contains less nicotine than such smokers are accustomed to, their body simply can try ways to get more smoke." the public was specifically and repeatedly told, "if you want to avoid the risk of smoking, do not smoke. if you are going to smoke, smoke lower tar cigarettes and do not compensate." that is what the public was told. now, dr. burns says, "well, the surgeon general and public health misinterpreted those epidemiological studies." well, maybe they did, maybe they did not, but it was a public health community that encouraged the tobacco companies to produce lower tar cigarettes, and it was the public health community that told smokers, "quit, but if you are not going to quit, smoke lower tar products." i told you in opening statement that if you look back over the last 60 years at the millions of pages of documents written by the thousands of employees of philip morris and the other companies, they said some dumb things, united states district court 99 and now you have seen them and now you know it is true, but i want you to think about how plaintiff showed you those documents. they literally would take a sentence from a document here, a document there, a document here, written 40 or 50 years ago, they would have dr. burns or dr. proctor read part of it to you, and then they would tack little quotes on a timeline. they made no effort to ever tie any of those documents to mr. harris or the decisions he made, and they did not tell you the whole story. let me give you just a couple of examples. you remember when they showed you the philip morris document in 1961 that was the research development document, and they showed you this page that said, "partial list of compounds in cigarette smoke also identify as carcinogens." well, plaintiff tried to leave you with the impression that philip morris knew something that the surgeon general did not know, until we got to cross-examination of dr. burns, and you remember it was the very end of the day, and i was hurrying to try to finish my cross-examination so we could get him out of here. it was a friday, get him back to california. and dr. burns had to admit that philip morris voluntarily provided this information to the surgeon general seven months before the 1964 surgeon general's report. philip morris did not know something that the surgeon general did not know. united states district court 100 philip morris told them. but you did not hear that on direct examination, did you? and you will not see that on the little timeline of quotes tacked. let me give you another example. dr. proctor tried to suggest that the defendants knew that people smoked for nicotine, and tried to keep that information from the public. frankly, that is just silly. dr. proctor admitted it has been known since the early 1900's that smokers smoked for the pharmacological affects of nicotine. dr. proctor showed you some excerpts from some philip morris documents and tried to suggest that philip morris was trying to hide nicotine's affect from the public. then we showed you a speech that bill dunn, a philip morris researcher, made in 1972 that said, "people smoke for nicotine." people from the national cancer institute and the surgeon general's office were in the audience and heard the speech. he was then, next, please -- he was interviewed in the newspaper after the speech. it was a sunday edition. and he told the public, with this picture, an important reason people smoke is nicotine. and then, next please, he published a book, and you saw the book, that said, "people smoke for nicotine." and on cross-examination dr. proctor told you he has this book in his own library, and the surgeon general has published and cited it in his reports a number of times, but why did not you united states district court 101 see it on direct examination? one last example. dr. burns showed you a statement from a philip morris document in 1964 that said, "in the near future we need to provide answers which will give smokers a psychological crutch and self-rationale to continue smoking." well, that looks really bad, does not it? but it was not until cross-examination that you learned that george weisman did not invent the term "psychological crutch." it was in the surgeon general's report that he was referring to, "under the beneficial affects of tobacco, the drive used tobacco being fundamentally psychogenic in origin has the same basis as other drug habits and in a large fraction of the american population, appears to satisfy the total need of the individual for psychological crutch." and he did not show you the last paragraph of george weisman's memo where mr. weisman said, "in closing, the main essence of the report and publicity to me is that it is still less smoking on an individual basis, the individual's own choice of the psychological benefit versus the alleged hazard. anything that impinges on the right of the individual to make this choice is contrary to our most basic traditions." he was talking about the benefits. it is up to the individual to weigh for him or herself the risks of smoking and the benefits. now, you saw some video clips where some employees united states district court 102 of the company, and some employees of the tobacco institute said that smoking was not a proven cause of cancer. you saw many of those. and what you did not learn until cross-examination is why they said that. on cross-examination dr. proctor explained why that was the company's position. and what he told you was the company's position was that statistics, statistics alone could not prove whether something caused something. and the basis for that statement was that since 80 to 85 percent of smokers do not get lung cancer, and nonsmokers get lung cancer too, smoking is not a necessary and sufficient cause. in other words, you can smoke and not get it. you can not smoke and get it. so the companies argued something else must be going on. now, we all now know those are technical arguments, and frankly, they are not very persuasive. and in 1964, when the surgeon general said smoking was a proven cause, the companies they should have just kept quiet. that is exactly what they should have done. and i'll tell you something, looking back 50 years later at those videos in this courtroom, you have to shake your head and say what planet are those people from? but you know what, unless plaintiff proves that mr. harris saw those statements, relied on those statements and was fooled by those statements that they affected him in some way, then united states district court 103 they have absolutely nothing to do with this case. the issue is not whether the companies said dumb things. they did. okay. they did. the issue in this case is whether mr. harris saw them and relied on them. the issue is whether mr. harris was fooled by them and whether that is what caused him to smoke and get sick. and the evidence is overwhelming, members of the jury, that they did not. starting in the early 1950's studies were published that linked smoking to cancer. we showed you those. they were widely reports in popular magazines like reader's digest and time and life. we saw in 1953 we heard about the mouse skin painting study, and you saw how it was published in life magazine, a very popular magazine at the time. we know for a fact that people were talking about these studies because in june of 1954 gallup ran a national poll where they said, "had you had heard or read anything recently to the effect that the cigarette smoking may be a cause of cancer of the lung?" ninety percent of the people answered "yes" to that question. jerry harris was 14 years old at the time, and there is no evidence he was a regular smoker then. ten years later in 1964 the surgeon general published his landmark report announcing to the world that cigarette smoking was a proven cause of lung cancer in men. big deal and got a ton of publicity. it was literally front-page news. it was the lead story on the nightly news united states district court 104 cast. it was on the front page of the newspapers, on the cover of major -- national magazines. people were talking about it, and they were talking about it big time and here's how it was covered on cbs news with harry reasoner. (videotape playing.) mr. cofer: jerry harris is 24 years old when that report came out. now, in 1964 in addition to concluding that cigarette smoking was a proven cause of cancer in men, the surgeon general also concluded that smoking was not an addiction, but more accurately characterized as a habit. and you heard the reason why, is because the definition at the time required that for something to be addicting it had to be intoxicating, and cigarettes are not intoxicating. and it was not until 24 years later in 1988 that the surgeon general changed its definition, adopted a different definition and said intoxication is not required any more and so cigarettes are now addicting. the bottom line, though, is between 1964 and 1988, when the company said, "it is a habit and not an addiction," they were agreeing with the surgeon general. now, as a result of the 1964 surgeon general's report congress got involved and held hearings. and in 1966, congress required this first warning label go on the cigarette pack. congress wrote the warning. told the companies exactly what it would say, how big it would be and united states district court 105 where it would be placed and that was the first warning. "caution, cigarette smoking may be hazardous to your health." from january 1966 on, members of the jury, every pack of cigarettes sold in this country came with a warning on the side. four years later, in 1970, the surgeon general's warning changed. congress wrote a new warning, a stronger warning and said, "warning: the surgeon general has determined that smoking is dangerous to your health." and then, in 1985, the rotating warnings went on the pack, and let me show you two of them. you saw this during trial. "surgeon general's warning: smoking causes lung cancer, heart disease, emphysema and may complicate pregnancy." those are three of the very diseases that mr. harris had, copd, emphysema is a part of copd, heart disease and lung cancer. but what is more, the warning also told him how to avoid 'em. "smoking causes lung cancer, heart disease and emphysema. quitting smoking now greatly reduces serious risk to your health." that was 1985. but more importantly, we know that mr. harris got a more personal warning in october of 1985 that any pack warning could ever be, and that is because in october of 1985, he was diagnosed with cancer on his left vocal cord, and he told his longtime friend and neighbor lewis jennings, "cigarettes caused it, and if i keep on i'm going to kill united states district court 106 myself with them." but even though he clearly understood the risks, he did absolutely nothing for the next 11 years to try to quit smoking. now, one quick point about mr. jennings. on cross-examination he said, "well, i had a conversation at one time with mr. harris and he told me he was confused about the risks." you remember on redirect i showed him his deposition and reminded him what he said, and i reminded him that he testified, well, that conversation occurred in 1999, after mr. harris had already had his laryngectomy, and after he quit smoking. and members of the jury, it is critically -- well, it is just clear that by 1985 there is no way that mr. harris could have been confused about the risks of smoking. so we have been with you for a week. we think this case comes down to five simple words, jerry harris did not even try. in 1985 jerry harris was diagnosed with cancer on his left true vocal cord. he was treated with radiation and he was cured. he dodged a bullet. he was cured. he told his neighbor that cigarettes caused this cancer and if i keep on i'm going to kill myself with it. despite that knowledge he did not make a single effort to quit for 11 years. now, in her closing argument, ms. london said, "mr. harris did not know he had a risk at getting sick. he united states district court 107 could not have known. things would have been different had he known." he knew in '85 and he did not even try. six years later in 1991, his brother was diagnosed with throat cancer and was cured and mr. harris did not even try. the next year his sister was diagnosed with throat cancer and mr. harris did not even try. in 1995 he had a heart attack and his sister died of throat cancer and mr. harris did not even try. in 1997, and yes, it was '97, and i'll show you that later, in '97 after he had surgery on his second throat cancer, do you remember the evidence, he did not smoke when he was in the hospital. and when he came home, his wife said, "well, he started to smoke again as soon as his throat felt better." it is undisputed, members of the jury, that until mr. harris had his laryngectomy in 1999, he made exactly one unsuccessful attempt to quit smoking. one time. sometime after '96, after patches were available over-the-counter, he bought a nicotine patch and he wore it for somewhere between three and seven days, but he continued to smoke while he had it on. there is no evidence, other than when he was in the hospital, he never went a single day without smoking. he put the patch on and kept smoking. how could he have had withdrawal symptoms when he was wearing the patch when he kept smoking? so he got a rash and he took it off and that united states district court 108 was it. that was his one unsuccessful "quit attempt". that is the evidence. that is the only evidence in the case. so why is that important? well, dr. burns told you why it was important. remember dolff and peto, mr. richard dolff and mr. richard peto and their study, the 50-year study of doctors? if you quit smoking by age 30, so for mr. harris that would have been 1970, you avoid all of the risk of smoking. all your excess risk. if you quit smoking by 40, you get nine years back. and let us go to the next slide. and as dr. burns himself wrote in the 2007 introduction to the ir handbook of cancer prevention, this is dr. burns, "figure 1 makes a value of cessation clear and demonstrates that the vast majority of smoking caused mortality, smoking caused death, is avoidable by quitting prior to age 45. even in older ages a substantial fraction of the excess mortality due to smoking can be avoided by quitting." members of the jury, mr. harris turned 45 in 1985, the same year that he was diagnosed and cured of vocal cord cancer. and as dr. burns admitted, if mr. harris had quit smoking, let us go back to the first warning, in 1966, when he was 26 years old, and the warning labels first on the packages, he would have significantly reduced his risk of dying of lung cancer in 2012. dr. burns told you, if mr. harris would have quit united states district court 109 smoking in 1970 when he was 30 years old and the stronger warning labels were on the pack, he would have significantly reduced his risk of dying of small-cell lung cancer 42 years later. if mr. harris would have quit smoking in 1974 when he was 34 and quit drinking, he would have significantly reduced his risk of getting small-cell lung cancer, dying of small-cell lung cancer in 2012. finally, if mr. harris had quit smoking in 1985 when he was 45 years old and cured of vocal cord cancer, he would have significantly reduced his risk of dying of small-cell lung cancer 27 years later. but unfortunately, mr. harris did not quit and he did not even try. so let us look at the verdict form. the first question asked, "do you find that the plaintiff has proved that it is more likely than not that mr. harris was addicted to nicotine in cigarettes?" so what was the evidence? well, dr. burns told you that it was his opinion that jerry harris was addicted. that is the only evidence plaintiff presented on that issue. dr. burns. that was it. the only evidence. of course you also learned that dr. burns has been testifying for 30 years, and he has never once, not one time testified that a plaintiff was not addicted. he also told you, without any evidence at all, that united states district court 110 mrs. harris is addicted and that krista harris is addicted too. he never even met krista harris. how could he possibly know whether she was addicted. the evidence was she quit smoking cold turkey for five years. how could he possibly know whether she was addicted? well, it is because it is his test for addiction. burns says, well, nicotine is addictive. if you smoke a lot of cigarettes you are addicted. period. we called dr. kaplan. dr. kaplan is a psychiatrist here in tampa. he actually treats people. he helps people overcome addictions, and he helps people to quit smoking whether you are diagnosed as addicted or not. and what dr. kaplan told you is that mental health professionals and psychiatrists like himself use the dsm-v to diagnose patients with mental disorders, including addiction. he told you that based on dsm-v it is his opinion that mr. harris was not addicted, but dr. kaplan told you that addiction is a mental disorder. for purposes of this lawsuit the word "addiction" is not a word casually used to describe why we do something. why do you run? i'm addicted to it. why do i eat chocolate? i'm addicted to it. why do i watch this television show? i'm addicted to it, dad. for purposes of this lawsuit, addiction is a medical diagnosis. and dr. burns told you as a threshold matter before someone qualifies as addicted, there must be a showing that the use of the substance led to clinically significant impairment. united states district court 111 in other words, it has to cause a problem in the person's life. in his relationship with his family, or in his work or in some other way. now, the best way to think about this is to compare how mr. harris' drinking compares with his smoking. his drinking caused all kinds of problems in his life and his relationships. mr. harris clearly demonstrated a pattern of use of alcohol that led to clinically significant impairment. there is no question, none, that mr. harris was addicted to alcohol. but his smoking did not disrupt his relationships, or his marriage or his work in any way. while it is true he smoked a lot of cigarettes for a long time, that is not the same thing as being addicted. and there is no evidence that any doctor that mr. harris ever saw diagnosed him as addicted. the best plaintiff could do out of those 19,000 pages of medical records is come up with one record that said, "history of tobacco abuse." and dr. kaplan told you that is not a diagnosis of addiction. that is doctor code for, "the patient used to be a regular smoker." this is an important question because if you believe plaintiff has not satisfied her burden of proof that he was, in fact, addicted, then you check "no" to question one and the case is over. now, let me say something about proof. plaintiff does have to prove it is more likely than not, but plaintiff has to prove it to your satisfaction. you know this "just a united states district court 112 hair, maybe just a little bit, oh you can have doubts," the bottom line is you are being asked to make very serious decisions in this case and plaintiff has the burden of carrying and proving that she is entitled to those factual findings. you should hold plaintiff to their burden. question 2, has plaintiff proved that it is more likely than not that mr. harris' oral cavity cancer manifested on or before november 21, 1996? well, you remember that mrs. harris testified she does not remember. she does not remember whether her husband had his oral cancer in '96 or '97. so plaintiff showed you one medical record that was prepared on february 3, 2012, by mr. harris' radiation oncologist that referred to his supraglottic cancer in 1996. that is it. now, on cross she tried to show you one other record that said it happened october '96, but it also said he had a complete laryngectomy in october '96. we know that is not right. so this is the record. this is the one piece of evidence that plaintiff is relying on to meet her burden to prove that the cancer manifested in '96. so it was prepared 15 years after mr. harris' cancer. it is inconsistent with at least seven other medical records in the case that i showed you. and it says -- "in '96 he underwent a supraglottic laryngectomy squames cell carcinoma of the epiglottis." that is their complete evidence. united states district court 113 next. we also know this record says things that are inconsistent with the facts. "he has a long history of cigarette smoking in the past, starting at age 13 and smoked as much as four packs a day." there is no evidence he smoked four packs a day. mrs. harris said in her deposition one to two packs a day. mrs. harris said on a handwritten form, i'll show you in a moment, two packs a day. mrs. harris said when she got to trial, two to three packs a day. no one said four packs a day. he has denied drinking alcohol. well, it is uncontroverted that he was an alcoholic and he was a regular drinker for years up to 1974. so that is the one piece of evidence the plaintiff has. now, let us contrast that. i showed you seven records, but i'm only going to show you two that is all, i think, frankly, you need to see. the first is, this was a record prepared on february 5th, 2001, by dr. trina espinola, the physician who actually performed the surgery. and here's what dr. espinola said, "he had full-course radiation therapy in 1997, and left modified radical neck dissection and epiglottectomy." when ms. london told you that dr. burns said maybe he had radiation in '96, and then he had the surgery in '97, that is not what the surgeon who did the dissection said. he had full-course radiation therapy in '97 and left modified radical neck dissection and epiglottectomy. i want you to think about that argument well, maybe he had it united states district court 114 in october and maybe they waited until may to operate. are you kidding me? someone who has already had one head and neck cancer, you think an ent is going to say, "well, let us just wait eight months, you know, maybe, hopefully will not spread." they go in, they take the cancer out the very first thing and then they give you radiation around the margins because you cannot cut everything out and so you get radiation around the margins. and you remember mrs. harris testified that it was dr. espinola who discovered the cancer. mr. harris had a sore throat and went to see her. she is the one that diagnosed him. does not it make sense that the throat doctor who diagnosed the cancer and performed the surgery would know when she did it? but here's an even more persuasive piece of evidence, members of the jury. this was filled out by mrs. harris herself. remember she told you she is the one that wrote this. "epiglottis thyroid. operation performed. past surgical history. operation performed. epiglottis thyroid may of 1997. reason for operation, cancer." she had the surgeon who performed the surgery. you have the plaintiff herself and they both say 1997. so if there was a real issue about that, why did not they bring in dr. cotman? why did not they bring in dr. espinola? why did not they bring in krista harris? she got married in april united states district court 115 of '96, do not you think she would have remembered if her father then had a second throat cancer a few months later? why did not they bring in william, his brother? they had the burden of proof and what did they bring you? one record, and they want you to ignore the record that plaintiff herself prepared. here's the bottom line, it is plaintiff's burden to prove that the supraglottic cancer manifested on or before november 21, 1996. and i submit to you, members of the jury, that if one thing is clear, the evidence is overwhelming that it did not, and the cancer did not occur and manifest in 1997. i respectfully suggest the answer to question 2 is "no". so let us go to the next question. "has plaintiff proved it is more likely than not that mrs. harris' (sic) addiction was a legal cause, i want you to focus on that phrase, a legal cause of mr. harris' coronary heart disease or mr. harris' oral cavity cancer?" i do not like to object in closing argument because that is a lawyer's opportunity, and the judge tells you that what we say is not evidence, but it is a lawyer's opportunity to summarize what he or she thinks the evidence is. but i did object when ms. london said, "a cause" because i wanted you to know it is important it has to be "a legal cause". and so, let us talk about that. you remember in opening statement i told you the united states district court 116 law makes a distinction between something that is a cause in fact and something that is a legal cause. and the example i gave you is a man who got hit by a truck. and ms. london used that example, spent some time on that in her closing argument. well, now that you have heard the evidence, let me give you a better example. so in florida we all love our beautiful beaches and we go and we love to layout in the sun. but when we go to the doctor, what the doctor says is, "use sun screen, wear a hat, cover up and do not get too much sun." so suppose a man goes to the doctor and the doctor is doing the physical and looks at the man's arm and says, "you know what, you have got a spot on your arm. it is not cancerous, but we need to take care of it before it gets bad. so what i want you to do is go out and make an appointment with my receptionist and come back next week and we will take it off." and he does not do it. so six months later he is back in and the doctor looks at the spot on his arm and says, "you know what, you have got a basal cell carcinoma. it is cancer. it has not spread. we can take it off, but now you will have a scar, and you will need stitches. so what i want you to do is i want you to go out and i want you to tell the receptionist you need an appointment to come in and get that cancer taken off." and he does not do it. so six months later he comes back and he says, "you united states district court 117 know, i'm not feeling well at all. i'm kind of run down and tired. the doctor says -- he examines him and says, "mercy, you have a malignant melanoma and it spread throughout your body. it is bad. it is really bad. it started in your arm. it is bad." what was the cause, in fact, of his malignant melanoma? the sun, but what was the legal cause? he did not take care of business. he did not follow his doctor's advice, and that is the difference between a cause in fact and a legal cause, and members of the jury, that is exactly what happened here. even if you believe that smoking was the cause in fact of mr. harris' coronary artery disease -- coronary heart disease and his oral cancer, an addiction to nicotine was not a legal cause. you know what the legal cause was? he did not try to quit. and the only thing, at least the one thing that burns and kaplan agreed on is that all smokers, including addicted smokers, have the ability to quit. whether they quit depends on their motivation and persistence, but they have to want to quit and they have to try to quit. the bottom line is addicted smokers can and do quit smoking every day. they quit when they make up their mind, it is more important to them not to smoke than it is to smoke. where is the evidence that mr. harris was any different than the 60 million people who quit smoking? there simply was none. mr. harris always had the ability to quit smoking whenever he wanted to quit, whenever he was willing to make united states district court 118 an effort to quit. unfortunately, he waited until he got his laryngectomy before he gave it up. members of the jury, the evidence is compelling that an addiction to nicotine was not a legal cause of mr. harris' heart disease, or his throat cancer or his death. plaintiff has not offered any evidence in this case that an addiction to nicotine prevented mr. harris from quitting. here's the court's instruction on legal cause, and you will have this when you take it back. the court: that is the whole page. you are going to get this from me eventually. mr. cofer: i'm not going to read it. what i'm going to do is tell you what i think is important. "in order for addiction to be a legal cause of mr. harris' death, plaintiff has to show first, he was, in fact, addicted, and that addiction was so strong and so substantial that it can be reasonably said, but for the addiction he would have quit and he would not have gotten sick." there was no evidence of that. there was none. and why is that important? because if mr. harris would have stopped smoking in 1985 -- next one, please -- when he was cured of vocal cord cancer, ten years later in 1995, his risk of having a heart attack would have been the same as a nonsmoker. dr. furman told you that. and here's what dr. burns, the cdc from the 2010 report, "quitting smoking reduces the risk for cardiovascular disease united states district court 119 and death. the risk for heart attack drops sharply just one year after smokers quit entirely. even patients who already had a heart attack cut their risk of having another one by a third to a half if they quit smoking." he had not had a heart attack in '85. "after two to five years the chance of stroke could fall to about the same level as nonsmokers." so if mr. harris would have quit smoking in 1985, his risk -- he would have had no excess risk of smoking by 1985 when he had his heart attack. likewise, if he would have quit smoking in '85 when he had that first cancer, he would have avoided his risk of contracting a second oral cancer. this is from iarc. "the risk of cancer of the larynx declines rather rapidly after the cessation of smoking. no detectable elevation compared with never-smokers was seen among subjects who had quit smoking for at least ten years." this is from iarc, and used by dr. burns. if he quit smoking in 1985, his risk of getting an oral cancer in '97 is the same as a never-smoker. if he quit smoking in '85, his risk of getting a heart attack in '95 is the same as a never-smoker, right? and with respect to his heart attack, let us put up the next slide, the evidence was the smoking was not even what caused it. mr. harris had severe aggressive premature arthrosclerosis. he had all these risk factors, smoking, high blood pressure, high cholesterol, a high fat diet, united states district court 120 alcohol, he was a male, he had a family history of heart disease, he was stressed, he was 55 years old. it is undisputed that even after he quit smoking in 1999 his heart disease kept getting worse and worse. that in itself is proof that smoking was not what was driving his heart disease. because had it been smoking when he quit in '99, his smoking -- i'm sorry, his heart disease should have stopped progressing. yet seven years after he smoked his last cigarette he had a massive stroke, and the same risk factors that cause heart disease cause strokes. we brought you dr. joshua furman, a board certified cardiologist from one of the finest centers in this state who has been treating patients in florida for heart attacks and strokes for 34 years, and explained to you exactly how this works and what the risk factors are, and what the mechanics are of cardiovascular disease, and he told you that mr. harris would have had a heart attack and a stroke if he had never smoked a single cigarette. to the extent smoking, and it is a risk factor, played any role in his heart disease, it was insignificant. and since smoking did not cause it, it is not a class-qualifying disease. let me say that again. smoking is a risk factor for heart disease, but in mr. harris' case he had an aggressive premature arthrosclerosis which was being driven by his other risk factors, principally genetics, and high cholesterol and high united states district court 121 blood pressure. and dr. furman, the only cardiologist who testified in this case, the only, other than dr. kaplan, a physician who is licensed in the state of florida to practice medicine told you it is his opinion to a reasonable degree of medical certainty that mr. harris would have had a heart attack and a stroke had he never smoked a single cigarette. so let us get back to question 3(a) and 3(b). members of the jury, the answer to question 3(a), "has plaintiff proved that more likely than not mr. harris' addiction was a legal cause of his coronary artery disease?" the answer is "no" for three reasons. first of all, it was not addiction to nicotine that prevented him from quitting. he did not quit because he did not try to quit. second, the heart attack was not even caused by smoking. and third, if he had quit in '85, he would have had no smoking related risk at all for the heart attack. it would have been gone. and, likewise, on question b -- i'm sorry, back on 3(b) please. likewise, on his oral cavity cancer, the evidence was if mr. harris would have quit smoking in 1985, he would have had the same risk as a never-smoker or a second head and neck cancer by 1997. and if you answer "no" to questions 3(a) and 3(b), united states district court 122 the case is over because mr. harris was not an engle class member. the court: mr. cofer, you asked me to remind you. it is one hour. mr. cofer: so let me kind of move on through the rest of the questions. question 4, for all of the reasons i've told you the answer to that question is "no". let us go to question 5, and this is comparative fault. "if you decide that mr. harris and the defendants are all responsible for causing mr. harris' injuries," this is where you can decide how much each party is responsible. let me tell you something so there is no confusion. you never get here unless you are persuaded that the plaintiff proved that mr. harris was a class member. and i believe the evidence is overwhelming that they did not do that. but if you do get this far, here's where you can decide how much plaintiff and how much any three defendants -- let me talk about that for a second. plaintiff admits that her husband was at least partially at fault for causing his own injuries. remember that? ms. london told you that. so i want you to think about what that means. it can only mean that plaintiff admits that mr. harris knew his smoking was harming him, and had the ability to quit smoking before it harmed him or he united states district court 123 could not have any fault. how could he possibly be at fault if he did not know and he could not quit? the fact that they admit that he knew and he could have quit is incredibly important in this case. and remember it is undisputed that by 1985 he knew his smoking caused, or he believed his smoking caused his vocal cord cancer and he did not try to quit. and i'll tell you members of the jury, if you get this far, you should take plaintiff at their word. if he knew he caused it and he had the ability to quit, you should mark one hundred percent responsibility for mr. harris because only mr. harris -- ms. london: objection, your honor. the court: overruled. you may continue. mr. cofer: because only mr. harris was in a position to decide whether to try to quit or not. that is nothing anyone else could do for him. if he knew it and he had the ability to quit and he did not try, then you should mark one hundred percent. let us go to question six. "we the jury find that the plaintiff has proved it is more likely that smoking manufactured by the defendants was the legal cause of lung cancer and death." the answer to this question is "no". and i will not go through it again, but dr. burns told you that had he quit smoking in '66 or 1970, or 1974, or 1985, his risk of developing a smoking related disease and lung cancer would united states district court 124 have been basically the same as someone who never smoked. let us go to question 7. again, this comparative fault, for the very same reasons i mentioned in question 5, if you get this far, you should side one hundred percent to mr. harris. let us go to question 8. "we the jury find plaintiff has proved it is more likely than not the following defendants are liable for fraudulent concealment and that was a legal cause." so, members of the jury, in order for a concealment or an omission to be a legal cause, mr. harris -- bless you -- plaintiff has to show that he reasonably relied on something that he did or did not do. ms. london said this case was about what was not known, and would it have made a difference to mr. harris? well, there is no evidence that anything would have because mrs. harris said her husband never told her he wished a tobacco company would have given him more information, or if the tobacco company would have said something sooner it would have made a difference. mrs. harris admitted her husband never talked about filters or light cigarettes. he never told her why he smoked them. he never said he thought filters or low tar were safer. and finally, we know that by 1985 he personally understood and believed his smoking was harming him, but he did not even try to quit. so why would you possibly think that anything we could have said earlier would have made a united states district court 125 difference? if going to the doctor being diagnosed with cancer, being cured of cancer, understanding and believing it is caused by smoking does not even get to you try to quit, what in the world could? plaintiff has failed in their evidence on this, and i respectfully suggest the answer should be "no". these next questions 9 through 15, as ms. london said, essentially, they are repetitive questions of earlier. so for all the reasons that you answered "no" to question 8, you should, likewise, answer "no" to questions 9 through 15. so that takes us to question 16. and back on 15, the bottom line is you do not check anything here because he did not rely on anything before or after. let us go to 16. so this is damages. you know ms. london suggested that you award $22.4 million for the decisions that mr. harris made and the decisions he did not make. you know all i'm going to tell you is, i cannot help you with this. you listened to the evidence. you are the ones in the best position to decide whether mr. harris and mrs. harris are entitled to recover anything. i have no idea where they came up with $22.4 million, but if you do get this far you should award something that you think is fair and something that you think is reasonable. question 7 (sic). the court: 17, but go ahead. united states district court 126 mr. cofer: thank you. this is for injuries that did not cause his death. the evidence is overwhelming that smoking did not cause his heart disease or stroke and i respectfully suggest that you not even consider those, but again with respect to the other diseases award what you think is fair if you get this far. okay. just about done. i want to talk briefly about punitive damages. the final question, this is question 18, asks whether you find by clear and convincing evidence that punitive damages are warranted against one or more of the defendants in this case. so let me talk for a minute about punitive damages and what you are being asked to decide. you are not being asked to decide an amount of punitive damages. the issue is whether by clear and convincing evidence plaintiff has shown she is entitled to punitive damages in this case. so do not spend one minute thinking about amount. the question now is whether she is entitled. and if you decide she is, there will be another phase to the trial, and plaintiff will put on evidence, we will put on evidence, we will have closing arguments and you can decide then whether an amount is appropriate. so the issue right now is whether they have proven it by clear and convincing evidence. it is a much higher standard. you heard ms. london talk about preponderance of united states district court 127 evidence, more likely than not, the judge instructed you on clear and convincing evidence. it is a much, much higher standard of proof. it is one where the evidence must be precise, explicit, lacking in confusion and of such weight that it produces a firm belief or conviction without hesitation about the matter at issue. it is a much higher standard. but what is more important you have to decide based on conduct that harmed jerry harris. this is jerry harris' case now. it is not a class action any more. other people can file their own lawsuits and ask for damages. so if you get this far, you can only award damages, punitive damages for conduct that harmed mr. harris. ms. london: objection. mr. cofer: you can only award damages -- the court: this is argument. you can read the instructions for yourself and decide. mr. cofer: you can only award damages for harm to mr. harris. so what did we do? is there any evidence, anything that the defendants did that caused him to smoke or caused him to continue to smoke? and i've told you that and i think the answer is, no, there is not. we sold cigarettes. that alone cannot be a basis for liability. the engle findings alone are not a basis. the evidence was mr. harris always had the information he needed to quit had he wanted to quit united states district court 128 and he had the ability to quit. let me just say one more thing because i do not want to take too much of the others time. mr. tepikian: ten minutes. mr. cofer: ten minutes. so we have 35 minutes left. how much time do we have left, your honor? the court: i'm going to have you up to 12:04 combined. so you have got about 37, 38 minutes left. mr. cofer: okay. let me say one more thing about punitive damages. ever since 1966 there is been warnings on cigarette packs. we do not know anything about mr. harris' smoking until 1972 when he met mrs. harris. in 1972 he was 32 years old. warnings had been on the pack for six years. warnings -- i mean advertisements were off television for the last 11 years -- or 12 years, rather. warnings were on every print ad since 19 -- well, went on print ad that same year. so bottom line is there was no evidence whatsoever that anything these defendants did caused mr. harris to smoke. we do not know what brands he smoked, if he smoked them when he was a kid, and you should consider that too in thinking about any conduct that may have harmed mr. harris. all right. last thing i want to say, members of the jury, this is a case about one smoker and whether he was a member of the engle class, and whether his wife is entitled to recover money for his decisions to begin and to continue united states district court 129 smoking. it is a case about jerry harris, and why he smoked and why he waited so long to quit. the evidence was that mr. harris smoked because he liked to smoked and that all of his friends and family smoked. the evidence was that mr. harris had the information he needed to make an informed choice whether to smoke or quit smoking. the evidence was that mr. harris had the tools and experience he needed to quit smoking when he wanted to quit. and finally, the evidence was that mr. harris did not meet the burden of proving that mr. harris was a member of the engle class. but let me clear up one thing, i hope that nothing that any of us did, or anything that i did in this trial suggested to you in any way that the defendants are blaming mrs. harris for her husband's decisions. we are not. we are not blaming mrs. harris at all. the issues in this case are why he smoked, why he did not quit and whether he was a member of the engle class. and as lawyers and as officers of the court, we have an ethical obligation to bring you the evidence and the facts you need to get it right. and we try to do that respectfully. we try to do that in a considerate way. we had an obligation to do that. i just wanted to make it clear what we were trying to do. you know, i told you during voir dire that we have united states district court 130 greatest system of civil justice any nation has ever had. it is not perfect. we read about mistakes. it is not perfect. we are the envy of every other nation in the world, and the reason why is because we have women like you who are willing to take time out of your lives and come sit in that jury box and follow the law and decide the case based on the evidence. on behalf of the defendants, and i think plaintiff too, and everyone in this courtroom, i want to thank you very, very much for your service, and i want to thank you for listening to my closing argument. that is all i have, your honor. mr. bielby: thank you, your honor. good morning. may it please the court. we have now been together for almost a week-and-a-half and we are at the end of the case and right up front. let me say that there has been no evidence that mr. harris chose any of the brands that he smoked because of anything any tobacco company said, or did united states district court 131 or did not do. none at all. plaintiff's counsel has given you no evidence that lorillard tobacco company said or did anything that affected any of the choices that gerald harris made about his smoking. in fact, what we have heard is just the opposite. mrs. harris told us that she never discussed with her husband why he started to smoke, why he continued to smoke, nor why he smoked any of the brands of cigarettes that he did smoke. i need to reintroduce myself because it is been a week-and-a-half. i'm lo bielby. i represent lorillard tobacco company. i think we all know that by now, but i like to say that up front and thank you for the week-and-a-half that you have been together and been with us. i'm going to try and be very, very brief. mr. cofer did a very nice job of going through the evidence and talking about the verdict form. i'm going to try very, very hard not repeat that. as you recall, at the beginning of the case i said i was going to be very brief, and i will try to do that and respect you and your time. i would like to go through some of the evidence, though. it is going to be as short as i can possibly make it because i'm going to talk about the evidence that might apply as to lorillard. mrs. harris told us gerald harris smoked several united states district court 132 brands, and as you heard, mr. cofer reminded us, the testimony was that he switched back and forth between brands and did not smoke any of the brands in a particular order. if you recall mrs. harris said that she never discussed hearing, seeing or reading anything from lorillard or from any tobacco company. mr. harris did not rely upon advertisements. you recall he made up his own mind. and finally, you heard that she has no knowledge of mr. harris choosing any brand because he thought it was safer or less hazardous. mr. harris lived a life filled with boats to sea fishing, and just like every american every day, he had the freedom to decide what he would choose to do that day, every day. mr. harris made those decisions as a life-long boat captain. he was responsible for people, for passengers, for their safety, for their lives and he made vital decisions every day. of course, he was also responsible for the consequences of his own decisions just as all of us are. mrs. harris admitted that her husband never said he wanted to quit smoking, and she told us she did not know if he ever truly wanted to quit. so after this week-and-a-half of trial, here's what we do know based upon the evidence from this courtroom. it all came from mrs. harris, the person who knew him best. we know that mr. harris smoked at least four brands between the united states district court 133 time period of 1972 until he quit in 1999. we know that mr. harris switched back and forth between those brands, between lights and non-lights without a preference for any particular brand. we do not know the reasons he chose to switch, but we do know that there was no difference in how he smoked any particular brand, a light or a non-light. mr. harris smoked the same number of cigarettes every day and he smoked them the same way regardless of the brand that he was smoking. this is not -- pardon me, i jumped down here. mrs. harris told us that only one lorillard brand of cigarettes was smoked by her husband, kent iii. this is why you have not heard from me much during this trial. we know that kent iii was first sold in 1979, that is stipulated between the parties. it is undisputed. in 1979 mr. harris was an adult. he was around 40 years old. he was married, and he was the father of two children. so we know that mr. harris' first lorillard cigarette could not have been earlier than 1979. we do know that every single lorillard cigarette that mr. harris smoked had the surgeon general's mandatory health warning on the side of the cigarette packages. mr. cofer went through that with you and showed the warnings on the side of the packages. in fact, every brand of united states district court 134 cigarettes that mr. harris smoked after 1966 had the surgeon general's mandatory health warning on the sides of the package of cigarettes. now, we do not really know when he smoked the lorillard brand after 1979. we do not know how many he smoked, how long he smoked it, but we do know that he never talked about -- talked to anyone about light cigarettes. and there is no evidence in this case, that mr. harris ever relied on any statement or advertisement by lorillard or any other tobacco company or about those statements or advertisements having anything to do with his decisions about smoking any cigarette, including a light cigarette. i do want to talk a bit about during the trial plaintiff showed you a video deposition of ms. christie leon. she is the lorillard marketing person. you saw the video on the big screen. she is not an actress, but it was a large screen in front of us. mrs. harris was adamant that mr. harris was not influenced by advertisements at all, but what is important mrs. leon said to us in her video deposition that the federal trade commission is charged with making sure the information is factually accurate. the government entity, the federal trade commission. the ftc's guidelines went into place in 1955 and lorillard has pre-cleared -- all the tobacco companies we united states district court 135 pre-cleared the ads with the ftc and we faithfully complied with those guidelines. you saw during the trial one kent iii advertisement that plaintiff's counsel put on the screen. she showed it during the trial. that ad was first reviewed and approved by the federal government before it was used and published to the american people. why is all of this important? because this case is about gerald harris. it is not about other people, in other states, at other times or other cases. this case is about mr. harris. it is not about statistics. it is not about age cohorts that dr. burns talked about, and the theories that we heard in this courtroom about light cigarettes from plaintiff's counsel is just not applicable to mr. gerald harris. that is what this case comes down to. before this afternoon you have not been allowed to talk about this case amongst yourselves, but in a few minutes you will be able to talk amongst yourselves and discuss the case because you are the decision makers. the engle case that you heard about, the case that resulted in those findings that plaintiff's counsel posted in front of you, that engle jury did not hear about mr. harris, but you have. in a few moments judge sargus will instruct you that those findings do not establish the defendants are liable to plaintiff in any way. you make the decisions as to mr. harris. united states district court 136 now, the verdict form you have already heard, contains a lot of questions. that is because there are a lot of things that plaintiff's counsel must prove in order for you to find in favor of plaintiff in this case. i was thinking about the verdict form and thinking that it is not enough to come into the courtroom and just say, "well, mr. harris smoked cigarettes for 45 years, to say, well, the tobacco companies said some dumb things, and well, lorillard made some of those cigarettes, therefore, lorillard must pay some money." that is not the way our system works. that is not the law. plaintiff must prove the legal cause of harm to mr. harris before you can think about awarding damages. mr. cofer went through the legal cause and distinctions in that regard. he did a nice job. i will not go through that again, but that is something that is to be previewed before thinking about awarding damages. plaintiff's counsel has the burden of proving all the elements of all of their claims. as mr. cofer explained, the plaintiff's counsel has to prove, with evidence, a direct connection between something a defendant did, an injury to mr. harris, and the plaintiff must prove her case against each defendant, each one. i mentioned that in opening statement and i mention it again now. that is why there is a separate line for each of the tobacco companies. i do want to talk with you about some of the united states district court 137 questions on the verdict form. i'm not going to go through each one, and i do not have any slides, but some of the things i'm going to talk about i'm going to shorten because of the limited time in front of you. i do want to talk about comparative fault. that would be questions 5 and 7. if you read those questions, you will be asked to compare the responsibility of mr. harris and the defendants. mr. cofer went through this. and we know from ms. london's opening that mr. harris was at least ten percent responsible. that is what she said in the opening statement. they admit that. so that amount cannot be zero for mr. harris -- ms. london: objection. the court: i believe i think you said mrs. harris. mr. harris. with that, the objection is overruled otherwise. mr. bielby: i apologize if i misspoke. ms. london: your honor, may we approach? the court: no. you may continue. mr. bielby: you will decide the comparative fault based upon the evidence, but my point this morning is it is critical to understand that apportionment of responsibility does not apply to the concealment questions of questions 8, 10, 12 and 14. that is the law and the judge will give you that instruction. so if you answer "yes" on questions 8, 10, 12 and 14, then your decision is on apportionment, what united states district court 138 percentage of responsibility, on questions 5 and 7 of comparative fault, will not count for anything. even if you decide ninety percent responsibility on mr. harris and only ten percent on the defendants, if you answer "yes" to one or more of those four questions, then the defendants would be held to one hundred percent responsibility regardless of the percentage of fault you intended for mr. harris to share. why is that important? well, that percentage of responsibility will then not reduce any of the damages that you award in this case. mr. harris' percentage of responsibility would then effectively be zero, which even the plaintiff has suggested is not correct because they admit ten percent responsibility. that is why it is so important that you go through each of those questions carefully, and i know that you will and i thank you for that. by now you are probably beginning to see why plaintiff's counsel spent so much time on expert witnesses and on claims about internal documents and statements made by some of the tobacco companies, all of which really had nothing to do with mr. harris. there was no evidence he ever saw or heard any of those documents or read them. and he certainly never relied on any of those documents or statements. he never relied upon any advertisements. mr. cofer went through all of that. i will not go through it again. united states district court 139 i do want to talk about the very last question on the verdict form and that is the punitive damages question. mr. cofer went through that, and i agree that the facts of this case, the class membership questions at the beginning of the verdict form and what we know and do not know about mr. harris' smoking decisions, respectfully, you should not reach the last question, but if you do, i would like to speak with you about it for a moment. i would not be doing my job unless i got to that last question about punitive damages. as mr. cofer explained, you will not be deciding the amount of the punitive damages at this point. the amount will be decided in a second phase of this trial that we would come back and start after you return your verdict here. that is called the phase two part of the trial, if there is one. your decision today, if you reach, though, that last question, question 18, is only whether or not the plaintiff has shown by that higher burden by clear and convincing evidence whether this case is a case where punitive damages are truly warranted to punish the defendants. i also note that any money awarded to mrs. harris for punitive damages would be on top of compensatory damages that you may decide to award. and the punitive damages do not go to the government, does not go to a charity, it does not go united states district court 140 to a nonsmoking entity, it would go to mrs. harris. the standard, judge sargus will read to you the standard, when i paraphrase it saying, "that each defendant must act with conscious indifference to the consequences and reckless disregard." i respectfully suggest to you that you have seen no evidence whatsoever as to lorillard, or for that matter, any tobacco company that would show by clear and convincing evidence that any defendant acted with conscious indifference and reckless disregard in a manner that directly harmed mr. harris. what did we hear about lorillard regarding the punitive damages? you may recall that i asked the very first plaintiff witness, dr. proctor, several questions specifically about lorillard tobacco company. he had a lot of good things to say about lorillard's numerous contributions in the field of scientific research, into the health affects of cigarette smoking. as you heard, lorillard supported and worked with famous early science pioneers such as dr. ernst wynder, dr. dietrich hoffman, and the scientists involved in those early mouse skin studies that you saw pictures of published in life magazine in the 1950's. that research was published in not only life, but in the reader's digest and other scientific journals and trade publications. both of plaintiff's expert witnesses, dr. proctor and dr. burns talked about dr. wynder and their respect for him united states district court 141 as a great scientist. as dr. proctor told you, lorillard worked closely with dr. wynder and supported his research, and supported the work of the scientists seeking to learn what potential carcinogens were in cigarette smoke. you heard that lorillard provided the cigarettes and the products for that research. but lorillard's help did not stop there. they collaborated with drs. wynder and hoffman and other scientists on smoke fractionation research to learn what was in the cigarette smoke, and lorillard assisted and funded that research, and it ended up with letters back and forth to the sloan-kettering cancer institute and the american health foundation and they worked together. that is not reckless disregard and that is just the opposite. as that research continued, lorillard worked with dr. wynder on how to reduce something called phenols, p-h-e-n-o-l-s, in cigarette smoke. and at that time phenols were believed to be a suspect as a cause of cancer. lorillard shared its research on phenols with the scientific community and published that research so everyone would know what it found. and lorillard came up with a filter that reduced the phenols in cigarette smoke leading to two patents being awarded to lorillard based on that research. after that lorillard made two submissions to the united states district court 142 surgeon general's office and dr. proctor told us that those submissions went to the advisory committee prior to the publication of the 1964 surgeon general's report. that is not reckless disregard. again, that is the opposite. the court: counsel, we are right up to the time you asked me to remind you of. mr. bielby: thank you, your honor. one more thing, dr. proctor acknowledged that lorillard did not place its products in motion pictures. he agreed that in fact lorillard had a policy of telling movie produces that lorillard would not do that, and that policy has been in place for 40 years. there is no basis whatsoever to find that plaintiff is entitled to punitive damages and no basis against lorillard. again, i thank you. i have every faith and confidence that each of you will carefully review the evidence that came into this court, not evidence from other states, or other people or other cases. you will listen and apply and judge, and use your common sense when you review the evidence and when you evaluate the witnesses. i'd like you to apply your common sense to the questions on the verdict form. i know you will. when you do that, you will enter a verdict for each defendant. and i thank you for your time. ms. baker: i will work fast, your honor. may it please the court, mrs. harris, counsel and good morning. i'm grateful for the opportunity to speak with you again. as you know, the only time we can speak with you, the lawyers can speak with you are during opening statement and closing argument. and on behalf of my client r.j. reynolds and myself, i thank you again for your service in this case. now, mr. cofer thoroughly walked you through the evidence in this case and what he said applies with equal force to r.j. reynolds, but i have a few additional thoughts, and i have a lot to say, but i'm going to work quickly. as you heard, i only have 18 minutes. so i may talk quickly. i may move through the issues quickly, but i want to add these thoughts to what mr. cofer and mr. bielby have already told you. now, i told you at the outset of this case it was about one smoker, and one alone, and that is mr. harris. and you will see that -- you have already seen that reflected on the verdict form. these are questions about mr. harris. not united states district court 144 another smoker, not a class of smokers, not some other generic smoker. they are about mr. harris. and despite that you heard days-and-days of testimony that had nothing to do with mr. harris. and ms. london spent a good bit of time this morning during her closing argument talking about things that do not have anything to do with mr. harris either. they did that to try to reprove those findings, those findings that judge sargus already told you about, and that you will hear about again in his instructions this afternoon. to try to reprove those findings to you. those findings and that evidence do not have anything to do with mr. harris and his smoking decisions. but i want to address -- i want to just quickly address some of those issues that plaintiff raised. i want to address them head-on and explain why they do not have anything to do with mr. harris. the first issue is how cigarettes are designed. you heard over and over and you heard it again this morning that cigarettes are designed to be more addictive. suggestions that there was something done, additives or something done to the nicotine to make them more inhalable. what did the evidence in this case actually show? drs. proctor and burns told you that cigarettes are dangerous and addictive by nature. that is inherent. there is no safe cigarette. tobacco companies do not make them united states district court 145 dangerous and addictive. if you roll up a cigarette, if you roll up tobacco and burn it, it has the same carcinogens as a commercial cigarette. and dr. proctor admitted that cigarettes were inhalable long before they were mass produced. now, the second issue and you have heard a lot about it already this morning is marketing to underaged smokers. you heard references in this trial to youth over and over. we do not know when or why mr. harris became a regular smoker. i think that is clear. but one thing we do know, there is zero evidence, zero evidence in this case that he started smoking or became a regular smoker because of advertising. in fact, mrs. harris when she took the stand she told you the opposite. what did she tell you? she told you that she could not recall mr. harris ever buying a brand of cigarettes because of an ad. he did not buy things because of advertising. he was not influenced by ads. that is what she said. he made up his own mind. there is no dispute about that. and that is what you heard from mrs. harris herself. now, when i stood up and asked dr. proctor questions you might remember i did not ask him that many questions, but what i said to him i want to put down some mile posts. you showed the jury a bunch of documents, dr. proctor, let us put down some mile posts. and i did that -- why did i do that? because he showed a bunch of reynolds united states district court 146 documents that came from a time when mr. harris was not a youth, things from before he was born, when he was well past his youth and in his 30's and his 40's. so i'll talk about those two issues and i want to move forward and refocus on the actual issues in this case. i'm going to walk through a few of the questions on the verdict form. you have seen the verdict form already this morning. you saw it from ms. london, and you saw it when mr. cofer stood up, but let me add some additional thoughts. let us take a look at question 3. now, mr. cofer already discussed the evidence on addiction. i'm not going to repeat that. we believe that you should find that mr. harris was not addicted, but if you find that he was, you will be asked to answer this question. you have already heard a lot about legal cause this morning, and the judge is going to instruct you, and you will have those instructions, but to be a legal cause, "plaintiff must prove an addiction, an addiction, not smoking, an addiction contributed substantially to mr. harris continuing to smoke. that, but for his addiction, but for his addiction, his heart disease and laryngeal cancer would not have occurred." now, ms. london told you this morning that addiction did not need to be the only legal cause. that is true. united states district court 147 court: let me just interrupt you for one moment. the "b" has been changed. we reached some different language. you will get these in the instructions, but i just want to be clear on that so the jury is not confused. ms. baker: yes. thank you, your honor. we used a more specific term so you are not confused about that question. ms. london told you addiction did not need to be the only legal cause that is true, but look at the instruction carefully and listen to it carefully when the judge instructs you. it requires that addiction be a substantial cause. what ms. london told you does not change that requirement. and the evidence on this issue is clear. addiction was not a legal or substantial cause of mr. harris' heart disease or laryngeal cancer. the only legal cause, the only substantial cause was his choice to smoke and continue smoking. we know that mr. harris knew that smoking was going to kill him if he continued to smoke, back in 1985 when he was diagnosed with cancer and it was cured. mr. harris was not confused, but he made a choice to ignore that warning and keep smoking. you have heard that story a lot in this trial and you might have wondered why. why do i keep hearing this? why does it matter? it matters because it tells us what mr. harris did when he was warned. when he was given information about the dangers of smoking, what did he do? he united states district court 148 did not quit. not only did he not quit he did not try to quit, and that was his choice and that was his right. but the choice to smoke or the choice to continue smoking -- and that is fine and we do not criticize that choice -- but that choice to smoke and continue smoking that was not a one-time shot. plaintiff's counsel and dr. burns would have you believe that once mr. harris became a regular smoker it was only a matter of time before he got heart disease and cancer. but we know that mr. harris had numerous exit ramps off that highway, many opportunities to quit. what was the evidence about that in this case? when he saw an exit ramp, he kept on driving. he drove right past these exits, exit after exit, he chose to keep smoking. in 1966 when the warning label went on each and every pack he drove past the exit and kept smoking. same in 1970 when the warning label changed he kept on driving and kept smoking. '74 when he went to aa and quit drinking for good, he kept on driving and drove right past that exit and kept smoking. '85 when he was diagnosed with cancer and knew that it would kill him, he chose to drive past that exit and keep on smoking. millions of smokers were quitting during this time united states district court 149 period. mr. harris is not even trying to quit. he did not make one "quit attempt", not in the '50's, not in the '60's, not in the '70's, not in the '80's. what does that tell us? it tells us that mr. harris' was not a tortured addict. there are smokers who desperately want to quit. that is not mr. harris. smokers who try, and try, and try and cannot quit, not mr. harris. smokers who ask their family, and friends, and their doctors for help over and over again, not mr. harris. smokers who want to quit to reduce their risk or for other health reasons and maybe get sick anyway, that was not mr. harris. mr. harris and his choices stood in between addiction and his heart disease and laryngeal cancer. and i want to pull up this slide. it was mr. harris between an addiction and heart disease and cancer, and because of that, because of that you should answer "no" to question 3 on the verdict form and proceed no further. but if you do go further on the verdict, and i do not believe that you should, but this is my chance to talk to you about it, but if you do go further let me take a moment and talk about some additional questions. questions 4 and 6 on the verdict form. these are questions where you will have to decide whether cigarettes made by my client, by r.j. reynolds, were a legal cause or substantially contributed to mr. harris' diseases. and you united states district court 150 can see that each defendant is treated separately on this question and these questions. and as i told you in opening, the plaintiff has the burden, and that was two parts, right. the burden, that is part no. 1, and proof, which is hard evidence. i asked you to demand hard evidence in this case on all of plaintiff's claims, but on this claim in particular as it relates to my client. i said not guesses. not could-be's. not it is-possible's. hard evidence. you heard testimony in this case about three reynolds brands, winston, camel and pall mall. the first reynolds brand you heard about you heard that mr. harris smoked was winston. now, judge sargus will instruct you that you are the sole judges of the credibility of the witnesses and the testimony that their weight deserves. you get to determine whether a witness is worthy of belief. you are to consider that witness's motive and you will have to decide whether mrs. harris' story is credible. as you heard, we asked mrs. harris at her deposition which brands she remembered her husband smoking, and she said there were four. none of those were reynolds brands, and one l&m, was made by a company that is not a defendant in this lawsuit. that is it. that is what she told us at her deposition. now, when she was asked the same question here when united states district court 151 she took the stand at this trial, her story changed. she said she remembered mr. harris smoking winston, and she forgot about l&m, that brand made by a defendant, made by a company that is not a defendant in this case. but mrs. harris did not tell you when mr. harris allegedly smoked winston or how long he smoked it. if she could have, she would have, but she did not, and that is no hard evidence. the next brand you heard about -- the next two brands were pall mall and camel, and you heard those from mr. jennings. and he testified that mr. harris smoked pall mall off and on for about 6 to 8 months, and camel off and on for about six months. that is the sum total about what you heard about mr. harris smoking reynolds brands. and other than price, you did not hear why mr. harris chose to smoke any brand that he smoked. now, i told you in opening that you might hear some vague or hazy memories about what mr. harris smoked and when, but those vague memories do not satisfy plaintiff's burden. now, we have talked a lot in this trial, and today, about substantial contribution, legal cause and substantial contribution. and let me offer a way to think about whether something is a substantial contribution. i have two boys. i have two little boys and they like to play with lego's. now imagine that there are 40 lego's spread out on the floor and i ask them to clean those united states district court 152 up, and one of my boys cleans up and puts 39 of those lego's back in the bucket and one puts one back in. now, i can assure you that the one boy will not think that his substantially contributed to the clean-up effort by putting one lego in the bucket. and just like that, hard evidence of about one year of reynolds smoking did not and could not substantially contribute to mr. harris' diseases. the court: you have five minutes, counsel. ms. baker: thank you, your honor. now, moving down the verdict form there is another question where you should consider the limited amount of reynolds cigarettes that mr. harris smoked, and that is questions 5 and 7. mr. cofer talked to you about that. mr. bielby talked to you about that. this question is about responsibility. it is not some global comparative of conduct. so if you hear ms. london talk about reynolds and the other defendants and their choices, whether they affected other smokers, that is not what this question is about. this is not the comparison this question called for. maybe you saw things that philip morris, or lorillard, or reynolds or some other company said, or wrote that you did not like, but if did not affect mr. harris, it is not fair game when answering this question. you already heard that mr. harris' choices to continue smoking in the face of numerous exit ramps, numerous united states district court 153 opportunities to quit his choice not to quit and not even try, you heard about that, mr. harris is one hundred percent responsible for those choices. ms. london: objection. the court: well, it is argument. the objection is overruled. you will decide all this of course. ms. baker: mr. harris had one hundred percent control over those choices. he had the control. he had the power, and now he has the responsibility. i want to move down -- i want to keep moving down the verdict form to questions 8, 10, 12 and 14. these are the questions that mr. cofer talked to you about, the questions having to do with concealment and agreement to conceal. now, again, we do not believe you should get this far in the verdict form, but if you do, i want you to focus on one word "reliance". mrs. harris has to prove that something philip morris, lorillard or reynolds said or did caused mr. harris, not some other smoker, mr. harris to take some action to rely on what they said or did and that that caused his diseases. i want you to look very carefully at these jury instructions and listen very carefully to the judge this morning. he will talk to you about reliance, on these questions, on these questions on the verdict form, the only united states district court 154 witness you really needed to hear from was mrs. harris, not dr. proctor or dr. burns. they did not know anything about these issues. mrs. harris was the only one you heard from. let me just say for a moment you heard a lot this morning of who should have call what witnesses. let me just say if there was any evidence, any evidence that mr. harris relied on something any tobacco said or did you would have heard from this witness. they would have called that witness at this trial. you did not hear that. in fact, you heard quite the opposite. what did mrs. harris say about whether mr. harris relied -- "he never relied on any statement made by a tobacco company or any ad in making his decision to start smoking. he did not rely on ads in making his decision to continue smoking. he never said a tobacco company withheld information from him. he never said he wished a tobacco company would have given him more information. and he never said if a tobacco would have said something to him sooner it would have made a difference." ladies and gentlemen, that is not hard evidence. that is not reliance. now, i'm coming close to wrapping up and the judge, i'm sure, is about to give me a one-minute warning, but before i get to the last question on the verdict form i want to spend just a moment on damages. if you decide to return a verdict for mrs. harris, you will have to decide the amount of united states district court 155 damages, and this is a difficult question for me, because obviously i believe that you should not compensate mrs. harris for mr. harris' choices. but we all feel compassion and we all wish mrs. harris well. but compassion and good wishes are not reasons to exceed common sense and good judgment. ms. london this morning asked you for millions of dollars for mr. harris' choices, but the judge will instruct you that any award should be fair and just in light of the evidence. so if you choose to make an award and compensate mrs. harris for her husband's choices, please do so based only on the evidence that you heard using your common sense and your good judgment. now question 18, you already heard about this a couple of times, but let me very briefly say, if you get to this question, if you get that far, you will have already fully compensated -- why do not we go ahead and pull up this slide -- you will have already fully compensated mrs. harris for mr. harris' diseases. punitive damages can only be awarded to mrs. harris, and they can only awarded for concealment or an agreement to conceal. when considering this question, i ask you to consider the following: those employees that you heard so much about in this trial, those documents that you saw flashing on the screen from 30, 40, 50 years ago, united states district court 156 sometimes longer, the authors of those documents, people like dr. teague or diane burrows, they long ago left those companies and many are now dead. drs. proctor and burns talked about secret documents. those documents are secret no more. there is a public website with tens of millions of documents available. anyone can go see those documents, not just dr. burns and not just dr. proctor. if the company's position on smoking and health and addiction throughout the years bothered you, consider that those positions changed over a decade ago when they admitted that smoking caused cancer and was addictive. there is no need to punish and deter. and based on the evidence and plaintiff's failure to meet her clear and convincing burden your answer to this question, your answer to question 18 should absolutely be "no". now, this is my last chance to speak with you and i am almost done. as the plaintiff has the burden of proof she will get the last chance -- she will get the last opportunity to speak with you, and she will get to respond to much of what i have said, and mr. cofer and mr. bielby. we will not get an opportunity to respond to her. so i ask you because we cannot respond i ask that you be our advocate in the jury room when you deliberate. you have seen how we responded in this trial, how united states district court 157 we have given you the other side of the story and we stayed focused on the facts in this case. i ask you to keep those facts and mr. harris' choices in mind and return a verdict in defendants' favor. members of the jury, it is been an honor and a privilege to try this case in front of you. i thank you for you attention and your patience and your service throughout trial. thank you. thank you, your honor.