14 mr. johnstone: good morning, counsel. ladies, good morning. our firm has represented clients here in fort lauderdale, broward county, miami, palm beach, for 50 years. and we are proud to speak for folks that believe in good faith that they have been injured or killed or harmed by the reckless or intentional misconduct or negligence of others. and i'm proud to appear in court before you and his honor, and i thank you, and, more importantly, the family thanks you for your service. you folks have taken notes day in and day out, you have been here on time, you all have jobs -- the court: mostly. mr. johnstone: college students have other things going on. in any case, you folks have been fantastic. and i want you to remember that when we went back through the jury selection process, each of the attorneys, mr. reilly and i had a chance to speak directly with you, and with the judge's help -- and we have gotten a lot of his help, things you do not even know about, with the law -- we were able to agree on you seven folks that everyone seemed to believe would be the most suited, the most qualified to sit as jurors in this case, and we thank you very much. you have done a fantastic job. mr. reilly told you in his opening statement that you wield tremendous power, and that is one of the things that he and i can agree on in this case. you are judges of the facts, and that is why each time you came and went, we rose, just as we did for his honor. you are not wearing black robes, but, in essence, really, you serve as judges of the facts; and then, as you have been told and will learn a little bit more today, you will have a chance to take all of the law -- and some of it is a little bit confusing, a little bit complicated -- and apply it to the facts, to do what? to reach a verdict that is just and true based on the evidence that was presented. now, this is one of the very few, if not the only, countries in the world, that give lay people in the community, citizens that live in the same area as those involved in the case, the power to make decisions of this magnitude. and you do wield tremendous power. and we believe, the family believes, that that power that you wield will be wielded in this case justly and fairly, and that based on the evidence you will hold philip morris responsible to some degree for chris' death. now, when we pursued this case against this tobacco company, we made it very clear from the outset, to anybody and everybody involved, that chris hatziyannakis is, to some extent, responsible for his own death. and we have said that since day one. the first decision that he made, put a cigarette in his mouth when he was being pressured, as so many people are, with peer pressure from friends, guys he works with, was his decision alone. he had the control to do that, and it was a mistake. and chris hatziyannakis paid for that mistake. he paid the ultimate price by developing a particularly aggressive, virulent deadly lung cancer that killed him over about a six-month period, from the time when he first started hacking and coughing up blood, until the time that he died at the hospital, holding his wife's hand, he paid the price. now, we have admitted some fault, and i'll talk to you about that a little bit later, and ask you to consider the fault of philip morris. now, philip morris has not accepted the slightest responsibility at any time, ever, for chris' death. they have continued to argue since the day that we have attempted to hold them responsible, that it is his problem, it is his wife's problem, it is the family, jim's problem, his son, it is not their problem. and they do not -- you can tell from the evidence and by what they have done in this case -- they do not care that their product killed this man. mr. reilly: objection, your honor. "care." the court: overruled. mr. johnstone: philip morris called a single witness, an expert witness that was hired in the washington area, near one of their offices, to come in and tell you what? that this man was not addicted to any cigarettes and was not addicted to philip morris' cigarettes, marlboros. they did not even have a corporate representative, anybody from the company, sitting here during this trial. and that is evidence that they do not care. the court: okay. that is sustained. no more of that. mr. johnstone: yes, sir. they called -- the court: they have a right to defend themselves. mr. johnstone: indeed, they do. the court: so, focus on the evidence. mr. johnstone: the evidence is they did not call any witnesses of any kind after 14 years, 15 years, chris has been dead, they did not call a single witness to go through all of their documents, their statements, their positions, to explain them to you, to describe what their thinking was or anything. they did not do that. and even today, as mr. reilly gets up, he is going to suggest to you that philip morris bears no responsibility whatsoever for this man's death, and that is not what the evidence has been. now, i want to show you the verdict form and i want to show you a little bit of law, so you understand what you are being asked to do. let us take a look, if we can, at cl40, please. now, this is the verdict form. i do not think you folks have seen this, and i think it is important that as we go through this closing argument that i'm offering here on behalf of the family this morning, that you get a better feel of what it is you are being asked to do, so we can discuss the issues in light of what the verdict form and the law is. now, can you enlarge that so that we can see what the -- what it says, please? this is the verdict form. now, each of you jurors that retire to deliberate will have a chance to go over all the evidence and the law and to talk among yourselves to reach a unanimous verdict. you must reach a decision that all of you agree on on each of these issues. this is not a state where you can come back four to two or something like that. each of you have to agree on each of the issues. so, the first issue you are being asked to decide in this case: was christos hatziyannakis addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine; and, if so, was such addiction a legal cause of his death. what has the overwhelming evidence been in the case? we know that by the time chris got to canada and smoked in canada before coming to this country in 1973, '74, he was addicted to cigarettes. that is when he smoked full time, that is when he had cigarette packs in his pocket. and you know from the evidence and from your own experience and your own common sense that he was addicted to cigarettes by the time that he got to this country. and he stepped off the plane in 1973, and the first thing he saw in times square was the huge billboard with the smoke billowing from the cowboy's mouth that he saw with his son, harry. and he became addicted to what? the next question. he became addicted, in this country, to cigarettes containing nicotine manufactured by philip morris. he was addicted to all of the cigarettes that he smoked, including philip morris marlboro cigarettes in this country. so, these are the first two questions. and how are you to decide this? you are to decide these two questions by the greater weight of the evidence, what is more probable. was he probably addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine; and was he probably, more likely than not based on all the evidence, addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine manufactured by philip morris? those are the first two questions. and they are very, very important. and all of your subsequent decisions in the case really, for the most part, are based on answering these first two questions. can we see the next page, please? the court: if i might make a suggestion, the verdict form, of course, will be given to you in the jury room, as will my instructions, so i see you feverishly notetaking. the idea is to still be able to move your right or left hand by noon. so, just some caution there. mr. johnstone: that is a good point. thanks, judge. appreciate it. you guys were able to take notes, and you guys were able to ask questions, and you are going to get the instructions and you are going to get the jury verdict form. so, i'm just trying to get you acclimated right now as we listen to the evidence and what is been in the case as to what you are being asked to do. so, those are the first two questions. was he addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine at all, period; and was he addicted to the marlboros. and i'll show you, in due course, that he was, indeed, addicted. in fact, if chris was not addicted, who was? if chris hatziyannakis was not addicted to cigarettes, and addicted to marlboros that contain nicotine, for all those years that he smoked, who in the heck is? we learned from both experts and from the dsm that the vast majority of people who smoke with any regularity are what? dependent. i'll talk about dr. dosovitz in a minute, but he made it clear that when we are talking about the word "addiction," it means dependent, was he dependent on. now, there is no agreement in this case about what addiction is. you will get different definitions and different phrases and different descriptions of addiction depending on who you speak to. but what is very simple and very easy to remember is that everyone agrees that if you are dependent to any degree on cigarettes, you are addicted. and that is the word i would like you to remember when you try to figure out was he addicted, was he dependent. third question: you are going to be asked to decide whether philip morris was negligent; you are going to be asked, in number 4, to decide if the product that they sold was defective and unreasonably dangerous. then can we go to the next page, please? you will be asked to decide whether the cigarettes that philip morris sold to chris for all those years, beginning in '73, up through '78, '79, and then again from '81 up until the time of his death, were defective due to being unfit for the uses intended or reasonably foreseeable. all right. number 6. did chris reasonably rely to his detriment on any statements of philip morris in this regard. may we see the next, please? i hope this helps you understand what you are being asked to decide. number 7: please state whether chris reasonably relied to his detriment on any act done. we will talk about that. was there gross negligence by philip morris; and, if so, was that gross negligence, was that intentional misconduct a cause of chris' death. all right. and let us see the next question. there will be, on the jury verdict form, an opportunity for you to hold both parties responsible, both chris and philip morris. there is no other party, no other manufacturer, both within this country and manufacturers of cigarettes outside the country, that anyone is suggesting is responsible legally for this man's death. so, let me say it again. the only two decisions you have to make on the apportionment of responsibility is between chris and philip morris. there will be no other manufacturers or cigarette brands in this case on this verdict form for your consideration. and you may, if you like, when you get to the jury verdict room, go right to this page and check for chris hatziyannakis, "yes," absolutely, was he negligent. we have conceded that and admitted that since day one. and it will be up to you folks to determine what that percentage is. we will talk about that a little bit later; and then you will have a chance, at this point, to actually determine to what extent the family is entitled to compensation. and, further, whether philip morris acted recklessly, acted with knowledge that their behavior may well have hurt their customers, whether they were grossly negligent, whether they committed fraud, all right? and if you find that, you may check that in this case philip morris, to some extent, should be punished for its behavior by the award of punitive damages. so, i hope that helps. now, let us go up to cl3, please. now, you will hear from his honor that if you find in the first two questions that we talked about, was there negligence -- excuse me, was chris addicted to cigarettes that contain nicotine, and was he addicted to marlboros, if you find that that is true, that he was, based on the evidence in the case, which i'll talk about, you must consider these findings. these findings are binding on you, and i'm going to read them to you very quickly. if you make those determinations to the first two questions, then you will consider this: smoking cigarettes -- because these have been findings in another case that your honor told you about that are binding in this case. smoking cigarettes causes lung cancer. now we know that now. nicotine in cigarettes is addictive. it is addictive. and, in fact, the first two have been admitted in this case by philip morris. dr. dosovitz wanted to argue about whether nicotine may be addictive or is addictive. it is. they admit it, their expert would not, but they admit it. and these are findings binding on you. next, philip morris placed cigarettes on the market that were defective and unreasonably dangerous. next, philip morris concealed or omitted material information not otherwise known or available, knowing that the material was false or misleading, or failed to disclose a material fact concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes or both. next, you will consider, and it is binding on you jurors in this case, philip morris agreed to conceal or omit information regarding the health effects of cigarettes or their addictive nature with the intention that smokers and the public would rely on this information to their detriment. these are all findings that have already been made. and, again, they are binding on you if you answer "yes" to the first two questions. he was addicted to cigarettes, and he was addicted to philip morris' marlboros. you also must realize that you are bound by this finding: philip morris sold or supplied cigarettes that were defective. philip morris sold or supplied cigarettes that, at the time of the sale or supply, did not conform to representations of fact made by philip morris. and, lastly, you are bound by the finding that philip morris was negligent. now, what i would like to do is to go through some of the evidence with you now, please. and i'm going to stand over here out of the way, so you all can see. i would like to go and discuss with you kind of in chronological order, so we can kind of remember what we talked about, beginning -- i think it was -- i think it was wednesday of last week with dr. burns. we are going to pick up kind of there. now, a lot of information, but it is important information, so i'm going to spend a little time with you on it. in this case, philip morris has admitted the following: these are stipulated facts that they have decided to admit in this case. here's what they have said: we agree with despina that nicotine in cigarettes is addictive. we agree that smoking cigarettes can cause lung cancer. we agree that chris died from a primary lung cancer for which cigarette smoking was the medical cause. now, that is been the evidence, you have seen the medical records, portions of them, and the death certificate. he died of cigarette smoke that he consumed for more than 30 years, most of which were comprised of marlboro cigarettes. number 4: marlboro cigarettes, which were manufactured by philip morris usa, and sold in the u.s., were a substantial contributing of chris hatziyannakis' lung cancer. all right. that is important, because the first two questions are was he addicted to cigarettes that contain nicotine and marlboros that were a legal cause of his death. that is what you are going to see on the verdict form i showed you, and the law that is given you by the judge. and philip morris has actually admitted in this case everything but the last element, that he was addicted. and they have done that because if you find that he was not addicted, despite the overwhelming evidence, they walk out of the courtroom and they are not legally responsible for compensating the family. marlboro cigarettes, which were manufactured by philip morris and sold here to chris, were a contributing, substantial contributing cause of his lung cancer and death. he did not die of any other lung cancer, from any other cigarettes, he died of lung cancer from marlboro cigarettes that he smoked predominantly in his adult life. the last thing that philip morris has admitted and has stipulated to is the following: philip morris admits that it is not claiming and will not suggest to you here in this courtroom that any other american brands, kent, camel, winston, or any other cigarettes smoked by chris in america caused or contributed to cause his lung cancer. and they did that, of course, because for the last 50 years they have worked in unison -- mr. reilly: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. mr. johnstone: now, mr. reilly may try to attempt to tell you that foreign brands of cigarettes caused or contributed to cause his death, and that is for you to decide, and it may or may not be true; but the major competent, substantial contributing cause of chris' death was smoking marlboros. and it is important, after we go through this evidence, on judgment day, that you hold this company accountable for its conduct, and for its behavior and for its peddling of this poison to this man. now, let us go to the next exhibit. (thereupon, the video clip was played and taken down to the best of the reporter's ability as follows:) let me begin my questioning on the matter of whether or not nicotine is addictive. let me ask you first, and i would like to just go down the row, whether each of you believes that nicotine is not addictive. i've heard virtually all of you touch on it, and just "yes" or "no," do you believe nicotine is not addictive? i believe nicotine is not addictive, yes. mr. johnston? congressman, cigarettes and nicotine clearly do not meet the classic definitions of addiction. there is no intoxication. we will take that as a "no," and, again, time is short, if you could just -- i think each of you believe nicotine is not addictive, i just would like to have this for the record. i do not believe that nicotine or our products are addictive. i believe nicotine is not addictive. i believe that nicotine is not addictive. i believe that nicotine is not addictive. and i, too, believe that nicotine is not addictive. mr. johnstone: there is the philip morris ceo, who sells marlboros, testifying under oath, in a congressional hearing, that cigarette smoking is not addictive. it is a lie. it is a lie. it is addictive, and this man was horribly addictive, and there are grades of addiction. dr. dosovitz's testimony the other day regarding whether he was addicted and whether there are degrees of addiction makes no sense. you know better. you have common sense that you can use in this case. we all know smokers who are addicted, we have all seen it, we can smell it, we know what it looks like. and like justice potter, the supreme court justice, who, when asked to describe what pornography is and said, i'm not sure exactly what it is, but i know it when i see it, we know addiction in this courtroom when we see it. and chris hatziyannakis was addicted to cigarettes, the vast majority of his life, and to the cigarettes that philip morris sold him when he got off the plane in new york. next exhibit, please. so, in public -- in public, philip morris is saying nicotine is not addictive. and they did that right up until the time that they were involuntarily made to admit the truth, after chris' death. they never told chris or their other smokers, their other customers, that this was a powerful drug, as powerful as cocaine, morphine, heroin, and that addiction would hook him and make it very, very difficult, if not impossible, to quit smoking. they never told him that. they did the exact opposite. but they knew better. and inside, for years, going back to the 50's and 60's, their private documents, their corporate documents that were generated by many, many of their employees, that we finally were able to show you in this courtroom, said what? can you blow up the first two, please? this is their internal documentation that they never shared with chris or anybody else until they were made to. nicotine is a powerful pharmacologic agent with multiple sites of action and may be the most important component of cigarette smoke. the cigarette should be conceived not as a product but as a package. the product is nicotine. internal document: i am told, that the entire matter of addiction is the most potent weapon a prosecuting attorney can have in a lung cancer case. we cannot defend continued smoking as free choice if the person was addicted. now, i want you to think about that for just a minute. i'm not a prosecuting attorney, but i am an attorney speaking on behalf of the hatziyannakis family. and mr. reilly, and his able partners, are speaking on behalf of philip morris; and he has told you repeatedly, in essence, both in opening and through his questions to the witnesses, that chris had free will, that chris could quit smoking any time he wanted, that chris had a choice, a free choice, to smoke or not to smoke. that is not true. the internal documents -- bless you -- the internal documents, going way back to the 60's and 70's, show that philip morris knew that we cannot defend continued smoking as free choice, which is what is being done in this courtroom if the person was addicted because that free choice is eroded, it is impeded. chris did not know that there are nicotinic receptors in his lungs and his brain, and that every time he took a hit of nicotine that washed through his lungs and in his brain, he was becoming more deeply addicted. he had no idea. not a clue. and philip morris knew and continued to sell these products, knowing that they would hook the most vulnerable, and that there was a strong likelihood over time that they would die of some smoking-related disease. at the bottom, another internal document. do we really want to tout cigarette smoke as a drug? they did not want to do that, but it is, of course. they say it is, of course. next document, please. this is blown up, so that you can see. my remarks in this summation are not directed at any of the defense attorneys. fine attorneys, reputable folks. do not mistake what i'm saying. but, in fact, the attorneys acting on behalf of philip morris are attempting in this courtroom with you to defend the indefensible. that is what they have done for the entire week and a half, two weeks we have been here. we cannot defend continued smoking as free choice if the person was addicted. but that is what they are doing in this courtroom today, despite knowing for 25 or 30 years that that is an illegitimate position to take. next document. (thereupon, the video deposition was played and taken down to the best of the reporter's ability as follows:) q. were you employed by philip morris usa? a. yes. mr. reilly: objection. the court: i'm sorry? mr. reilly: i do not believe you permit playing videos. the court: overruled. incorrect. mr. johnstone: would you start again, please? the court: that is testimony they may present. (thereupon, the video deposition was played and taken down to the best of the reporter's ability as follows:) q. were you employed by philip morris usa? a. yes. q. do cigarettes contain nicotine? a. yes. q. does nicotine find its way into the lungs through anything other than tobacco? a. not that i'm aware of, no. q. are there receptors for nicotine in your lungs? a. yes. q. are there things added to the tobacco that goes into cigarettes which contribute to the addictive properties of cigarettes? a. in my opinion, yes. q. are those additives put into cigarettes by the cigarette companies for that purpose, to enhance the addictive nature of smoking? a. in my opinion, yes. q. is the rate at which nicotine enters the body and gets into the system, to the brain, so to speak, something that the cigarette companies enhance or control? a. they control them, yes. and enhance it. q. all right. and who is in control of these design parameters? a. the manufacturer. q. earlier in your testimony you mentioned that nicotine was manipulated. a. yes. q. is urea another additive that is used in cigarettes? a. yes, it is. q. and what was the purpose of putting urea in the cigarette? a. when you burn urea, it makes ammonia. and ammonia, as we have talked about a little bit earlier, can change the characteristics of nicotine. it can help remove nicotine from tobacco, and it can also change it to the free-base form, which makes it transmit across tissue faster. q. was urea added for that purpose, to free-base the nicotine? a. yeah. they did not need it for any other purpose. so, yes. q. and did the people that you worked with at philip morris, that were involved in it, did they believe or express to you that they believed that that helped them sell cigarettes? a. yes. q. and did they express to you that they knew that smoking was, in fact, addictive? a. yes. q. and did they think that -- that these compounds, ammonia, urea and so forth enhanced the addictive nature of cigarettes? a. yes. mr. johnstone: that is outrageous. was chris hatziyannakis in control of how these cigarettes were manufactured, so that the smoke was like free-base that hit his lungs and then his brain and hooked him right up until the time that he died? this was a man who was so addicted to marlboro cigarettes that even after he got the lung cancer diagnosis, and was shocked and frightened, his addiction was so strong, he continued to smoke. and we know that from clio, who was sitting next to him as he met with his physician before radiation therapy. the only time that he quit smoking permanently after these cigarettes were manipulated and additives were included with the tobacco to hook him was when he had radiation therapy to his chest, which made him so deathly ill, so sick, he could not swallow, he could not eat, and he certainly could not smoke. that is how addicted this man was. do any of you really believe for an instant, after hearing all of this evidence, that chris was never addicted to any degree on cigarettes? he was not dependent on marlboro cigarettes, that he was hiding from his family? do you really believe that? and why would you believe a witness that is brought in from washington, dr. dosovitz, who is the only person you heard from to ever say he was not addicted? why would you believe a word he said when he is been hired by philip morris, who has lied to us for 50 years? would you really believe what he said? was he credible? did you think that his demeanor was convincing? do you think he really believed what he was saying? juxtapose his comments and his testimony with dr. burns. and we will talk about dr. burns, who has worked in the public health service, and has helped edit or write at least five separate surgeon general reports. every question that was asked of him, he was cordial and polite, and answered the question truthfully and quickly and honestly. is that what you watched dr. dosovitz do the other day? and, yes, i was upset. now, i apologize to any of you if i've said or done anything in this courtroom in any way to upset either the court or you jurors; but, yes, i was upset, because i watched him, you saw him. mr. reilly: objection, your honor. the court: overruled. mr. johnstone: now, let us go to the next exhibit, please. going back -- and i'm going to move along here -- going back to the 50's, the public statement that philip morris offered to all of its customers, and this is an environment that they helped create. you younger folks may not recall the 50's, 60's and 70's, when everybody smoked everywhere. but the public statement that was being offered by philip morris was: we accept an interest in people's health as a basic responsibility paramount to every other consideration in our business. we have -- we have and always will cooperate closely with those whose task it is to safeguard the public health. people like dr. burns. a harvard graduate who wrote a huge chapter in harrison's textbook. people like dr. burns, who have spoken out in the public health interest since the 70's. their private remarks, 1977, when the man's here smoking, in new york, hits the tarmac, he is addicted to cigarettes, that is right, and you can hold him responsible for that addiction as he comes to this country. and you must hold these people responsible for the continued addiction that they fostered in him and helped him with and encouraged him with throughout the rest of his lifetime in this country. this family has lived as citizens doing the right things, as immigrant greek citizens in this country, going back to the early 70's. and i'm asking you to hold philip morris responsible to this family for their misconduct, because look what they did. smoker psychology program. first every undertaking has to have some mission. i would state our charter from philip morris in this fashion: study the psychology of the smoker in search of information that can increase corporate profits. yeah. that does not sound to me as though they will cooperate closely with those whose task it is to safeguard the public health. when i asked dr. dosovitz, their paid expert, who they paid something like 70 grand or something to, in this case alone, whether the surgeon general is a recognized medical expert in this country, he said "yes" on the stand; and we went back to a depo he gave two months ago where he said no, he was not, i do not agree with that; is that cooperating closely with those whose task it is to safeguard the public health? look what else they say at the bottom. our position should obviously be supportive of jet's for the primitive reason of "who ain't for more money?" once again, i'm forced of the opinion that the program -- this is the tobacco research council that they set up, that was actually starting to disclose how bad cigarette smoke was and how addictive it was, one of the folks that worked for philip morris said that program seems to be misdirected since its main mission seems to be to prove that smoking causes cancer. well, of course, it does. their cigarettes, they have admitted, caused his lung cancer, but they were not telling the public that. next document. now, this is another employee of philip morris, just like the fellow whose video we just watched a minute ago. and he was asked in deposition, on the stand, and you can read this for yourself. two hundred thirty billion cigarettes philip morris sells a year. we know that they have fifty percent market share, they are the single biggest manufacturer by distribution by volume of cigarettes in the country. next document. they spent $200 million a year, at least during this five-year period, when chris was smoking their cigarettes, they spent in or around $200 million a year in advertising. next document. james morgan was deposed, and john and steve hammer read portions of this, and i want to enlarge the second and third paragraph. bring it down, please. right there. those two paragraphs. thank you. and there is -- this is all in evidence, you can read them for yourselves. early on, we were talking about marketing, and i think i used the word "integration." i think marlboro integrates its products and total proposition extremely well. what does that mean? it means it floods the marketplace with their cigarettes and with their advertisements, all of which chris hatziyannakis saw in this country all through the 70's and 80's. secondly, i think its packaging is excellent. i believe its advertising is excellent. i believe its sales promotion programs are excellent. can you go to the next paragraph? right down there at the bottom. we spent -- we spend a lot of money making sure that things like the tear tape on the cellophane are always in the right position, not defective. we really try to make that brand the highest quality brand that we can make. so, if you are asking yourselves, yes, chris was addicted to cigarettes when he came to this country, why did he start smoking marlboros, it is because of the concerted attempt to make their brand the most interesting, most well advertised, easiest to open, most consistently addictive, both visually and physically, cigarette that you can buy in america. and they did it on purpose. and they knew that. and that is wrong. it is outrageous. next exhibit, please. and so when chris gets off the airplane, and as he drives down 95 and as he heads to miami or tampa or to his son's school, what does he see? you may not recall this, some of the younger folks. these advertisements were plastered all over south florida, and they were in magazines, and he saw them, and we know that as a young father he was taken by the american cowboy, clint eastwood and others, that he admired and tried to emulate. and what does he see? he looks at these and says, gee, that guy looks pretty healthy, he does not look like he is got lung cancer to me, my dad's 98 years old. and he did believe he was going to continue living, and he paid the price. he paid the ultimate price. he is in a grave in memorial -- in hollywood, after leaving memorial, that his wife continues to visit all these years later. he paid the price. what did she do wrong? her name is not on the jury verdict form. mr. reilly: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. mr. johnstone: what did she do wrong? the court: sustained. mr. reilly: motion, your honor. the court: step in the jury room, please. (whereupon, the following proceedings were had outside the hearing of the jury:) the court: i can barely hear you, mr. reilly. mr. reilly: i appreciate -- the court: you need to keep your energy level up for at least another day, sir. mr. reilly: okay. the court: now, what are you talking about? mr. reilly: this is the third improper argument that counsel has made. there is a cumulative effect. even though your honor has sustained my objections to each of his improper arguments, there is a cumulative effect. he is violated -- the court: denied. denied. denied. mr. reilly: well, the argument -- the court: in fact, the first one i admonished him in front of the jury. mr. reilly: you did. the court: so, it had the exact opposite effect. it not only cured any prejudice, it let the jury know he did something wrong. overruled, denied. bring the jury out. you have got to be careful, mr. johnstone. mr. johnstone: yes, your honor. thank you, judge. (whereupon, the following proceedings were had within the hearing of the jury:) mr. johnstone: ladies, on the jury verdict form, as you look at the jury verdict form, there are two parties or two entities that you are to determine were at fault. chris and philip morris. that is it. those are the only two parties that you are going to be considering respective fault. and if you make an award in this case, the verdict will be reduced by that respective fault. for instance, if you were to award a hundred dollars, for the sake of argument, and you found chris 25 percent responsible, the award to the family would be $75. so, when you attach comparative negligence to the respective parties, and weigh their respective fault, please remember that. that is what happens. that is what your verdict means. you hold chris a percentage responsibility and the award is diminished by that. next exhibit, please. again, do not see an oxygen bottle trailing behind this cowboy. looks pretty healthy, virile, another chiseled cowboy galloping across the colorado hillside. and this is what he saw over and over and over again, day-in and day-out, and he made a connection between the strong cowboy actors he saw on tv or in the movies and these advertisements. and so what did he do? next video, please, or next image. he actually dressed his kid, harry -- i'm not so sure about jim, but we know harry -- in cowboy outfits. now, it is not the marlboro outfit, but for a young boy it is pretty close. he is got his badge and his two six-shooters on his hips; and you cannot see it in that photo, but he is got cowboy boots on and his cowboy hat. and even years, years later, 12, 15 years later, chris had around the house -- or harry did, because his father had encouraged him to, a cowboy hat, and he is got jeans on and boots, as well. next image, please. and, so, as chris, with his addiction that he is responsible for, that we agree he should be held responsible for, for smoking brands outside the country, comes to this country to raise his two sons, he starts buying cigarettes by the carton because he is so addicted. he is terrified that he is going to be without cigarettes during the normal day, so he goes to the seminole reservation, out on 441, and picks up as many as two or three cartons at a time, so that he is always got cigarettes; and after they go shopping, he hands it to his wife, and you can see the bag with marlboros inside. next image, please. now, this is the sworn testimony in this courtroom that you heard from dr. burns. again, you will have the ability, as you speak to one another in the back, to talk about dr. burns and whether you found him to be believable, whether you found him to be a credible witness, whether he answered questions directly, whether he had the knowledge and experience to comment on addiction. this is a pulmonologist who has spent many years in intensive care units taking care of smokers with emphysema, and with lung cancer, and with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, who is written and spoken widely on cigarette smoke, cancer-causing agents, addiction, and actually contributed, as i said, to many of the surgeon general reports by either writing portions of it or editing. and he says, when asked: do you know approximately when chris returned to this country and began smoking the marlboros predominantly, if not exclusively? and he is right, the undisputed evidence, since 1973, '74, folks were living in new york, he says: chris hatziyannakis died of lung cancer because he was addicted to the nicotine in marlboro cigarettes. absent that addiction, absent that addiction, he never would have continued the repetitive exposure to all those cancer-causing substances that ultimately resulted in his cancer. question: is there any question in your mind that chris was addicted to philip morris' cigarettes, the marlboros that led directly to his death in 1994? none whatsoever. if philip morris had actually manufactured a cigarette that it did not add ammonia to, urea to, if it did not create a free-base effect that hooked people like chris -- for instance, if they had sold cigarettes that did not contain nicotine or much less nicotine -- chris would not have been addicted to their cigarettes; but they did not do that because they know why people smoke cigarettes. it is not for the flavor or the taste, not really. it is for the nicotine that they manipulate in the cigarettes that they sell the public, including chris, and that is why he was addicted to their cigarettes and that is why he was hooked and that is exactly what they wanted. and now it is time for them to be held responsible. because without you, they will not accept responsibility of any kind. not one percent, not one percent will they say, yes, we have some responsibility, we accept that, we are willing to be held accountable. you jurors are the only people in this case that are able to hold this company, philip morris, accountable. next exhibit, please. the clerk: you are at 50 minutes, counsel. mr. johnstone: thank you. we know that he smoked mostly marlboros, it is undisputed. they have admitted their cigarettes caused his death. next exhibit, please. and there he is, smoking their cigarettes. we gave them everything in the way of documentation, photographs, that we had. we gave them the photographs that they never sent to their expert. the gentleman that they brought to this courtroom, who is supposed to use the dsm-iv as a guide to help him make a determination as to whether chris was addicted, never interviewed or asked to interview the family or to look at photographs -- mr. reilly: objection, your honor. there is no legal basis for interviewing family. the court: overruled. mr. johnstone: he did not ask at any time to interview the family as a psychiatrist. mr. reilly: objection, your honor. mr. johnstone: he did not ask -- the court: overruled. mr. johnstone: he did not ask for the photographs, and they did not send them to him. nor did they send him any of the internal documents that we have been talking about for a week. that is the expert, the only person after all these years, that philip morris has brought in the courtroom. cross-examination by mr. reilly of dr. burns. so, when i finished, mr. reilly got up and he began to ask questions. that was first his chance to examine the witness to make sure that the jury had all the information that he thought was important. and this is what he asked: if, in fact, mr. hatziyannakis -- this is mr. reilly -- began smoking in greece as a young adult, the decision to begin smoking would have been mr. hatziyannakis'; correct? answer: i'm not sure why it would make a difference where he started smoking cigarettes. and what did mr. reilly say? it probably does not. he is just putting a time frame on it. it probably does not matter where he started smoking cigarettes. now, think about that for a minute. it does not matter. not in this case. not in the family's lawsuit that they have brought against this company. it does not matter where he began. they do not walk out of this courtroom because he began to smoke outside the country. that is not the issue you are being asked to decide. what did we learn? was he addicted to cigarettes that contain nicotine, and, later, was he addicted to marlboros? the overwhelming evidence is yes. it does not matter. so, listen carefully when mr. reilly gets up to address you in his summation. and remind yourselves mentally, he is talking about foreign cigarettes, we are talking about issues that he, himself, has admitted does not matter. what else is he going to talk about? they have already admitted that he died from smoking their cigarettes. they already admitted that he was a resident of the state of florida. they have already admitted that cigarettes are addictive. they have already admitted that the cigarettes that are addictive can cause lung cancer, like he had. what else are they going to talk about when they will not accept responsibility? things like whether he started smoking in greece, or whether he smoked earlier in life. it probably does not matter, he said, and he is right, it does not make the slightest difference in this case. so keep that in mind. next exhibit, please. now, dr. burns explained that people smoked everywhere. it was in the environment. it was normal. and we have this belief, as human beings, that things that are normal cannot be very dangerous. what happens is people then consider it normal, it is normal to smoke. and part of what "normal" means is it cannot be very dangerous for you. i mean, it might have a little bit of risk, you know, maybe something's out there, but it cannot be really bad for you because everyone does it. and especially when, as in this case, the tobacco company, philip morris, continued to bomb the public with misinformation and denials. next exhibit. psychological crutch. this is a memo, philip morris, way back in 1964. at some point, reflecting the same seriousness with which we met the report -- the surgeon general's report, '64 -- we must in the near future provide some answers which will give smokers a psychological crutch and a self-rationale to continue smoking. and they did. they said you can quit any time, nicotine is not addictive, it is a choice. you have free will. you like the flavor, everybody smokes. we disagree it is dangerous, it does not cause cancer. you have heard that. and that is not true, and they have known it since 1964, when i was living in winter haven as a five-year-old. next exhibit. mr. reilly: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. do not personalize again, sir. mr. johnstone: yes, your honor. tobacco institute, fraud and concealment. may 1st, 1972. for nearly 20 years, this industry has employed a single strategy to defend itself on major fronts. internal documents from the tobacco institute directly aligned with philip morris. politics and public opinion. while the strategy was brilliantly conceived and executed over the years, helping to win important battles, it is only fair to say that it is not, nor was it intended to be, a vehicle for victory. on the contrary, it has always been a holding strategy, consisting of creating doubt about the health charge, without denying it; advocating the public's right to smoke, without actually urging them to take up the practice, 1972. next document. chris did not know about nicotinic receptors. i wanted you to understand that it is not free will whether you smoke addicting cigarettes like marlboros. it is not just free will. the free will is eroded by the release of chemicals and the pickup in the lungs and brain of the nicotine that sends a cascade or shower of dopamines and other chemicals to the brain. and that is what hooks you, and that is what causes you to have terrible withdrawal symptoms and shakes and nervousness and upset, when you cannot get your fix. when you cannot get your drug delivery device, and get your fix, your brain screams for nicotine. that is what this exhibit was about. it is physiological as well as psychological. next exhibit, please. broken promises. philip morris accepts an interest in people's health. philip morris will cooperate closely. we find -- if we find any components of tobacco smoke that we consider harmful, we will remove them. way back in 1955. we want to be the detective just as much as the surgeon general and the american medical association, we will cooperate in any way. if we find any bad elements in tobacco, we will remove them. it is not true. it was a conspiracy by philip morris with the other tobacco companies in this country to spread misinformation for 50 years. next exhibit. mr. farone. i think we have looked at this. maybe not. have we looked at this? i think we did. that was the testimony. dr. burns, control. philip morris certainly controlled -- this is dr. burns on the stand, the fellow that came in from the university of california san diego where he is still a professor emeritus at the university. philip morris certainly does control the amount of nicotine in their product very closely as part of the manufacturing process. they do it with a variety of different approaches, and they do it very carefully; and then they test it to make sure they have done it. so, they do control the amount of nicotine present in cigarettes. philip morris knew it had to control the amount of nicotine to ensure that people would continue to come back and buy their product. now, on the issue of chris -- and he is worked with hundreds of addicted people -- chris felt, in a sense, angered at the cigarettes for controlling him. that is what throwing them away and stomping on them or stepping on them means. if you are not addicted, you do not see cigarettes as controlling your life and something you need to attack by destroying them. he knew that he was addicted. he told people like george that he was addicted. he even used -- and i cannot pronounce it -- he used a greek phrase to describe his own addiction. and what did their expert say just yesterday to one of you jurors' questions about the following? do addicts come to you and try to deny that they are addicted? and dr. dosovitz admitted, no, they actually tell me they are addicted, they know better than anyone. they are actually very intelligent about that and recognize that they are addicted. i do not remember which one of the jurors asked the question, but that was the question and answer that came yesterday. chris knew he was addicted. he was so addicted, he thought of the cigarettes as some third-party entity, that he had to kill. he threw them on the ground and jumped on them. if you are not addicted, you do not see cigarettes as controlling you. and at the bottom, often when somebody is addicted and quits and says to their family they have quit, when they relapse back, they often try to hide that because they are embarrassed about the fact they cannot control their own behavior. their expert, dosovitz, admitted on the stand that he relapsed. he relapsed. he was dependent on cigarettes. next exhibit. this is important because way back in '64, this gentleman, who was the philip morris ceo at the time, said the following: obviously, a filter -- if you look at the bottom sentence at the top, obviously, a filter takes out certain tar and nicotine. and there was an illusion that philip morris tried to give the public that if you smoked filtered cigarettes, tar and nicotine and other cancer-causing agents would be absorbed by the filter and they would be safer. that is what the testimony has been, and that is what that means. that is the public remark. the private remark is the illusion of filtration is as important as the fact of filtration. it was an illusion. it was not true. despina thought it was true. she spoke directly with her husband, and said, look, if you are going to have to smoke, try to smoke these cigarettes that are filtered; and he did, both du maurier in canada, and marlboros here. and she told us he was under the impression, by smoking those cigarettes, he would please me, and that those filters would protect him from additives and cancer-causing agents. next exhibit. and it was not true. it is a lie. knowledge of carcinogens. philip morris has said since '64, if there are bad elements through our laboratories, we hope we may find them; and if they are found, they will be removed. well, that is preposterous because they had known three years earlier that by that time there were at least 20 known cancer-causing agents, and we need to go to the next exhibit. okay. let us go to the next exhibit. 1968, our basic position in the cigarette controversy is subject to the charge, and may be subject to a finding that we are making false and misleading statements to promote the sale of cigarettes. they knew that back in '68. that it may come to light someday. and they still did it. next example. let us go to the next example. (thereupon, the video clip was played and taken down to the best of the reporter's ability as follows:) we asked philip morris, r.j. reynolds, brown & williamson and lorrilard to appear on this program. none would. they told us to talk to the tobacco institute. the institute said anne browder would speak for them. the case is still open. the jury has not come in. it may not be harmful. you are not convinced? it may be or it may not be. we do not know. mr. johnstone: now, i could go on for another half an hour, but there is not adequate time, and i need to save a little bit of time to speak to you later. and so i'm going to ask you to bear with me for a couple of minutes as we go through the verdict form, and i'm going to ask you to follow along, as i show you what the family recommends that you consider in this case, if we could, please. can we turn this elmo on, please? thanks. this verdict form is, i believe, identical or very, very similar to the one that you are going to get. thank you. thank you very much. we see that judge streitfeld, our judge, is at the top of the verdict form. we, the jury, return the following verdict. one of you will be chosen to serve as the foreperson, and will announce your verdict in open court when you have reached the conclusion or the decisions that you have all decided on. was chris addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, to any degree was he dependent on cigarettes? of course he was. that is been the overwhelming evidence. they called no witnesses, other than dosovitz, to tell you he was not. his testimony, i will suggest to you, was not credible. next question: was chris hatziyannakis addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine manufactured by philip morris usa; and, if so, was such addiction a legal cause of his injury, his death? the overwhelming evidence is of course that it was. now, this is important, please. one of the instructions that you are going to get, the law in the case, on both of these issues will read, essentially, as follows: in order to be regarded as a legal cause of death, addiction need not be the only cause. addiction may be a legal cause of death even though it operated in combination with some natural cause or some other cause, if such other cause occurs at the same time. now, this is what this means: these folks are going to get up and say, the sole cause of his death was his own decision. and we know that is not true. we know that there are two responsible parties in this case. one is chris, we have acknowledged that, and one is philip morris. and i want you to understand that you have the evidence and you have the law to hold both of these folks responsible, and i'm asking you to do that based on the overwhelming evidence in this case. if you look at the next page that you folks are going to get, please state whether the negligence -- forgive me -- please state whether the negligence of philip morris usa -- let me get my glasses -- was a legal cause of chris' death. the answer is yes. and i went through these with you a little earlier; and i'm asking, as you go through the evidence in the case, that you hold philip morris responsible in this case for each of the claims that have been made by the family, both jim and his wife, despina. and you will see as you go through them there are a number of separate claims, and whether he relied to his detriment on misstatements that we have been talking about ad nauseam for days. again, if you get to the bottom, as i believe the evidence suggests you will, if you look at number 8: was there gross negligence by philip morris; and, if so, was that gross negligence a legal cause. was it "a," not the only legal cause, was it a legal cause. please do not be confused by that. there may be more than one reason for chris' death. his own behavior and decision-making, and the acts and fraud and misrepresentation and purposeful hiding of facts without any concern for the consequences of their actions by philip morris. the answer is "yes." please state the percentage of any responsibility for chris' death that you charge to philip morris. now, i have suggested to you based on their superior knowledge, their information going back to the 60's, that they hid from the country, from their fellow americans, and from this man when he moved to this country in the 70's and lived here all through the time of his death in the 90's, that an appropriate distribution of responsibility in this case is philip morris 75 percent, and chris hatziyannakis, 25 percent. all of these decisions on the apportionment of fault, and the compensation to which the family is entitled in this case are your decisions. and you may exercise that power as you deem appropriate based on the facts and the law given to you by the court. what is the total amount of damages sustained by despina hatziyannakis for the loss of her husband's companionship and protection and for pain and suffering as a result of her husband's death? and i suggest to you that you consider in the past, for the 16 years that she is lived without her husband, a figure of $10 million. we know that she is healthy, and that she is going to live, more likely than not, another 15, 20, 25 years. and i ask you to consider compensating her for the death of her husband in the future with $10 million. this is a woman, after her husband's death, who continued to work and goes to hollywood to this day to open and close her shop, and steps out into the dark alone at night, and goes home to her quiet home at eleven, 12:00 at night. she has a picture of her husband at her bedside that she speaks to and prays to each night. she continues to visit his grave. she has told you that he was her life, he is the father of her sons, and she never considered remarrying. she loves him dearly to this day, and philip morris is responsible to some significant degree for that man's gruesome death. the clerk: you are at 70 minutes, counsel. mr. johnstone: thank you. because the eldest son, harry, who you heard from, was over the age of 25 at the time of his father's death, the law in florida does not recognize his claim, and that is why although you heard from harry, and he is a son, he does not have a legal claim in florida because that is what the legislature determined. because jim was 22 when his father died, he does have a claim in florida that is recognized. now, you know how much both of those boys loved their father, you heard from both of them. i'm asking you to consider in this case jim's claim for the loss of his father, his guidance and companionship, his father's inability to ever come to his wedding, meet his wife, see what he does in life, give him help and guidance, and speak to him as fathers and sons do. he is lost that all these years, and will never have a father again. he was taken away from him in 1994. and the figures that i've suggested to you are $2.5 million in the past, and $2.5 million in the future. we already know, because the defendants, philip morris, have already agreed that the total amount of economic damages sustained by mrs. hatziyannakis' husband's estate is $114,609. these decisions that you make are yours alone, and we will respect your decision. the last decision that you have to make today as you retire is the following: under the circumstances of this case, state whether you find by clear and convincing evidence that punitive damages are warranted against philip morris usa. the clear and convincing evidence in this case is that they lied and manipulated and disseminated misinformation and confused and created an environment all through the 60's, 70's, 80's, up and through the time of chris' death, that encouraged smokers to smoke, they directed their message to those that are addicted. their message was not focused on those that do not smoke. their message was focused on the most vulnerable, who were looking for a psychological crutch and reassurance that smoking was not addictive, it would not cause death. that was an outrageous lie. outrageous. and i'm asking you to hold these folks in this courtroom, in this case, responsible. we respect your decision and we thank you. and i'm going to have a couple of minutes to speak to you when mr. reilly is through. i'll have a couple of remarks for you. i've tried very hard to give you the information that you need to make an intelligent, just decision as jurors in the case. i believe that we have been able to do that for the family. thank you. mr. johnstone: okay. i just have a few minutes that i'm going to speak with you before lunch. i know everybody's hungry, you all have been here for the better part of two weeks. please let me respond for a few minutes, and we will get the law and your jury verdict form, and you can get to work on reaching a fair and just verdict in the case. the only personality that does not really change is mr. reilly's. he is a very nice guy, and he is an able spokesperson for philip morris, and he has attempted in his closing statements to, essentially, change the focus and to continue to defend the indefensible. there have been some statements that he made that i would like to address, if i may. the family has accepted responsibility to some extent for all the cigarettes that chris smoked. it is not as though we are suggesting that he is not responsible for cigarettes that he smoked abroad. i told you in opening statement that we provided evidence to the other side and photographs that he smoked certainly in venezuela, and in canada, and we know he smoked in the u.s. now, mrs. hatziyannakis, when she took the stand, never indicated, never told you that he had never smoked at all outside of greece, outside of canada. what she said was that he became a full-time smoker and started actually having a pack of cigarettes in her pocket -- his pocket, rather, he did, in canada, when he started smoking du maurier. that is the testimony, and that is what we have been telling you since the case began. now, let me focus on a few things that were said about what changed, what is different. there is no evidence whatsoever, although i suppose if mr. reilly had chosen to, he could have brought you evidence and spoken to you folks about the advertising and about the public statements that were made by foreign tobacco companies. he did not do that. what changed when mr. hatziyannakis looked in the mirror in 1973, '74, '75, '76, up through 1979, and then all through the 80's and early 90's, is that philip morris, in this case, purposefully targeted, with advertising, people like mr. hatziyannakis, who were the most vulnerable to that advertising. we know why he started smoking marlboros. we know that he was addicted to cigarettes before he came to the country, and we know he was addicted to marlboros throughout his entire life here in this country for the last 20 years of his life. now, there were remarks made by mr. reilly about nicotine patches, professional help. there is been no evidence or testimony that nicotine patches were even available in the last years of this man's life. what testimony was there? professional help? this is a fellow that never went to the doctor. he had been perfectly healthy up until the time that he got sick with his lung cancer and the hacking and the blood in his sputum started to cause him problems and sent him to the doctor. we accept full responsibility for his attempts and his failures to quit smoking. we have heard that he tried to quit as many as ten times. you folks know in your hearts that he was addicted to cigarettes, that is the first question; and you know that he was addicted to marlboros. he smoked them for the last 14 years of his life, almost exclusively. the jury verdict form, the first two questions that you answer, are those first two questions. and it is critical that you understand that dr. burns, a foremost expert in the country on this topic, made it crystal clear that he was addicted to cigarettes and to marlboros. the fellow that they brought from washington, d.c., mr. -- or dr. dosovitz, used for his diagnosis and his opinion that this man was not addicted, the dsm. that diagnosis can be made using the dsm, if you obtain a detailed history from the individual, or if you interview the family and speak to them. he never did any of that. when they put him on the stand to say that he was not addicted to cigarettes and was not addicted to marlboros, he never even went through the criteria with you. they talked about one or two of them and stopped dead. i went through all seven criteria that they used for addiction to marlboro cigarettes, and mr. hatziyannakis met every single one of those criteria. they never told you, for instance, when he tried to suggest that chris was not addicted to cigarettes, or to marlboros, they never discussed with you the following: the most common signs of nicotine dependence are tobacco odor, cough, stains on the finger -- fingers, all of which he had, and you know, from the evidence, is undisputed. this fellow was addicted to both cigarettes and marlboros, and i'm asking that you do your duty and go through the remainder of the jury verdict form and get to the other issues. let us put up a couple of exhibits for just a couple of minutes, please. put up, if you would, cl22, please. now, mr. reilly started talking to you fairly early in his closing remarks about the issues in the case according to philip morris. control: philip morris controlled and manipulated the levels of nicotine in marlboro cigarettes to make them particularly addictive for this man. we know that he struggled for many years to try and quit, he was ashamed of his smoking, it caused tremendous upset in his family; and because of the way in which these cigarettes, with the level of nicotine in them, affected his brain and his willpower, he was unable to control his smoking and able to quit. philip morris controlled and manipulated the levels of nicotine in marlboro cigarettes. on causation, philip morris admits, in this case, that their marlboro cigarettes were a cause of chris' death. so, on the first couple of questions, was he addicted, that is crystal clear. you guys know he was addicted. and then in an attempt to divert your attention, perhaps, from the next easy issue, was he addicted to marlboros, and did that addiction cause his death, as dr. burns told you, he tries to suggest that it is complicated or difficult to understand. they stipulated in the case, admitted -- please put up cl35. they have admitted in number 4 that marlboro cigarettes manufactured by their company, sold in the u.s. to chris, were a contributing cause of chris' lung cancer. so, you have the addiction, you have the medical cause, and you have the legal cause. there is no debate about it, there is no question; and if you permit dr. dosovitz to come in and suggest to you that he was not addicted, it will be a terrible miscarriage of justice. the overwhelming evidence that you know in your hearts to be true, is that he was addicted to cigarettes, and to their cigarettes in particular. dr. burns -- cl8 -- is there any question in your mind that chris was addicted to philip morris cigarettes that led directly to his death in 1994? none whatsoever. that is the legal cause. take a look at cl11, please. mr. reilly put a lot of testimony, a lot of exhibits up to recount what dr. burns had to say. he put up very little about what his expert said, but he consistently wanted to draw your attention to dr. burns. and this is important, because whether he knew it or not, during his questioning of dr. burns, he conceded, through the questions and answers, the following: question: if mr. hatziyannakis began smoking in greece as a young adult, the decision to begin smoking would have been mr. hatziyannakis'; correct? answer: i'm not sure why it would make a difference where he started. and it does not in this case. we are not in this courtroom holding anyone responsible for this man's death but the company that marketed these cigarettes to him for going on 20 years, that he smoked two to three packs of a day for the last several years of his life. they have a legal responsibility to this family that they have shirked for the last 16 years, and it is your -- most respectfully, your duty to hold them responsible to some extent today in this courtroom. please put up cl39. now, we learned in the videotape deposition of one of their employees, the chemist that worked for many, many years with philip morris, that ultimately was fired by philip morris when he spoke out, we learned the following: philip morris has a motto -- and we see the twin horses there, opposing one another -- and it is veni, vidi, vici. philip morris' motto is, i came, i saw, i conquered. now, it is probable that that motto has to do with its battle with other tobacco companies that it was in competition with, but it is also true of what these folks are trying to accomplish in this courtroom in this case. they expect you, essentially, to ignore the last 20 years of this man's life, and all of the misconduct and outrageous behavior of their executives going back to the 1950's. and i suggest to you that if you permit them to do that in this case, then there will not be justice for this family. there will not be a fair verdict reached if you let them leave this courtroom without accepting any responsibility whatever. this gentleman had a chance today to accept some responsibility for this man's death, and he accepted none. he refuses to, and continues to stiff arm the family on any liability by philip morris. the reason that this company is responsible to this family -- put up cl24, please -- because they marketed and sold for, essentially, the entire time this man lived in this country as an american citizen, their cigarettes, knowing that they would hook him, knowing that he may well get sick, and knowing that he would die. that is why they are responsible. take a look, please, at cl36-1. on christmas day, this photograph was taken -- and the actual photographs are in evidence, and you can take a look for yourself -- the effects of this cancer that ravaged this man's body, that they admit they caused, they admitted that, not voluntarily, but -- mr. reilly: objection, your honor. that is not correct. the court: sustained. mr. johnstone: they admitted eventually in this case that the cigarettes they sold this man caused his lung cancer and caused his death; and if you go through the records, you will see, among many other medical terms and descriptions of what happened to this man, you will see that he experienced what is called temporal wasting, which means his head and the temple areas of his head actually began to cave in. the cancer that they caused to some extent in this man's lungs ate his brain from the inside out, and he had seizures, and he died on dilantin, in seizures, unable to breathe, because of the cigarettes they sold him for the better part of 15 years. now, you have the opportunity when you go to your jury verdict form and read the law, you have the opportunity to hold both of the parties in this case responsible. you determine to what extent this particular company is responsible after they have admitted that they caused his death, and you hold chris responsible to the degree that you believe he was. and if you do that, and if you speak to one another and look at the evidence, you will have done your duty, and we respect that and we thank you for that. take care.