16 mr. reilly: thank you, your honor. well, good morning, everybody. you know, i think it is appropriate for me to begin my closing argument somewhat like mr. johnstone did, by saying, as i said to you in voir dire -- and i am the one who said it to you -- that you take on a tremendous responsibility, along with the very power that we give you when you get chosen as jurors in cases. and what i want to spend just one minute talking about is our hopes as litigants and judiciary in civil cases like this. in order for this system to work at its best, what we hope for is that we will luckily select jurors that pay very close attention to the evidence. and, frankly, while i try very, very hard not to look at you during any part of the trial, because i think that is your space, and whatever you are doing is your -- was what you are doing, sometimes when i was standing at the podium, either examining somebody or cross-examining somebody, i would glance in your direction, i would see you taking lots of notes; and you asked lots of questions, and you obviously paid great attention in this trial, and that is what makes this system work. so, on behalf of lucy and me, philip morris, all the lawyers, all the parties, the judge, everybody, you are making the system work; but you got your toughest work ahead of you, right? this is the hard part of your job. not that sometimes i'm sure the evidence was not a little -- a little tedious and a little complicated and -- but, anyway, now we come to the hard part of the job, okay? now, in my opening statement, i said that i look forward to the moment in time -- i reviewed -- i walked you through what i thought was going to be the evidence in the case, right? and i said i look forward to the moment at the end of the trial when, in closing argument, we get to walk together -- and i'm not going to walk through a week of evidence, but we get to walk together again through the evidence that occurred in this trial, and see if it did not turn out to be pretty much what i told you it was going to be. and, in fact, with one area of exception, the evidence turned out to be, frankly, just exactly what i told you it was going to be. just exactly. and we will go over that, and we will go over the one exception. and i told you that at the end of the case, you were going to get written instructions read to you by judge streitfeld, and then given to you by judge streitfeld, and you are. there are going to be multiple pages of dense legal language. but in my opening statement, i said, i think that you can boil all that down to these three words. and i also said, you know what? i'm a guy that uses boards, and you know that i said you can -- well, i said you are going -- you are going to see many of the same boards that i used in my opening statement once again, because that is exactly how the evidence turned out. i do not have to change a thing. but i said all this -- all this legal language can be condensed down into these three words: "control," "causation" and "responsibility." and i said, what is control? control is who was in control of mr. hatziyannakis' decisions regarding smoking. the decision to begin smoking, the decision to smoke multiple cigarettes, the decision to become a regular smoker, the decision to smoke in the various countries in which he smoked, the decision, if he ever decided he wanted to quit smoking, to make an effort to quit smoking, to quit smoking, who made all those decisions? the brand choice decisions, who made brand choice decisions? who made brand choice decisions in every country in which he lived? who made all those decisions? that is who was in control of all those decisions. causation: it is, basically, two questions. two questions in this case were, and are, was he addicted, and was addiction the cause. and you are going to see this term, "legal cause," was it the legal cause of mr. hatziyannakis developing his lung cancer and dying. and you also have the second question of whether or not philip morris played some role, some substantial role, some legal cause role, in mr. hatziyannakis developing his lung cancer and dying. that is causation. bless you. and then i said, once you know the answers to these two questions, as we walk through the evidence, then you are going to be able to assign responsibility in this case. and you heard mr. johnstone say in his closing argument, well, we accept responsibility on the part of mr. hatziyannakis. he said, we accept responsibility for all the smoking history he did outside the united states. you know, there are manufacturers of the cigarettes, who made the cigarettes that he smoked outside the united states, but they accept all the responsibility for all the smoking he did regardless of whether he was in venezuela, greece, or canada. in his closing argument, as he spoke to you just, what -- this was about ten minutes, 20 minutes into his argument, he said, we accept the responsibility of all his smoking in all these foreign countries. but in this case, they want to change that situation when mr. hatziyannakis steps off the plane in new york, and now they want to hold philip morris responsible for the decisions that mr. hatziyannakis made while he was here in the united states. that is what this lawsuit is all about. all right? they say, mr. hatziyannakis is responsible for his smoking behavior outside the united states. what does it mean when they say that they are accepting responsibility on mr. hatziyannakis' part? i put this board up in my opening statement. i said what it means is that they are acknowledging that mr. hatziyannakis' decisions were a direct substantial cause of him getting his lung cancer, only they want that to stop at the border of the united states. they accept that mr. hatziyannakis could have quit smoking in time to avoid his lung cancer, but they want that to stop at the border of the united states. i said, you will not see these two -- these three words on the verdict form, and you will not. you will not. instead, what you are going to see on the verdict form -- and mr. johnstone showed it to you -- are multiple pages of questions. and i'm going to put up the first two questions -- first page. this is the first page of the verdict form. and i just want to walk through the first two questions on the verdict form, especially the first question, because, you know, mr. johnstone said, well, you can go back in the jury room and you can immediately go to the page that tries to apportion responsibility; but you cannot. the court's instructions tell you what to do. and that is your responsibility as jurors. judge streitfeld's going to read you this verdict form, and it is going to tell you how you walk through the verdict form, what your responsibility as jurors is, what you are supposed to do. and what you are supposed to do is answer this question first: was mr. hatziyannakis -- was christos hatziyannakis addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine; and, if so, was such addiction a legal cause of his death? that is actually two questions, is not it? the first question is -- let us just break it up right there. the first question is, was he addicted. was he addicted. and if he was, then you have to answer the second question of whether or not addiction was a legal cause of his death, a legal cause of his death. as we go through the evidence, i'm going to -- we will talk more about whether or not he was addicted. obviously that was a point of significant discussion in this courtroom. evidence was presented on the issue of addiction from two very distinct points of view. one came from a respected member of the public health community, dr. david burns, who the plaintiffs brought you; and the other came from, frankly, in spite of what mr. johnstone said, a very respected member of the medical community, a board-certified psychiatrist, psychiatrist with a subspecialty in addiction psychiatry, a very respected member. he is a former medical school professor, he currently remains a medical school professor on a voluntary basis, yet mr. johnstone characterized him as somebody that -- i do not know. it was odd. odd. they came to this issue in a very different way. dr. burns came from a public health standpoint; dr. dosovitz came from the perspective of a guy, as he described it, a guy in the trenches, a guy who sees people coming to them every day who have -- who use substances. he said, i do not treat heroin patients anymore, they are just too tough. he said, the methamphetamine patients, there are -- virtually a hundred percent of them are addicted. it must be a terrible drug. he treats cocaine, he treats nicotine. what did he say about his patients who come to him, the number of patients who come to him to deal with stopping smoking? he said, look, they represent -- half of my patients are addiction patients, substance abuse patients of one form or another. i have to evaluate them, i have to decide whether they are or are not, and then i have to create a treatment plan for them. matter of fact, i thought it was very interesting, dr. burns was reporting on when he treated patients who had any kind of substance abuse issues, he said, well, it was when i was in the critical care unit; and i said, well, what would you do? he said, oh, well, when we were in the critical care unit, if we had somebody that we thought had a substance abuse problem, we would call for a psych consult. and what was that? i asked dr. dosovitz, what is a psych consult? he said that is where they call for me, people with my expertise, and we come in and we tell the pulmonologists, the internists of the world, is this person really addicted, is this -- how do you deal with this person? and that is the guy that i brought you. and he gave you, from his perspective, after 30-something years of doing this, what he thinks about. and, granted, neither he nor dr. burns ever got an opportunity to examine mr. hatziyannakis; he died many, many, many years ago. mr. johnstone said that dr. dosovitz never even asked to interview the family. nobody says interview the family. if you can interview the patient, you interview the patient. there is no opportunity in this case to interview the patient. there is no law in the state of florida that allows us to require or ask for an interview of the family. i do not know why he said it. there is no opportunity to do that. mr. johnstone: i object. that is a misstatement of the law. i object. the court: restate it. continue. mr. reilly: the bottom line here is, you have to answer this question: was he addicted; and if so, was that addiction a legal cause of his lung cancer and death. and, by the way, if the answer to this question is "no," that ends your work in this case, you will go home. now, mr. johnstone went all the way through the verdict form. i'm sure i'll go all the way through the verdict form, as well; but i just want to point out to you right away, that is a decisive question right there. if the answer to that question is "no," you do no more work in this case and you go home. all right. what does legal cause require? this is the same board i used in my opening statement. i said, look, this is a shorthand way of thinking about legal cause. in order for something to be a legal cause -- and you are going to see the complex language in the instructions the court gives you. law students go to law school for three years to try to figure that out, and lawyers like me try to explain it for the rest of our lives to jurors. it is dense. the shorthand of it is, in order for something to be a legal cause, there has to be a direct connection between whatever it is and whatever the outcome is. for example, for philip morris to have been a legal cause of injury to mr. hatziyannakis, there has to have been a direct connection between philip morris so that there was a substantial impact on mr. hatziyannakis, and then philip morris can be a legal cause. let me give you just an example. mr. johnstone put up a number of documents, a number of old philip morris documents. do you know how many of those were even created during the time that mr. hatziyannakis was here in the united states? i think there might have been one. how many of those -- i'll get to it later. the bottom line is, for philip morris to be a legal cause of injury to mr. hatziyannakis, there has to be a direct connection between something that philip morris did that had a substantial impact on him that resulted in an outcome, the legal cause. and that is true for the addiction as well. and we will go through that in detail. but i said, you know, in order to know the answer to this question, was he addicted and whether or not the addiction was the legal cause of his injury, you have got to know his smoking history, right? you have to know his smoking history. the next question asks, basically, the same thing, but it asks it specifically about cigarettes manufactured by philip morris, period. did he become addicted to cigarettes manufactured by philip morris, and was that addiction a legal cause of his injury. now, you heard mr. johnstone tell you that mr. hatziyannakis became addicted to cigarettes outside the united states, before he ever got here, before he ever got here. did he tell you that that addiction caused mr. hatziyannakis to develop his lung cancer and die? no, you did not hear that. did he tell you that when he set foot on american soil, that all of a sudden the addiction that he said began outside the united states went away? no, he did not say that. did he tell you that when he went back to greece, that the addiction was not there, or that when he came back to the united states, the addiction was not there, that it started here. and where, we will talk about that in just a minute. no, he did not. so, now let us just take a little bit of our time -- because mr. johnstone did not do this -- let us just walk through mr. hatziyannakis' smoking history. and, you know, when this case started, during the discovery phase, when the depositions were being taken, and even straight on through the direct examination, when mrs. hatziyannakis was on the witness stand, what she told everybody was, my husband was not smoking when i met him in 1965, and he did not begin smoking until 1967 in canada. on cross-examination, she said to lucy mason, well, my husband was sneaking some cigarettes in '66 in venezuela. harry hatziyannakis and clio hatziyannakis both came here, and they both reported that mr. hatziyannakis told them -- told them directly that he began smoking as a young man. their impression was it was in greece. at this point, that is the most likely beginning point for mr. hatziyannakis beginning his smoking. you have these pictures of him. now, mrs. hatziyannakis has had these pictures since she moved to toronto in 1967. so, she said, well, these pictures are in venezuela and these are mr. hatziyannakis. does he look like he is sneaking those cigarettes? no. here's mr. hatziyannakis in venezuela in december of 1966, he is smoking cigarettes with a cigarette holder. i'm sorry, i'm probably in your way. here he is with mrs. hatziyannakis at christmastime in december of '66. here he is at christmastime, again, or sometime in december of '66, with mrs. hatziyannakis, and here he is smoking a cigar, there is the smoke from the cigar, in january of 1967, a month later. now, that is clearly not sneaking cigarettes. mr. hatziyannakis was clearly smoking. here he is, what is he in his early 20's? i do not know exactly how old he is. is he in venezuela? did he start smoking in greece? he told his family, i started smoking as a young man. so we still do not know whether the beginning is in greece or venezuela, but here he is in his 20's. that is in the 50's. that is in the 50's. and whoever made these cigarettes, whatever company, we do not know what company made the cigarettes or the cigar that he was smoking in venezuela or greece, but mr. hatziyannakis, based on counsel's statement, he is taking full responsibility for those cigarettes that he smoked, full responsibility. these are the cigarettes -- and that is the question that i was asking dr. burns. he said that i said it did not matter where he began. the question i asked dr. burns was, is mr. hatziyannakis fully responsible for beginning smoking cigarettes? and dr. burns and i at that time were talking about the fact that who knew where he actually began; and so, sure, i said, for that purpose, for the purpose of that question, does it really matter where he started? and dr. burns said, no, it does not matter, because he said, wherever he starts, he is fully responsible for the decision to begin smoking. of course, that is true. whether it is venezuela or greece or canada, it does not matter, he is fully responsible for the decision, of course. all right. and that is exactly what i asked -- sorry -- that is exactly what i asked dr. burns. i said, if, in fact, mr. hatziyannakis began smoking -- and this is a misprint by the court reporter, but it is in the transcript -- in 1967, it should have been, in canada, because that is what mrs. hatziyannakis -- remember, he was the first witness to testify in this case, so we did not have the testimony of mrs. hatziyannakis yet, so that is why i said, in 1967, in canada, the decision to begin smoking there would have been his decision, would not it? and he said the first cigarettes he smoked in canada would have been his decision, sure. sure. and then i went through with dr. burns, well, the decision to continue smoking. in fact, if it took him a period of time to become, in your opinion, addicted, the cigarettes he smoked during that time would have been solely an unencumbered decision on his part to continuing smoking at that point in time; correct? yes. he was being urged on by friends, but it was certainly not an addiction-driven choice. now, how long did that last? there was another question i asked of dr. burns. let me make this real simple. for whatever period of time mr. hatziyannakis was not addicted, the decision to smoke each cigarette he smoked was his decision alone, was not it? and he said, yes. dr. burns thinks he was addicted, but he says, look, until he is addicted, he is the only one who makes the decision. i said, how long is that going to take? do you have an opinion -- oh, this is a question by mr. johnstone: do you have an opinion, more likely than not, when chris became addicted to the nicotine that was contained in the cigarettes he was smoking? now, those cigarettes are in either greece or venezuela, right? he probably became addicted within the first four or five years of the time he was smoking. now, we still do not know when that four- or five-year time frame expired, but just to make sure that the design of the cigarettes was not of any significance in differentiating cigarettes in the united -- the marlboro cigarettes in the united states, or any of the foreign cigarettes that he smoked, to make sure there was no design difference of any significance in this case, i asked this question of dr. burns. i said: no cigarette has a greater or lesser propensity to develop addiction in smokers, does it? no cigarette, whether it is in venezuela, greece, canada, or a marlboro in the united states, no cigarette has a greater or lesser propensity to develop addiction in smokers, does it? and his answer was: as far as we know currently, we cannot distinguish any addiction potential for different cigarettes. it is possible that might exist, but we cannot distinguish it at this point in time, period. is there anybody that said anything different? one guy, an ex-employee of philip morris that was fired more than 25 years ago. but here is their public health expert, the guy who is written all these chapters, the guy who is done all this work, here he is telling you there is no difference. and mr. johnstone just acknowledged, and dr. burns has already said, this guy is addicted to the nicotine in his cigarettes in wherever it is. is it greece, is it venezuela, is it canada? i went further with dr. burns on this point. i said: are all cigarettes equal in terms of their propensity to cause lung cancer? i said: the cigarettes in greece caused people who smoked them in greece to develop cancer of the lung and other diseases? certainly did. just as readily as cigarettes in venezuela? as far as we are able to determine at this point, yes. they certainly all had that capability. they certainly all caused large numbers of lung cancer deaths in their population. the same is true in canada, and the same is true in the united states. both canada and the united states have also had large numbers of people who died from smoking cigarettes manufactured in their own country. no difference, no place, no design difference, period. and that came from their expert. did the cigarettes that he smoked in venezuela, greece, canada, play a substantial role in mr. hatziyannakis developing his lung cancer? this is their expert, dr. burns. i said: doctor, if he had quit smoking in 1981, would he more probably than not have developed lung cancer anyway? and he said: maybe yes, maybe no, cannot tell. the fact is, he did not quit smoking, and consequently all the smoking he did before 1981, ends up contributing to his ultimate development of cancer; correct? and he said: all before and all after, because he did not quit, yes. because he did not quit, yes. that is their expert. that is their expert. here he is. if he is smoking in greece, when he gets to venezuela, and he gets off the plane, this is -- you remember i did this with dr. burns? unfortunately, we had many steps because -- we had many stops; right? and i said: doctor, when he gets off the plane, this time in venezuela, he is got two decisions to make; i'm going to stop smoking or i'm going to continue to smoke; and if i'm going to continue to smoke, i've got to select a brand, right? and dr. burns said, that is right. 1965, mrs. hatziyannakis meets mr. hatziyannakis. they meet in greece, they date. she says, in trial, he is not smoking. you see the pictures. you see the pictures. now, in trial, she said, yes, in 1966, he started to sneak cigarettes, he was sneaking, that is what she said. lucy mason was cross-examining her. you see the pictures. why she characterized it that way, i have no idea, honestly; but pictures are worth a thousand words, so i'll save you a thousand words. but the bottom line is, obviously, he was a regular smoker in venezuela, and now you know that, unfortunately, because of the earthquake the family moves to canada. and, again, when mr. hatziyannakis gets off the plane in canada, where he is going to start new businesses and have a new life, he is got two smoking decisions to make. and you know from mrs. hatziyannakis' testimony that as soon as she saw him smoking in venezuela, she told him, look, i hate smoking, smoking is bad for your health, smoking is addicting, you are going to -- you are not going to be able to quit, and what did she say he said? she said he said, well, i'm only going to do it for a while because i'm under a lot of stress. she said, do not do it, i hate it, it is bad for your health, you can die. how did she know? because she learned it in sunday school and she learned it from her dad. so, ten years before mr. hatziyannakis ever gets here to the united states, his fiancee, future wife, now his wife, tells him, do not smoke. and you heard my exchange with dr. burns. i said, you know, he has a choice, does not he? he can do what his wife asks him to do, or he can decide not to, cannot he? and dr. burns says: yes, he should have listened to her advice, husbands oftentimes should, but he chose not to. anybody else play a role in that decision? is philip morris anywhere in this picture? mr. johnstone has said they accept full responsibility for the decisions he made when he gets off the plane in canada and chooses a brand. now, the manufacturer, whose brand he chose, makes a cigarette called du maurier. my french is worse than terrible, far worse than terrible. no one is attempting to hold the manufacturer of du maurier cigarettes responsible in this case, their cigarettes are just as addicting, just as capable of causing cancer, and they played just as much a role in mr. hatziyannakis getting his lung cancer in this case, but no one is holding them responsible in this case. no one is trying to. mr. hatziyannakis -- or they are accepting full responsibility for the decisions that mr. hatziyannakis made in smoking every du maurier cigarette that he smoked, every cigarette he smoked in canada, every cigarette he smoked in venezuela. is there any evidence in this case that there were any warnings on the du maurier cigarettes? none. but mrs. hatziyannakis is there, telling him, do not smoke, do not smoke, frequently, you heard it, frequently, vigorously, angrily. is mr. hatziyannakis a guy, before he even gets to the united states, that does not know that there is a risk in smoking, that there is a risk in developing illness and dying or becoming addicted? his wife has told him a thousand times. 1971, he smoked in canada for four years and moved to greece; right? he wanted to get out of the cold climate of canada, wanted to go home, go to greece. once again, he gets off the airplane, he has a couple of decisions to make about smoking. my decisions are, am i going to continue to smoke. if i'm going to continue to smoke, what brand am i going to smoke. and when he gets off the plane, he makes the same decisions, right? i'm going to continue to smoke, i'm not going to do what my wife says, i'm going to continue to smoke. he chooses a brand. we do not know what brand he chose. there was a discussion of karelia cigarettes, a greek cigarette, but i do not think there was a real identification for sure that that was the brand that he smoked there. but whatever he smoked, for some reason they distinguish between the full responsibility they take for every cigarette he smoked in greece, but not the marlboros he smoked in the united states. did philip morris play any role in his decision to smoke greek cigarettes? absolutely none. you know that. he is nowhere near the united states yet. nowhere near there. you know he opens new businesses in greece, he stays -- the family stays in greece until 1974, when they move to the united states. now, this is the first time they will have set foot on american soil. and let us stop for a moment and ask ourselves, so what is the situation before he ever smokes his first marlboro? well, the situation is they have already said he is -- they have said he is addicted, addicted to the cigarettes that he smoked outside the united states. so, if he is addicted, as they say he is, he is addicted. they say -- well, by this time, how many cigarettes has he smoked in greece? mrs. hatziyannakis said he was smoking two packs a day. that is 40 cigarettes a day. she said he was smoking a pack and a half in greece, but you guys figured out that is 25 cigarettes to the pack, a pack and a half is really two packs of 20 cigarettes a day. or a cigarette off. so, mr. johnstone says, well, that is -- he does a calculation. you can do the same calculation. going back how many years now? are we back to the mid- to late 50's, has he been smoking for 15 or 20 years? how old is he before he sets foot -- the moment he steps foot in the united states, how old is he, and makes the decision to smoke his first marlboro? he is 38 years old. after having smoked for 15 or 20 years, here's a marlboro ad. they want you to conclude that somehow this marlboro ad, with a warning right on it, caused mr. hatziyannakis, at age 38, to do what? he is already been smoking at the rate of two packs a day in greece, he is gone to the store to buy more cigarettes in the united states. what did -- what impact -- i mean, you guys did not leave your common sense at the front door. what impact did that have on a guy that they say was addicted and has now been smoking cigarettes at the rate of two packs a day for how long? fifteen years, 20 years. that is a puzzle. what about all the advertising that occurred in greece and venezuela? they are not claiming any responsibility on the part of the manufacturers who advertised their cigarettes in greece or venezuela or canada. what about the du maurier ads? oh, and by the way, just so we are perfectly clear about this, mrs. hatziyannakis said he smoked some cigarettes called marlboro in canada. there is no relationship between the cigarettes called marlboro in canada and philip morris' usa manufactured marlboros. there is no dispute about that. let us clear that up. now -- and, by the way, here are the pictures of mr. hatziyannakis smoking in canada. here are the du maurier cigarettes. here he is smoking pipes. he smokes pipes, he smokes du mauriers. there you go. all right. now, what is the situation in terms of a warning when he gets off the airplane in the united states? let me just take these down. well, the situation is that there is a warning not only on every pack of cigarettes, there is a warning on every ad in a magazine, there is a warning on every billboard here in the united states. what is that warning? it says: warning: the surgeon general has determined that cigarette smoking is dangerous to your health. now, somebody might say, oh, well, that warning's kind of little, but that warning was spotted by mrs. hatziyannakis, and she read it, she understood it, she translated it, she said it to her husband in greek. she said, look, look, there it is, a warning on every pack of your marlboros says this is dangerous for your health. if her message had not gotten through to mr. hatziyannakis in venezuela or greece or canada, there it is, in black and white, on every ad, on every billboard, on every pack of cigarettes here in the united states, every marlboro pack of cigarettes he smoked, every marlboro pack of cigarettes he bought. now, they say -- they say mr. hatziyannakis -- that somehow this ad caused him to do something. i cannot figure out what the something is, though, because he is already, by their description, a committed, addicted smoker, right? so, that ad, obviously, does not make him begin to smoke, and he is already smoking. but i asked -- i asked harry hatziyannakis, the eldest son, i said, why did your dad pick marlboros? i said, your father never told you why he selected any given brand of cigarettes, did he? he said we really -- we never had a conversation about it. you could stop that answer right there. we never had a conversation about it. but he went on to say, but i -- he always liked going with big name brands -- well, there is no question that marlboro is a big name brand -- thinking that, you know, it is always a safer way to go when you buy name-brand stuff. for quality? yes. there you go. i'm going to run out of space here. all right. so, now, what is different about the situation and the responsibility when mr. hatziyannakis lands in the united states? why is it that now all of a sudden, in this courtroom, that is supposed to be a different situation than -- here's all the blue. you see the colors? this is all the blue smoking that he is -- that they say he is responsible for, before he gets to the united states. and then they say, well, when he steps off the plane -- every morning in the mirror when mr. hatziyannakis gets up in greece, venezuela, canada, and he looks in the mirror and he says, today i'm a smoker, i'm smoking today, i'm smoking my two packs today, in all those foreign countries, he is the only person in the mirror, the only person to be held responsible. but when he steps into the bathroom in the united states, all of a sudden they want you to put philip morris in the mirror with him. their cigarettes are no more dangerous, no more addicting than all the cigarettes he smoked right here. but for some reason they are now supposed to be in the mirror, too. why is that? does his responsibility change when he gets to the united states? does it change when he is addicted? this is their expert, dr. burns. i asked him: even after in your estimation he became addicted, mr. hatziyannakis does not lose the responsibility for smoking his cigarettes, does he? this is their expert. that is his complete answer: he does not. that is his complete answer. all right. the warning stays on every pack, every ad, et cetera. mr. hatziyannakis creates new businesses, they move from new york city, to arizona and back, and then because of an illness in her family, and because they want to have -- be closer to home, and new business opportunities, they move back to greece. now, i cannot imagine what it is that differentiates mr. hatziyannakis and his responsibility when he gets back to greece; but mr. johnstone said, you know what? when he does his foreign smoking, he is completely responsible. so, when he gets off the airplane in athens, all of a sudden because he goes to the store and instead of buying marlboros, he buys karelias, or some other greek brand, he is fully responsible again. what -- what happened? he is in greece now for another three years, '78 to '81, smoking two packs a day. he opens that bicycle carrier business. you know, this guy is smart, he is entrepreneurial, he is disciplined, he is successful, he is intelligent. what happened that makes this difference? it certainly is not because he ever heard or saw anything from philip morris or any other american cigarette manufacturer other than ads with warnings on them. how do we know that? well, first of all, no family member -- and they all came here -- not one family member came here and said my father ever heard or saw anything from a cigarette manufacturer ever, other than the ads for marlboros. nothing. so, all these things that mr. johnstone puts up -- and remember, look at the dates on them -- but all these things that mr. johnstone talks about, nobody ever came here and said that anything that philip morris ever said, other than those ads, was ever seen by mr. hatziyannakis. and i confirmed that with -- i'm going to leave it there -- i confirmed that with their expert, dr. burns, who said, i read all the depositions of all the family members in this case. and i said, doctor, you saw in the depositions of his family members that they testified at no time did he tell any of his family members that he ever saw any statement by philip morris or any other cigarette manufacturer or the tobacco institute or anybody else connected with the tobacco industry during the time that he lived in the united states, right? dr. burns said: i think that is a bit of an overstatement. what is clear is he never saw a statement by the tobacco industry that was significantly important to him that he would have discussed it with his family members in a way that was significantly memorable to those family members that they remembered it and reported it in deposition. that is a long-winded way of saying no. no. all right. and besides, since at least 1965 or 6, mr. hatziyannakis has been hearing from his wife regularly, loudly, angrily, you are killing yourself, you are addicting yourself, i do not want you to smoke. now he hears it -- when he goes back to greece, he is hearing it from his own parents, he is hearing it from his in-laws. during the time that he was living in the united states, '74 to '78, every pack told him, every ad told him. there is no failure to warn claim in this case. they are not claiming philip morris failed to warn him about something. 1981, family moves back. when he steps off the plane, they want to have a new situation. they want to go back to now mr. hatziyannakis is not fully responsible for all the cigarettes that he smokes, now philip morris is supposed to be back in the mirror. what is different? there is still a warning on every pack. there is still no -- no seeing -- and is it any surprise -- mr. hatziyannakis, you heard, does not really read english very well. is there any surprise on the part of anybody that no family member came here and said mr. hatziyannakis ever said, i heard anything from philip morris or any other cigarette manufacturer or anybody else connected with the tobacco industry here in the united states that misled me in any way? in any way. never said that. all right. 1981 to 1988, they say mr. hatziyannakis smokes two to three packs a day. maybe he does. i do not know. but what i do know is that the testimony was, from harry hatziyannakis and clio hatziyannakis, that around 1988, or thereabouts, mr. hatziyannakis says, i quit. he quit for a period of time, and then for the next five years, until his death, nobody sees him smoking. now, occasionally -- now, occasionally, there are exceptions to that. when harry goes off to the gulf war for a period of time, his dad was then smoking openly. when mrs. hatziyannakis' has gallbladder surgery, he resumes open smoking. but the rest of the time they do not see him smoking, and occasionally they see indications that he is smoking, because they see the packs of cigarettes around, or they see ashes and they confront him with it. not just one family member, but as a group. you heard about it. as a group, they would come to him and say, hey, husband, hey, dad, hey, father-in-law, i see residue, i see indications that you are smoking. and what was his answer? he would say, i'm smoking one or two. now, maybe he was smoking more than that; but what you know is that if you are not smoking in front of your wife, if you are smoking in front of your children, that means when you get up in the morning, you cannot smoke. that means when you are having breakfast and coffee, you cannot smoke. it means that when you are driving with your wife to the shop, you cannot smoke. the only time you can smoke is when you are driving -- after you dropped her off, you can drive on to the mobil station, you can smoke at the mobil station, and you can smoke from the mobil station back to the shop. that is how long he can smoke, and that is a half-day job for him. and that is it. because the rest of the day you are with your wife, and you cannot smoke. that means you cannot smoke before dinner, you cannot smoke after dinner, you cannot smoke in the evening, you cannot smoke on the patio when you are listening to music. you cannot smoke. you cannot smoke before you go to bed. and you remember that harry, even though he is a student, even though he is not spending a lot of time at home, he is still at home until he gets married in 1992. and you did not hear any different information from mrs. hatziyannakis. in 1993, when he is diagnosed, does he quit? it is a little unclear. mrs. hatziyannakis said he quit. did he quit -- did he quit because he could not smoke? i do not know. you know, i asked dr. burns -- oh, and by the way, in 1985, you know that the warnings on the packs changes. in 1985, the warnings on the packs changes, and now it says: smoking causes lung cancer, heart disease, emphysema, and can complicate pregnancy. smoke contains carbon monoxide. it says: quitting now greatly reduces your -- can greatly reduce your risk of disease. it is rotating warnings. all right. all right. you know, i asked their expert, dr. burns. can every smoker quit? this is what i asked dr. burns. i believe that nicotine addiction can be overcome, and there is no addiction that cannot be overcome. that is their expert. this goes to the question of control and legal cause. will people quit smoking -- excuse me -- if they are not motivated to quit? if you do not want to quit, are you going to quit? i asked harry, his son: but, frankly, you do not even think your dad was motivated to quit until the late 80's, do you? his answer was: i do not think so. back to that original word "control." who is in control of mr. hatziyannakis' decisions regarding his smoking? who is in control? well -- and remember what harry went on to say was, i believe the only reason why mr. hatziyannakis became motivated to quit smoking after that was because he just wanted to avoid all the argument that we were giving him. he wanted to get us off his back. that was exactly what he said, get us off his back. you know, you would think, based on mr. johnstone's argument, that dr. dosovitz and dr. burns were completely at odds in this case, would not you; but, in fact, they agree -- let me see if i can get out of everybody's way -- that the decision to begin smoking was mr. hatziyannakis' alone. the decision to continue smoking was mr. hatziyannakis' alone. mr. hatziyannakis continued to smoke for years without being influenced by addiction. obviously, dr. dosovitz believes he continued to smoke his entire smoking career without addiction. he could have quit anytime, if he was sufficiently motivated, expended enough effort, and had the right circumstances and support to quit. they both agreed on that. who was in control? what is different -- what is different about what happens in the united states versus what happens in any one of those other countries? what is different? mr. hatziyannakis is totally responsible in every other country, but he has no responsibility here. how can that be? all. right. on this issue -- let me put this down. addiction was described as compulsive smoking, right? compelled smoking. loss of control. when dr. dosovitz was describing his determination that he thought that mr. hatziyannakis had not truly been addicted, he said, look, i looked at several factors, because i try to get as much in-depth information as i can. for dr. burns it was, if you smoked a lot of cigarettes over a long enough period of time, and i see that you tried to quit and you did not quit, you are addicted. very simple. works for the public health guy. that is okay. for dr. dosovitz, who has to deal with these people every day, every day, he said, you know what? and he said, i apply this criteria across the board, whether i'm dealing with somebody that is a heroin -- or he does not do heroin anymore -- a cocaine addict or a meth addict, an alcoholic, somebody that wants to quit smoking, i look to see, you know what, do they have a loss of control, really? and he looked at, in particular various instances that he talked to you about, especially the end of '88 through '93, where mr. hatziyannakis does not smoke in the presence of his family, except on those few occasions, and he said, you know, that is to me -- to me, that is real control, that is not compulsive smoking. withdrawal symptoms, he said, you know what, i need to know whether or not -- the hallmark of addiction is you are going to have withdrawal symptoms. what are they? he said it is not the shakes, that is not what people get. you can get that with alcoholism, you can get that with a lot of other addictions, but what you are going to get is irritability, sleeplessness, anger, loss of concentration, that sort of thing. and that was asked of jim and harry, and nobody reported it. they said his personality never changed. clio, personality never changed when he was smoking, when he was not smoking. failed self-motivated quitting. well, there never was any failed self-motivated quitting because harry said he was not really interested in quitting until '88, until the late 80's, and he said, even then it was to get us off his back. that is what dr. dosovitz found significant. mr. johnstone, on cross-examination, asked him about, well, did not it materially affect his lifestyle? were not there people that would not come over to his house because they did not want to go to a house where a guy smoked? and dr. dosovitz said, well, you know what, the guy had a rich social life. you remember he went to minos' restaurant to sit and chat with minos and his wife, jeanne, in greek, smoking cigarettes, drinking coffee. he was described as a guy who had a social life, went to church, et cetera. dr. dosovitz said, you know what, a two-hour long service, if you get up at an hour and go and get a cigarette, that is, to me, an indication of control, not an indication of addiction. it is a judgment call. it is a true judgment call. and that is exactly what you guys now have to make, because judge streitfeld is not going to give you an instruction that says this is how you determine whether or not somebody -- whether or not mr. dos -- i'm sorry, whether or not mr. hatziyannakis was addicted or not. you are going to have to -- you have listened to all the evidence, now you are going to have to make a determination. i know that is kind of hard, because ordinarily on everything else, you are going to get guidance. on this one, you do not. okay. dr. dosovitz also said, you know what, i also look to see exactly how committed you are to quitting, and so i look for how many methods you have attempted in order to quit. if you are really committed to quitting, if you try cold turkey and you fail, you know if you are really committed to quitting, you are going to do something else. you are going to try the patch, you are going to go for professional help, you are going to ask for a prescription, you are going to go to a clinic, you are going to do something. he talks to these folks every day. every day. but mr. hatziyannakis did not do any of those things. they suggested because he did not know about any of them. i leave that to you to decide whether that seems credible or not for an intelligent guy. you know, when he got here in 1981, how old was he? he was 45 years old. forty-five years old, in 1981, when he came to the united states and became a permanent resident, a citizen. forty-five years old. he is no kid. this is not a case involving somebody who is 15 and deciding, without information, whether or not he is going to smoke a marlboro or not. this is a gentleman who is 45 years old, making the decision when he returns here from greece, whether he is going to smoke a marlboro or not. okay. i'll go to the verdict form and i'm just going to walk through it. you have been very patient with me. i appreciate it. all right. mr. johnstone said both of these questions should be answered "yes." i would suggest to you that both of these answers should be answered "no." in fact, if you answer this one "no," you do not have to do anything else, because that is the end of it. even if you were to decide that mr. hatziyannakis was addicted and that his addiction was a legal cause of him getting cancer and dying, you have got to ask yourself, well, what addiction was it? i mean, they have already said he was addicted before he ever got to the united states, so what addiction compelled him to continue to smoke? if that is what you conclude, what addiction compelled him to continue to smoke? so, i think the answer to that one would be "no" even if the answer to that one was "yes." and this one says: please state whether the negligence of philip morris was -- oh, and by the way, any findings that -- by another jury at another point in time have nothing to do with answering these questions. these are just yours to answer alone, period. next question says: was the negligence of philip morris a legal cause, a legal cause, a legal cause, a legal cause, of mr. hatziyannakis' death. well, you would have to find -- and here's a guy who they have said has full responsibility for everything he does, except when he is here in the united states; and then they are claiming that philip morris ought to take on the responsibility because they are the maker of the cigarettes that he smokes in the united states. puzzling. you would have to find that all of a sudden they become the legal cause, they become the substantial reason why he gets lung cancer. does that make any sense? but the manufacturers of the cigarettes that he smokes in greece, canada, venezuela, are not, even though dr. burns said they all contributed to him getting his cancer. so, i think the answer to all of these questions is "no," and then you come to, please state whether mr. hatziyannakis reasonably relied to his detriment -- reasonably relied to his detriment on any statement by philip morris which concealed or omitted material information concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes; and, if so, whether such reliance was a legal cause of his death. well, dr. burns told you the answer to this one. no one came to the stand and said, yes, he relied on some statement by philip morris. the answer to this one is so obvious, no, that it is -- i mean, all you have got to do is look at the testimony of dr. burns and you know the answer to that one. that is the same thing right here. please state whether mr. hatziyannakis reasonably relied to his detriment, reasonably relied to his detriment, on an act done in furtherance of an agreement to conceal or omit information concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes; and, if so, whether such reliance was a legal cause of his death. dr. burns just told you there is nothing that anybody reported that mr. hatziyannakis ever said that he relied in any way, that he even heard anything from philip morris or any other cigarette manufacturer, much less relied on something that was said or unsaid. number 8 says: was there gross negligence by philip morris; and, if so, was that gross negligence a legal cause of mr. hatziyannakis' death. and, again, you have to make up your own mind about this entirely. what is it? what is it that philip morris did in connection with mr. hatziyannakis that mr. hatziyannakis ever -- what was his total interaction with philip morris? it was he saw ads with cowboys, and he bought cigarettes manufactured by philip morris. that is it. the same type of cigarettes that he bought everywhere else in the world, the same cigarettes that dr. burns said equally contributed to him getting his cancer and dying; and yet those companies are not being held responsible in any way, no claim, they are accepting full responsibility for his smoking of those companies' products, those companies' cigarettes. and yet philip morris does the same thing, makes the cigarettes that he buys, and they are supposed to be grossly negligent now. then you have to assign a percentage of responsibility of mr. hatziyannakis and to philip morris, if you get this far on the verdict form. and mr. johnstone said, well, i think that the split should be 25/75, 75 percent on philip morris, although he accepts full responsibility for all the cigarettes manufactured by all the companies outside the united states. how can that be? how can it -- i mean, it is -- the idea that all of a sudden when he gets to the united states, he looks in the mirror -- up to that point, it is only mr. hatziyannakis looking in the mirror, deciding whether he is going to smoke; and now, all of a sudden philip morris takes on a 75 -- must be more than that, it must be a hundred percent responsible to get a 75/25 split. must be a hundred percent responsible for mr. hatziyannakis deciding he is going to smoke cigarettes in the united states. i just do not understand how it is different for the manufacturers outside the united states, the manufacturers -- and philip morris inside the united states, when the products are the same, the results are the same, and mr. hatziyannakis sees nothing more than ads with warnings on them. that is the -- that is the entire interaction. now, i'm not standing here and telling you that everything that philip morris ever said or failed to say about the health risks of smoking was right or that they would do it today or they have done it in the last ten years, i'm not doing that. i told you that in my opening statement. but there has to be a legal cause requirement. it has to have an impact on mr. hatziyannakis. it has to. and you cannot overlook that in doing your job. that is just the way it is. that is the law. and that is your responsibility. if you get this far in the case, mr. johnstone said you should put 10 million here, 10 million here, two-and-a-half million here, two-and-a-half million here. you know what? i'm not going to comment on that. you are a wise jury, you will make a wise decision. yes, this number is 114,000, we agreed to it, but that does not mean we agree that that is a number that -- that you should award in this case. that is all controlled by the prior answers to the prior questions. and then we come to the final question: under the circumstances of this case, please state whether you find by clear and convincing evidence that punitive damages are warranted against philip morris usa. and this is the punitive damage standard. intentional misconduct -- and you will get this exact language -- intentional misconduct means that philip morris usa, incorporated, had actual knowledge of the wrongfulness of the conduct and there was a high probability of injury or damage to christos hatziyannakis, and, despite that knowledge, it intentionally pursued that course of conduct, resulting in injury or damage. philip morris made the same kinds of cigarettes that all the other manufacturers did. there is not even a whisper of responsibility on our part. mr. hatziyannakis has accepted full responsibility for doing the very same thing that they did, they want to hold -- in connection with mr. hatziyannakis, they want to hold philip morris and punish them, punish them. all right. you know what? you have been very patient and very attentive, once again, as usual, and, so, let me conclude this. and lucy was very kind to let me make the entire closing argument. you know she wanted to do this. okay. i'm going to sit down. mr. johnstone gets a second bite at the apple, he gets to get back up and he gets to talk to you again. why? because they have the burden of proof in this case. they have the burden to prove to you that everything i just said to you is wrong, everything i just said is just flat wrong. they have the burden of proving this case to you, most of it by the greater weight of the evidence. this punitive damages -- some of these punitive damage issues are by clear and convincing evidence, an even much higher standard. and that is why he gets a second bite. i do not know what he is going to do in his closing argument. he may show you more old documents, he may say, well, here's the difference between the manufacturers in europe and south america and canada and philip morris. but you know what? at the bottom, bottom, bottom line, ask yourself -- number one, ask yourself, what is the interaction with mr. hatziyannakis? he saw these ads, he smoked their cigarettes. that is it. in canada, he sees their ads, he smokes their cigarettes. they are equally as dangerous, equally as potentially addictive. in greece, same story. in venezuela, same story. same story. he may get up and show you more old documents. i just ask you to ask yourself this: when you are looking at that document, ask yourself, where is mr. hatziyannakis? what does this document have to do with mr. hatziyannakis? for example, the testimony of the ceo's before congress, where was mr. hatziyannakis? he had already died. that -- that clip, he did not show you the clip, he gave you the quote of the guy commenting on the -- being interviewed after the surgeon general's report, where was mr. hatziyannakis in 1964? he is in either greece or venezuela. he is not here, watching american television. he may put up an old ad or something. ask yourself, where is mr. hatziyannakis? does mr. hatziyannakis see this? he showed you the frank statement. 1954. where was mr. hatziyannakis? he is either in greece or venezuela. is there any evidence in this case that mr. hatziyannakis saw the frank statement? the clerk: you are at 75 minutes, counsel. mr. reilly: thank you. i'm so close to done, as you can tell. okay. please just ask yourselves that, because neither lucy nor i get to get back up again, and say, wait a minute, wait a minute. okay. thank you very much.