closing argument mr. gustafson: good morning. the jury: good morning. mr. gustafson: i want to start by saying thank you for the attention that you all have paid in this case and, really, for the patience that you all have shown because things do not always go as smoothly and as timely and as moving fast like you would like it to, and you all have been very patient. and i do not purport to speak for everybody in the courtroom, but i'm sure that everybody here appreciates the patience you all obviously paid and patience you all have showed and the attention that you have paid to the evidence in the case. and i just want to say thank you for your service here. the jury instructions, call it closing arguments, the folks that taught me how to do this called it summing up. we are supposed to come in here in opening statement and we are supposed to tell you what we are going to show you. and then in trial, we are supposed to show you. and then when we sum up, we are supposed to tell you what we showed you. i'm going to sum up here by using the verdict form because that -- those are the issues that you all are here to decide, and it is the structure of what i'm going to sum up and tell you about the evidence in the case and how i believe the evidence is going to guide your decisions on each one of those questions. and we will start out with question number 1 on the verdict form: do you find that charles edwin clark was a florida resident at the time his lung cancer manifested itself, that he was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, manufactured by r.j. reynolds tobacco company, and if so, that his addiction was a legal cause of his lung cancer and death? and we will take that in the three parts that it is stated. the first part is was he a florida resident, not during his whole life, but was he a florida resident at the time his lung cancer manifested itself. that is the question that you are here to answer. and the court has given you an instruction on that. and the class membership instruction which you all have that addresses residency on or before the date his lung cancer manifested says that a florida resident is a person who has a true, fixed home and principal establishment in florida and to which whenever he is absent he has the intention of returning. florida residency requires both physical presence in florida and the intent to make florida one's home. and then finally, a florida resident is a person who lives in florida and has no present intention of leaving. charles clark left the state of florida one time after he was diagnosed with lung cancer. he went home to rome, georgia, to see his family after he was done with the chemotherapy and radiation that he had received and he spent three days in the hospital in rome, weighing 130 pounds because he got the flu from one of his family members that they went to go visit. he never returned to rome again. he was living in florida at the time he was diagnosed. and what was the evidence here about that? deana hagen testified that when her father moved down permanently to live with them with her mom and her sister and brother in trenton, that he moved down before he was diagnosed with lung cancer. she recalled for you the event in her life that had occurred at the time that he moved down. she had just found out that she was pregnant with her son dillon. he was born in september of 1993. so when she found out, she was approximately eight weeks to ten weeks pregnant, which is typical when folks find out they are pregnant. that would place it back in february or march of 1993. it was at that point that her father had moved down, and two days later, she shared with him the fact that she was pregnant with her first child, his first grandchild. what did jody clark tell us? jody clark said that when his father moved here, he had not been diagnosed with lung cancer. he looked healthy to jody. when he moved down here to florida permanently, he got a job with mack johnson roofing company, and he lived and worked in florida here before he was diagnosed with lung cancer. he was living with the family. he brought all his stuff down, and he was going to start -- he was going to try to put the family back together. what did melissa hausner tell you? when her father moved down and started living with them, that was before he was diagnosed with lung cancer and she remembered because she had always played basketball and she had always gone to the basketball camp at georgia southern. that was in may. and that year, she could not go to the basketball camp because her father had moved down and they did not have the money to send her to basketball camp and so she could not go that year. he definitely had moved down before his lung cancer had manifested. what did charles clark's brother say, emmett clark? that he -- the last place he had lived before he died was down there in florida somewhere, and he had come down to visit his brother when he was dying. what do the medical records say? well, you know that charles clark showed up to the va medical center here in gainesville and said, "i need to stop drinking." that was august 23, 1993. a couple days before, he showed up at the emergency room with the va and he had been on, i think the records say, a six-day beer binging drink. six days. he had been vomiting blood. he was a mess. he did not know -- he had come down here to put the family back together. he and patricia had already split up once before for a couple of years. and as you can imagine, patricia -- they split up the first time with stuff like this happening and she was not doing it anymore. so he showed up at the emergency room and he did not know if he was going to treat for alcohol treatment in gainesville or whether he was going to go back to georgia, but the next day they decided, and it is in the records, that he was going to treat here, that they were going to make a go of it and patricia was going to participate in that care, in that program at the va. he shows up at the -- at the va medical center on august 23, 1993, and his address is route 2, box 240, trenton, florida. that is patricia clark's home that she had purchased after she moved down. that is the home he was living in and had been living in for months before he was diagnosed with lung cancer. it is the same address that charles clark lived in until the day he died. this is before he is diagnosed with lung cancer, this is before his lung cancer had manifested. and he moved here in the spring of 1993, and he never lived anywhere else again. route 2, box 240, trenton, florida. it is in every record. you know that they were separated in the early '90s before he moved down. we know that his drinking problem is what caused the separation and them splitting up. and you know that he was depressed and was binge drinking. all of this is stated in the va medical center records. they are in evidence. and he probably did look pretty bad on a six-day beer drinking binges. he probably did not eat well. he probably did look skinny. but charles edwin clark did not manifest lung cancer until september of 1993, and we are going to get to the manifestation instruction in just a minute. the manifestation instruction which is in the class membership instruction says that lung cancer manifests itself when a smoker, not somebody else, but when a smoker is on notice of a connection between smoking and his lung cancer. well, what is the evidence in this case about that? his lung cancer manifested sometime between september 12th and september 20, 1993, because when he came in on september 12 of 1993, his wife, patricia, brought him to the emergency room because he was sick with pneumonia and he was coughing real bad. and deana testified about it, that he got really sick, mom took him to the er over at the va where they did a chest x-ray and found a spot that did not look normal, and they wanted to biopsy it to see what it was. and as you know from the records that are in evidence, when they found that spot on september 12 -- and it is in this particular record -- back up one, please, jeff. this particular record, i've highlighted the same stuff that i showed you in opening statement, but it says that he was coughing whitish and bloody, and he had been coughing bad last week. he quit smoking two weeks ago. but if you look in between those two highlighted portions, it says, "patient chest x-ray reveals right-sided middle lobe infiltrate." and at that point with the history of smoking that he had -- we go to the next one, jeff. with the history of smoking that he had when he went into the hospital at that time, it varies one pack a day for 30 years, which means he started when he was 16, two packs a day for 34 years, which means two packs a day since he was 12, 100 pack years. you remember how a pack-year is defined? if you smoke one pack a day for ten years, that is ten pack years. for a 46-year-old to have a 100 pack-year history, that is three packs a day for an awful long time. whether it is three packs a day or whether it is one pack a day, he is real positive for tobacco use for a long, long time. and so at that point when he is got this_ infiltrate on the chest x-ray with a history of tobacco use, they are going to tell him, as the records show they did, "you might have lung cancer and we need to look into that." and he got admitted into the hospital and he was there for a week or two. either way, when he is finally diagnosed which is the next one, they do the bronchoscopy where they slip the tube down into his bronchial tubes and they take a piece of the tissue with the snippers on the bronch. and they send it to pathology and it comes back as small cell undifferentiated carcinoma. and he is told, if you remember, the record states that dr. kubiet, who was his pulmonologist, went to tell him the diagnosis and he wrote in the records i showed you all in opening statement -and these are in evidence -- that when he went to tell mr. clark about the lung cancer diagnosis, mr. clark was on the smoking lounge. remember, he had not smoked in two weeks when he showed up. he was on the smoking lounge. and that was the day that charles clark found out he actually had lung cancer. either way, whether it is -- whether you find that his lung cancer manifested on september 12th when they told him he might have lung cancer or on september 20th when he found out he actually had lung cancer, either way, he is living in florida at that time, and he had been living in florida for a while by the time that had occurred. the defense tells you that mr. clark was living in georgia at that time. what is the address in georgia that he was living at? we know route 2, box 240 in trenton was his address in every record before he was suspected of having lung cancer. that is the address he lived at when he died. that is the address the testimony was he had moved down here living with his family. route 2, box 240, trenton, florida. what address in georgia did the defense give you in this case of where he lived in georgia? none. they just say he did not live here. deana hagen testified in this case that her father did not have any diagnosis of lung cancer until her mother took him to the hospital september 12th. that is the manifestation of lung cancer, between september 12 and september 20th. the class membership instruction on the next part of the class membership issue is whether mr. clark was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine. and what was the evidence about that in this case? well, we have melissa hausner testified her father was addicted. deana hagen testified her father was addicted. tina clark testified that her uncle was addicted. mr. burns testified -- board certified pulmonologist, been working with the surgeon general for 30 years, testified, wrote the chapter on internal medicine about nicotine addiction and tobacco use, he testified that charles clark was addicted. dr. cummings, been working with addicted smokers for decades at the roswell park medical center and now at the medical university of south carolina. started the first quit line in the united states up in new york state, been working on these issues for a long, long time. dr. cummings testified charles clark was addicted to the nicotine in cigarettes. what did the defense bring you to say that he was not? or what witness did they call? what testimony did they give you? what record did they show you that he was not addicted to the nicotine in cigarettes? nothing. what did charles clark tell people about smoking? he would tell people that it controls you. it was miserable when he did not have a cigarette. it was hard for him to stop and said he just could not stop. tried a number of times, if you are dying of lung cancer and you are trying to stop smoking and you cannot stop and you are in the bathroom in a hospital when you weighed 130 pounds and you are in that -- you are in that hospital over christmas and you are sick because you have gone through chemotherapy and radiation and you weigh 130 pounds and you cannot be around family members with the flu without getting so sick you have to go to the hospital, and you have been told you have less than two years to live. but you want to live because you have got a young son and you have got young daughter and you have got another young daughter who is got a brand new grandchild, your first one. you have a lot to live for because you are 47 years old. the reason you end up in a bathroom smoking a cigarette with a closed door is because you are ashamed. you are doing it because you cannot go without it. that is what happened with charles clark. charles clark was addicted to the nicotine in cigarettes, that is why he smoked. he was not smoking for the secret blend in winstons. deana was asked: "from what you observed, w your father addicted? "yes." melissa was asked: "was your father addicted from what you saw?" "absolutely, yes." what did tina clark say? we read her deposition to you. tina clark: "i think he wanted to quit but i do not think he could." the defense talked about alcohol, and i believe they told you in opening statement that alcohol raises the risk of lung cancer. well, what did you hear about -- what was the evidence that you heard in this case about that? alcohol does not cause nicotine addiction. dr. burns was asked: "if charles clark had never had a drop of alcohol in his entire life, would he still have been addicted to the nicotine in cigarettes?" "yes, he would." dr. cummings was asked: "if you take away the alcohol, would he have been addicted to nicotine? "yes." by all accounts, he was addicted to nicotine first, and if you take away alcohol, he still would have been addicted and heavily addicted to nicotine based on the smoking history that he had reviewed. the evidence in this case was that charles clark was addicted to the nicotine in cigarettes. they did not bring you evidence that he was not. go to the third part of the class membership instruction, which is whether mr. clark's addiction to nicotine was a legal cause of his lung cancer. and the instruction that you have here talks about addiction being a legal cause, not the legal cause. and i talked about this in opening statement, and i'm going to talk about it again when we get a little bit further on, on questions 2 and 3 on the verdict form. but the reason it is important that the instruction talks about a legal cause instead of the legal cause. if it was the legal cause, if that is what it had to be, then it can be nothing else. here it is -- the instruction of the law is it is a legal cause. and the reason it is a legal cause is because there are other things that work in conjunction with addiction. charles clark believed the message of the cigarette companies for a long, long time. did not believe that cigarettes actually caused these -lung cancer and things like that. told his daughter that when she came home from school. i'm going to talk about that in a little bit. charles clark bears fault in this case. i'm going to talk about that a little bit. charles clark's fault is a legal cause of his death. the plaintiff came here telling you that. these things all work together, and the law recognizes that. so the issue on this part of the class membership aspect, the third part, that mr. clark's addiction was a legal cause of his lung cancer, it has a couple of different aspects of it. the first thing is: what was the medical cause of charles clark's death? well, smoking cigarettes was the medical cause of charles clark's lung cancer. dr. tetreault gave that testimony and so did dr. burns. the defense did not bring you a witness to say that smoking cigarettes did not cause his lung cancer. the cigarette smoking was the medical cause of charles clark's lung cancer and death. it is stated on the death certificate, multiple brain metastases due to small cell carcinoma of the right hilum, that is the cause of his death. he had primary lung cancer metastasized to his brain and that is what killed him. smoking cigarettes is what caused it. dr. tetreault: "did you make a determination as to whether or not it was more likely than not that mr. clark's small cell lung cancer was caused by cigarette smoking as opposed to any possible exposure to asbestos?" his answer was: "i think it is fair to say it is more likely than not that cigarette smoking contributed to his lung cancer." dr. burns testified that his cigarette smoking and his nicotine addiction caused his repetitive cigarette smoking which resulted in his lung cancer. what did the defense tell you in opening? they mentioned, oh, he was exposed to asbestos. what did we learn about asbestos in this -- in the evidence that was in this case? dr. tetreault: "there is no evidence from the records you have given me that asbestos played any role in his presentation." dr. burns: "is there any findings of pleural plaques suggestive of asbestosis or asbestos exposure related to mr. clark's lung mass or lung cancer?" "answer: no." dennis sharp was the friend that worked with him. and i think dennis sharp did plumbing work and charles would do the houses -- the roofing work on some of these housing projects that they worked on together. and then mr. sharp left and started working at the boeing facility and charles also worked at the boeing facility as a boilerman. and mr. sharp was asked and we read the deposition to you and he was asked whether in that facility that he saw charles clark working at over there at boeing, whether that facility had any asbestos. and he said no, it had all been removed. and then we have emmett clark, charles' brother with whom he worked for decades in the roofing business: "were you ever exposed to asbestos?" "no. it was all tar and asphalt." they did not bring you a witness in this case to say that charles clark got lung cancer from asbestos exposure as opposed to cigarette smoking. the evidence that you have is that cigarettes were the medical cause of his lung cancer. they also raise roofing tar. they showed you that picture of charles clark working on that commercial job where they had the roof tar was -the steam was rising up off the roof tar. and what did emmett clark tell you about the roofing company that they had and the jobs that they did? emmett clark testified that -- they were asked: "did you ever work on commercial buildings?" and he said: "sometimes on the small ones, you know, just little service stations and stuff like that." and look at that picture that the defense put in. it is a commercial building that looks like a top of a gas station or something like. "but what percentage of your work," mr. clark was asked, "related to residential houses?" 99 percent, and 1 percent was the commercial buildings and luck up and get one. and that is where they were using that roofing tar. 1 percent of the work that they did involved that. it was such a big deal to luck up and get one of them that the only picture you saw of charles clark roofing was on a commercial job. dr. burns was asked about this. and he said that -- "is the evidence that is presented for his roofing experience consistent with him either having exposure to benzopyrene or asbestos fibers sufficient to have caused in a substantive way or contributed in a substantive way to his lung cancer?" "no, there is not that evidence." benzopyrene was the carcinogen that was found in roofing tar. 1 percent of the jobs he did were commercial jobs involving roofing tar. the other ones were shingles. r.j. reynolds knew that benzopyrene is a constituent of cigarette smoke. they are trying to blame benzopyrene in roofing tar when benzopyrene is in cigarette smoke that charles clark smoked every day all day for decades. alan rodgman talked about it in 1959, the optimum composition of tobacco when it is smoked. and he says in 1954, the first report of the presence of a carcinogenic cancer-producing polycyclic hydrocarbon benzopyrene in cigarette smoke was published. they knew it was in their own cigarettes smoke. here today they are trying to tell you it was not our cigarettes he smoked all day, it was that 1 percent of commercial jobs he did. that was such a big deal to get, he took a picture of it when he was doing it. dr. burns talked about this very thing. he went through the chemicals that are in cigarette smoke. benzopyrene. same thing dr. rodgman identified. it is still in that smoke. they cannot take it out. they cannot remove it. every single cigarette that charles clark smoked every single day for decades had benzopyrene. 1 percent of the roofs he worked on were commercial jobs. cigarettes caused his lung cancer, and the defense did not bring you a witness to say otherwise. they raised alcohol; "his alcohol caused lung cancer." we know it does not cause lung cancer. dr. burns was asked about this: "is there anything about charles clark's alcohol consumption that caused his lung cancer?" he said, "no, not that caused it. alcohol is not an independent cause of lung cancer. people who drink heavily have a little higher rate of lung cancer, and it is not clear whether that is because they tend to smoke more when they are drinking. "if somebody has a drinking problem, their inhibitions are going to be lowered. and if they want to try to quit smoking but they are still drinking, when they drink, it lowers their inhibitions and then they are unable to quit. it prevents them from quitting." there might -- and he says: "in the absence of cigarette smoke, alcohol does not increase the risk of lung cancer at all." drinking beer does not cause lung cancer. smoking cigarettes does. what did dr. tetreault say? he was asked: "based on your education, training, and experience" -- dr. tetreault was a treating oncologist when he was at the va -- "would alcohol abuse contribute or cause small cell lung cancer as was the case of mr. clark?" "no. it raises risks statistically of all sorts of aerodigestive cancers." esophagus, stomach. aerodigestive cancers, not lung cancers. and then dr. cummings was asked about it too, whether his alcohol addiction -- tells us the effects of his alcohol addiction on his nicotine addiction or vice versa. and dr. cummings explained that they are codependencies and he was struggling to overcome both of these dependencies, from his review of the records, which are all in evidence. "and so, you know, obviously, if somebody is drinking heavily, it makes it a little harder to, you know, control other behaviors like smoking." there is no doubt about that. that would be the effect of alcohol. but in terms of the health effects, smoking is what causes lung cancer. alcohol use does not cause lung cancer. the defense did not bring you anyone to say that alcohol, drinking beer, causes lung cancer. we know that lung cancer was a medical cause of charles clark's death. dr. tetreault said it. dr. burns said it. the death certificate says it. the defense brought you nothing to say that -other than lung cancer is what caused his death. and then we get to the addiction to nicotine is what causes the lung cancer. nicotine addiction is what causes the repeated exposure to the carcinogens in cigarettes. smokers smoke for nicotine, but they get carcinogens. and you cannot separate the two. you can take nicotine out of cigarettes so they will get nicotine somewhere else, but you cannot take the carcinogens out of cigarettes. but it was the nicotine addiction that caused the repeated exposure over a long term. that is what resulted in the carcinogens day after day after day after day for all those years, and that is what caused his lung cancer and death. dr. burns was asked about this, asked what his opinion was: "i believe he was addicted to nicotine and that his nicotine addiction caused his death from lung cancer." r.j. reynolds brought you nothing to contest this evidence. they will talk to you about choice. they will tell you he chose to smoke. they will tell you that nicotine addiction did not have anything to do with why he smoked, that he did it because he liked it, that he did it because he chose to. but we know from the evidence that was presented here when someone is addicted to a substance, that their choice -- they can make a choice to stop using it, but if they are addicted to the substance, the addiction constrains the choice. addiction does get in the way. you can overcome it. i mean, addicted people have responsibilities too, and that is why charles clark bears fault here. he could have overcome it. he should have tried harder. and we take responsibility for that, but he is not the sole cause. charles clark is not the sole cause. so when you get to the verdict form, when you are going to answer verdict form question 1, i think the evidence is clear here that he was a florida resident at the time his lung cancer manifested, he was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine manufactured by reynolds, stipulated he was a winston smoker. you have seen the pictures. you have heard the testimony. and if so, his addiction was a legal cause of his lung cancer and death, and we believe the evidence shows you should answer yes to that question. you get to the concurrent cause instruction here. and this is what i was talking about a little bit earlier here. addiction may be a legal cause of death even though it operates in combination with the act of another, charles clark, r.j. reynolds, some natural cause, or some other cause if such other cause occurs at the same time as the addiction and the addiction contributes substantially to producing mr. clark's death. now, nicotine addiction need not be the only cause, just a legal cause along with others. and that is what this concurrent cause instruction recognizes. if you check "no" on the first question on the verdict form, charles clark's children lose, r.j. reynolds wins, and it is over. so we are asking you to check "yes" based on the evidence that was presented here in court. they did not disprove any of those things. we have proved each one of those aspects of class membership questions on the verdict form. if you do check "yes," you will have found charles clark to be a member of the engle class. and when you find that he is a member of the engle class, then the engle findings will apply. and the court read you the instruction that you have here. and you have seen these findings before. we talked about them for a long time during jury selection, that smoking causes small cell lung cancer, nicotine in cigarettes is addictive. reynolds put cigarettes on the market that were defective and unreasonably dangerous. reynolds was negligent. reynolds concealed or omitted material information not otherwise known or available, knowing the material was false and misleading or fails to disclose material facts concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes or both. and reynolds agreed with other tobacco companies to conceal or omit that information. they all got together and agreed that they were going to lie. that takes us to the second question on the verdict form. was reynolds' concealment or omission of material information about the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes or both a legal cause of charles edwin clark's death? and part of the instruction you got that you have and -- says that to be a legal cause of mr. clark's injury, the concealed or omitted facts must have been unknown to mr. clark. and then says, moreover, if those facts were unknown, either they must have been not otherwise available to mr. clark or mr. clark's opportunity to learn them was less than that of r.j. reynolds. what was the direct evidence we have here? there is a couple of things. the first is charles clark believed the tobacco industry message. you heard that he tried to quit at patricia clark's request when patricia was pregnant with deana in 1971 and he was unable to stop. you did not hear about any other quit attempts after that because he did not make any, not until the mid-1980s, 1986, 1987, when deana came home from school having a health class that showed that smoking cigarettes -- i mean, she had pictures of black lungs and lung cancers and all of that. and what did she say? she came home and told her dad what she learned in school about the dangers of cigarette smoking. sixth or seventh grade is '84, '85, '86, sometime in that time period. "did you tell your dad he needed to stop smoking?" "i did." "and when you showed him these materials and told him that he should stop, did your father say anything?" and she recalled that he told her -- that he laughed at it, said not to worry, there is nothing proven out there that cigarette smoking causes any kind of cancer. and he was fine, believed what the company said. and he actually told me if it was dangerous, they would not be out there advertising cigarettes. what was it -- and keep in mind, the instruction says the agreement to conceal or omit material information regarding the health effects of cigarettes or their addictive nature, is a legal cause but must have been unknown to mr. clark. it had to have been unknown to him. so what was unknown to mr. clark? well, charles clark did not know what r.j. reynolds knew about the cigarettes he smoked. they said there was not anything about cigarettes that caused cancer but they knew that their cigarettes, when you burned them and smoked them, created polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons. and they did not just know that, they knew that the cigarettes that he smoked, winston cigarettes, had two and a half times as many pahs as their unfiltered camel cigarettes. you heard the testimony of robert heimann who was the president of american tobacco company, and he said they want people to rely on their advertising. because as you know, american tobacco is now part of r.j. reynolds. they wanted people to rely on their advertising, and they wanted their advertising to make people feel comfortable about what it was they were doing._ the last thing you want to do when you are advertising cigarettes is to tell people, yeah, if you keep doing this, it is going to cause cancer, and it is addictive, and if you start, you may not be able to stop or it may be really hard for you to stop. you may struggle with it your whole life and you may die of a smoking-related disease. you will never ever see that in a cigarette advertisement. they want you to feel comfortable about what you are doing. they are darn sure not going to tell you that if you choose this winston brand over our unfiltered camel brand, you are going to get two and a half times as many carcinogens than if you choose our other brand. charles clark did not know this. r.j. reynolds did. and they concealed it from him and from everybody else. what else did r.j. reynolds conceal? during charles clark's entire life, r.j. reynolds never admitted that it knew there had never been a cigarette sold anywhere in the world that was not addictive and did not cause cancer. they never ever admitted that. they continued to lie about that after he died. during charles clark's lifetime, reynolds never admitted publically that its winstons had two and a half times the amount of pahs as camel. these were not things that charles clark could know. how is he going to know those things? r.j. reynolds knew those things and they kept it from him. so when you got to the verdict form question 2, think about the things that r.j. reynolds knew and charles clark did not know. specific things that i just showed you. he could not have know them. i ask you to answer yes, based on the evidence you have seen here in this trial. you get to the third question on the verdict form, which is similar to the second question. and this is was reynolds' agreement with others to conceal or omit information regarding the health effects of cigarettes or their addictive nature a legal cause of charles edwin clark's death? and i'm not going to go through and show you all the documents all over again. you all know what happened. you know that the -- the stuff started coming out in life magazine in 1953 and american tobacco sent out a telegram and they hired a public relations firm and they went to the plaza hotel and they had their meetings and they created the tobacco industry research committee, published the frank statement in all the sunday papers around the united states. and "we are going to take care of you all. we are looking out for you smokers." all that. and it started a 50-year campaign of lying to conceal what they knew to be true about cigarettes. they did it because they did not want to lose money. there is no other reason. they like making a lot of money, and they wanted to keep making a lot of money. and the way to keep making a lot of money is to tell addicted people that it is okay, keep doing what you are addicted to without telling them they are addicted to it. if you can give an addicted person a reason, a rationalization to keep doing what it is they are addicted to, it is about the easiest job you can have. because different from drugs like heroin and cocaine and things like that, this is not a crash-and-burn drug. you can smoke cigarettes and be a good dad. you could smoke cigarettes and be a good roofer. you can smoke cigarettes and be a good friend. it is not a crash-and-burn drug like heroin, cocaine, and things like that. you can be a productive member of society and be addicted to the nicotine in cigarettes. how did this work? how did the agreement with others to conceal or omit information, how did it work? how did they do it? well, the federal trade commission did a study in 1967 and did a report to congress about the federal cigarette labeling and advertising act, and what did they find? expenditures on cigarette advertising and promotion increased each year during 1963 to '66 reaching nearly $300 million in 1966. $300 million in 1966 dollars, not $300 million in today's dollars. and look at the amounts. back up one, please. look at the total advertising expenditures: $249.5 million in '63. $297.5 million in 1966. every one of the advertisements they ran, every single thing they spent on marketing cigarettes to people, whether it was kids or whether it was grownups, everything said that cigarettes were okay, they were healthy. athletes were doing it. stars were doing it. think about what a different time it was back then. showed all these advertisements; lucille ball, ricky ricardo, edward r. murrow, all these people, you cannot name a famous person back in those days -- sammy davis, jr., all of them died from smoking-related diseases. cigarettes were ubiquitous back then. they were everywhere the way cell phones are everywhere today. that is about the only thing you can compare them to. they are everywhere. fifteen years ago, we did not have smart phones. why do we have smart phones now? did we run out because advertisements forced us to go buy smart phones? no. the advertisements make it appear like it can help you. the advertisements make things appear desirable. but everyone within the sound of my voice probably has a smart phone, and everyone within the sound of my voice has probably heard that cell phones cause brain cancer, but we all use them and let our kids have them because we do not believe it is true. back then, we did not have cell phones, but they had cigarettes. lots of folks heard that cigarettes might cause lung cancer, but there was an industry out there saying that it did not. and people did not believe it was true. and that is why you have father's day advertisements with kids handing their fathers cartons of cigarettes on the stairs in the home, and christmas packages to give cartons of cigarettes to people. it is a very, very different time back then. hundreds of million of dollars a year in 1967. the ftc stated again in 1981, in 1981, they found that cigarettes were the most heavily advertised product in america and that the national commission of smoking and public policies reported in 1978 that the tobacco industry spent more on advertising cigarettes in one day than the then national clearinghouse on smoking and health, government's primary agency working in this area, spent in an entire year. cigarette advertising expenditures had grown substantially over the last decade and continued to grow. why did they do it? why did they spend all this money? if the lie that they were telling the public and the agreement with others to lie did not work, if it did not work, why did they continue to lie and why did they spend so much money on it? they tell us. they tell us in 1972, "for nearly 20 years, this industry has employed a single strategy to defend itself on three major fronts; litigation, politics, and public opinion. "and while the strategy was brilliantly conceived and executed over the years helping us to win important battles, it is only fair to say it is not nor was it intended to be a vehicle for victory. "on the contrary, it has always been a holding strategy consisting of creating doubt about the health charge without actually denying it." they did it because it worked. and they congratulated themselves about how brilliant and smart they were concocting a plan and executing it over 20 years in '72, and it continued until the end of the century. so out there -- out there when no one is listening and they are just talking to each other, they pat each other on the back and tell each other how smart they are. how good -- how well the plan has worked. in here, they are going to tell you it did not work. ask yourself if the evidence would support that. the evidence was that it did work, and it worked on charles clark. the industry message was a legal cause of his continued smoking and death. we know that addiction was a legal cause of his smoking based on the evidence, but the evidence is also that the only source that said cigarettes were not proven to cause lung cancer was the cigarette industry. through all these different methods and means, they got that message out there. they spent more in one day than public health spent in an entire year. ask yourselves: what evidence was there other than r.j. reynolds and the other tobacco companies and the scientists that they were paying, other than them, who was saying that cigarettes were not proven to cause lung cancer? who? nobody. the industry was the only one saying it. the industry message had an influence on mr. clark. he believed smoking did not cause cancer. he denied that smoking was dangerous. he did not know about the winston secret blend with two and a half times more carcinogens. he did not know that the pure white modern filter on the winstons that they advertised did not do anything, did not remove anything. and charles clark did not know about them monkeying with cigarettes. he did not know they were putting ammonia in cigarettes to create more impact on the smoker, to create free basing nicotine. at normal smoke ph at or below 6.0, dr. teague tells us in 1973, all of the smoke -- essentially all of the smoke nicotine is chemically combined with acidic substances, hence is nonvolatile and relatively solely absorbed by the smoker. as the smoke ph increases above about 6.0, an increasing proportion of the total smoke nicotine occurs in freeform, which is volatile and rapidly absorbed by the smoker and believed to be instantly perceived as nicotine kick. they knew if they added ammonia to cigarettes just the right amount, they can create freebase nicotine. and dr. cummings described the very thing that dr. teague described when dr. cummings testified and was asked about this. the court: you are at 45 minutes. mr. gustafson: thank you, judge. the ammonia that you can find in tobacco, adding more of it altered the ph of the smoke, the ph alteration of the cigarettes either through blending or through adding ammonia, diammonium phosphate, added to the reconstituted tobacco makes it easier to inhale, and you get -- changes the form of nicotine, which in the salt form, it is bound and slowly absorbed. it changes it to a freebase form, so you get more rapid absorption in the mouth and a greater feel. that is the kick that dr. teague was talking about. charles clark did not know about this, and he did not know that they were putting -- they were evaluating ammoniated tobaccos to optimize the blend in the 1980s. r.j. reynolds' choices were a legal cause of charles clark's death. they should have told the truth about the dangers of smoking. reynolds -only reynolds had the ability to remove nicotine and ammonia and the other additives from its cigarette and make it a fair fight to quit. do not make it as addictive as you can and then say, oh, you choose to smoke. make it a fair fight. take that nicotine out. they knew how to do that. the evidence showed you that. there is documents in evidence talking about it. reynolds is one hundred percent responsible for the choices that it made. so i told you about the concurrent cause instruction. and each one of these instructions, each one of these claims; addiction, concealment, agreement to conceal, the comparative negligence of mr. clark, all of them have a concurrent cause instruction because the law recognizes that is a standard instruction. it is not special for engle tobacco cases. whether it is a bus wreck case or whatever case it is, the law recognizes, the standard instruction recognizes the complexities of life. because very rarely is it just one thing that causes something to occur, whether it is a tragedy or whether it is a great thing, it is very rare that it is just one thing that causes something to happen. the law recognizes that in this concurrent cause instruction. each one of these when you get to concealment, it says that it need not be the only cause. when you get to the agreement to conceal instruction, it need not be the only cause. all of them, even though it operates in combination with another, each one of these things, the law recognizes those complexities that each one of these things can operate to create the one thing that happened. and that is -- that is what the instruction recognizes, and i wanted to draw your attention to that. charles clark died because he was addicted to the nicotine in cigarettes. he died because he smoked to satisfy that addiction. and he died because he believed reynolds' message that cigarettes do not cause lung cancer. and he did not begin trying to quit until after deana showed him those materials and he finally started to come around in '86 or '87. so when you get to the verdict form on question 3, we think the evidence shows that you should answer yes. we get to the verdict form on question 4, and this is how do you divide the responsibility. and you are going to have to base this on the evidence. this is you-all's decision and yours alone. but when you get to the comparative fault issue, you have here in the claims and the defenses what the allegation is that is being made. the plaintiff claims that mr. clark bears some measure of fault but less than one hundred percent of the fault for his lung cancer and death as his acts and omissions relating to the duration and frequency of his efforts to stop smoking were a partial legal cause of his lung cancer and death, and also claim that mr. clark's acts relating to the duration and_ frequency of his efforts to stop smoking were a partial legal cause of his lung cancer and death in combination with the acts of reynolds. there we go with the concurrent cause issue that we just talked about. they worked together to create this result. and what does that mean? what does that mean? charles clark's actions were a legal cause of his death in combination with the acts of reynolds. charles clark should have tried harder to quit. and you might say that charles clark was dumb for believing what they said. well, think about what the executives from the companies said. robert heimann in 1986 said that throughout his tenure with american, they publically stated that cigarette smoke was not injurious to health. and that is something they wanted the public to believe, and it was a statement that american tobacco placed great reliance on. they issued that statement. "and as far as you are concerned, a person is justified in relying on that statement?" "yes, sir." american tobacco was one of the companies with whom reynolds had the agreement to lie to the public all those years. it is reasonable to rely on what we say. that was them in 1986. in 1992, james johnston, we read you his very short testimony on this topic. james johnston was the president of r.j. reynolds tobacco company, and he did not find fault with one of the customers who would then rely on what they say and continue to smoke. they concede that charles clark was reasonable to rely on what they said. why was it so important? they tell us in 1980, the tobacco institute does, that: "the lawyers remind us that the entire matter of addiction is the most potent weapon a prosecuting attorney can have in a lung cancer cigarette case. we cannot defend continued smoking as free choice if the person was addicted." they recognize the concept of how addiction constrains someone's ability to choose whether they are going to stop smoking or not. you can choose whether you can stop. you can choose to stop. it is executing that choice that is the struggle. mr. clark is the only one who can choose to quit smoking. only reynolds can make the choice to engineer cigarettes to keep him from carrying out that choice. and only reynolds can make the choice to lie about the dangers of smoking in an effort to give smokers like charles clark an excuse to keep doing it. were the dangers of smoking unknown to reynolds? well, r.j. reynolds knew there were carcinogens in cigarette smoke. clarence cook little got on tv in 1955 in see it now and said we cannot possibly eliminate an agent that has not yet been identified with the presence of which has not been proven. but alan rodgman in '56 noted that the winstons had two and a half times as many pahs as camel. and rodgman in '59 recognized that in 1954 the first report of the presence of benzopyrene and other polycyclic hydrocarbons in cigarette smoke was published. they knew carcinogens were in there. rodgman in '62 told management: "obviously, the amount of evidence accumulated to indict smoke as a health hazard is overwhelming. the evidence challenging it is scant." 1964, howard cullman went on cbs news and said, "we do not know if there is anything in there, but through acts of god and luck and we will hope to find them. if they are found, they will be removed. at this point, we do not know." they were stronger in '71 when howard cullman's brother joe got on face the nation and said, "we do not believe cigarettes are hazardous. we do not accept that." they knew. but who knew more? who knew more in the 1950s about the dangers of cigarette smoking? clarence cook little and timothy v. hartnett or charles clark? who knew more in the '60s about the hazards of cigarette smoking, charles clark or howard cullman and alan rodgman? the industry or charles clark, who knew more? we know the answer to these things. 1970s, who knew more? the truth squad people they sent out everywhere, joe cullman or charles clark? we know who knew more. the industry knew more. 1980s, who knew more? r.j. reynolds put two-year campaign, "can we have an open debate," where they still called into question whether cigarettes were proven to cause any disease and lots of scientist that were independent in the industry found they did not. but everybody ignores that, they say. you give addicted smokers a reason to keep_ doing what they are addicted to and they are going to keep doing it. reynolds knew more. the decision on how to divide the fault on question 4 is yours and yours alone. reynolds told you that -- they read the deposition of ann proctor, and they are going to suggest to you that charles clark laughed when ms. proctor told him that cancer sticks were going to get him. now, i want you to put this testimony she gave in the proper perspective. she said that -- she said this when her child, gene, was four years old or less. because she scooped him up to get him away from her husband and charles clark and she said, "the cancer stick is going to get you and you are not going to hurt my child." well, she testified that her son was four years old in 1961. charles clark was 15 years old in 1961, and he did not live on lombardy way or next to the proctors. harold proctor, ms. proctor's husband, testified that he had quit smoking when he lived on broad street in the '50s before they lived on lombardy way and that he never smoked cigarettes with charles clark. and remember what ms. proctor said, she does not know how long the clarks were her neighbors. she remembers there was another family who lived in that house. and then she cannot estimate how long she was neighbors with the clarks, and then she is asked by us, the plaintiff's lawyers in that part of her deposition, that around the time gene was young when he was a toddler or an infant, and she does not remember what mr. clark's reaction. and so mr. guest asked if he laughed when she said that to him about the cancer stick was going to get him, you were just guessing, and she does not know. here's what i will tell you about ms. proctor's testimony regarding this: i do not doubt she had that conversation with somebody. i do not doubt it a bit. but she did not have that conversation with charles clark, not when her story is that she picked up her son to get him away and he was little. her son was born in 1957 or 1958. charles clark was not even around. so when they say that charles clark laughed about the cancer stick, i think that the evidence shows that it could not have been charles clark that she is talking about. she is thinking about somebody else. verdict form questions 5, 6, and 7 are the part where you need to follow the instruction that the judge gives you, follow the law on this about what to -- what to put there for damages for each one of these children. i'm going to be brief about this. they call -- they call him clark. melissa named her son clark because they called her dad clark. he had a fifth grade education. you will see in the records, he always said it was eighth or ninth grade. he had a good way with people. one of the witnesses that you heard about that were not family members. what were the folks that were not his children? what did they say about him? he had a good way with people, that he never met a stranger, that he was respectful, that he would do anything for you, that he was a good father and he had a good relationship with his kids. he had had his share of tragedy in life. he knew what it was like to go without, whether it was money, you will see in the records whether it was clean clothes when he was a child, or whether it was a father. but he knew what it was like to go without and so he welcomed all the kids. we will see back in the time they did not let girls play. charles did. every had fond recollections of him. he made a living a hard way with his hands and with a hammer and a shovel. and you will see in the records that he is well aware of his failings. he knew about the failures he had had in his life. and he tried to hide that from his family. but he did his best to provide for his family, as the witnesses in this case testified, and that he loved his children. he loved them dearly. you will see references in the records to being excited about his grandchild and wanted to leaving chemo to be with his son. the fact that charles clark died at age 48, which is a young age to be dying, the fact that he died at age 48, 19 years ago, only magnifies the enormity of the loss for each one of his three kids and every day of the 19 years since he died. mortality tables tell us he would have lived 28 or 29 more years, 28.3, something like, and that is in evidence. the decision of what you all are going to put in each one of those three verdicts is yours and yours alone. and i would ask you to do three things. first is: follow the law that the judge gives you. when you are given an instruction on this, you need to follow that instruction and base whatever you put in that blank next to each name on the instruction and the evidence that you heard. that is rule number one. rule number two is i'm going to tell you please do not award more than $3 million per child. do not do that. more than that is too much in this case and i'm asking you -- somebody thinks they want to award 5 million or whatever, please do not award more than 3 million per child. i'm asking you to do that. but whatever number you do choose to put in each one of those blanks, please, base it on the evidence, and may it be respectful of that child's loss. may it be respectful of the loss. verdict form question 8 that -- whether r.j. reynolds should be punished for punitive damages. there is not any question here that they did what they did. this is a story that has only one side. they did what they did and they did it for money and they should be punished. they knew smoking cigarettes caused lung cancer. they withheld that conclusion from the surgeon general and their customers. they knew winston had two and half times as many carcinogens. they withheld that information from the surgeon general and their customers. they knew that cigarette smoking caused lung cancer and yet they continued to engineer them to be as addictive as they could. despite knowing cigarettes caused lung cancer, they publically denied anything was proven to be harmful, and they knew that people were going to die, and they did not care. there is four things in the jury instruction on punitive damages. there is four different reasons how somebody, a defendant, can have punitive damages imposed on them. they are set out one, two, three, and four. and look, between each one of them is an "or." it only needs to be one of the four. you can blindfold yourself and stick that jury instruction on the wall and take a dart and throw it and whichever one of the four you hit with that dart they did. it is rare -- there is an or between there, there is -- you only need one of them. they did all four. charles clark started smoking when he was a child. he lost his father at a young age. he had to grow up when he was 13. he had a fifth grade education. and he was exactly what reynolds' marketing was meant for. when he -- when he became a smoker, reynolds was marketing to children and studying how to improve it. we know that from reynolds' own documents, the youth research institute, the cigarette smoking study among high school and college students. and they were looking to see how well winston was doing and how well camel was doing and how well salem was doing, especially among high school students. it is where they have always been, getting young people to smoke because they know -- based on that diane burrows document from 1984 that talks about replacement smokers, they know when people grow up, they do not pick up cigarette smoking, typically. it is pretty rare. they know 90-something, 95 or more percent of people start when they are young. and they considered 18 to be 12 to 18. remember, at 12 years old, ten percent start when they are 12, and another percent when they are 13. they studied it. they knew the importance of getting children to smoke. and you know now that trials are not nearly as exciting in real life as they are on tv, but there was something interesting i thought occurred. and these things do not happen that often. but when dr. stueck was testifying and he was on cross-examination and he was asked: "do you know if it was a violation of the same laws you showed the jury yesterday for r.j. reynolds to market cigarettes to minors?" and he said, "yes, it was." and then he realized what he had just said and he tried to fix it. and he said, "well, i do not recall seeing any georgia legislation to that effect. it was certainly against the law for anybody to give cigarettes or even sell cigarettes to a minor," implying that it was still okay for r.j. reynolds to market cigarettes to children. according to reynolds, nothing is ever their fault. ever. ever. the need to satisfy their addiction to profits was so great that they carefully studied the behavior of children, that their youth research institute and they engineered products to appeal to them and they made sure those products were advised and promoted and placed so that kids could get them. there was a reason why cigarette vending machines existed and were as common as coke machines, according to dr. stueck. it is where they have always been. that is where they are always going to be. charles clark paid the ultimate price for his addiction, and his three children are still paying. r.j. reynolds refuses to take any responsible for their role, and so that is -- respectfully, i think that is -- you are going to have to do it for them. i think based on the evidence in this case, they deserve to be punished. they deserve to be punished. we are asking you to answer yes on question number 8. thank you. mr. gustafson: yes, sir. if it please the court. two hours of closing argument by the defense and here's what we heard from r.j. reynolds about what they did for 50 years. that is r.j. reynolds' explanation to you about what they did for 50 years. "lying to people about the dangers of smoking; lying to people about the addictiveness of smoking; engineering cigarettes to be as addictive as they could; adding things to cigarettes to make them as addictive as they could; and then blaming people saying, it is your responsibility, it is your behavior; it is your behavior, not ours." and what is their explanation to you on that? r.j. reynolds could have done things better. as you can imagine, mr. furr and i have done this before. he said -- he asked you, should r.j. reynolds be punished? and then he talked about the council for tobacco research. and he put that slide up saying, $500 million in research, and as the testimony was, only ten percent of it was actually on smoking and health; ninety percent of that money was so they can come back into court and say that they spent a bunch of money on research. and they really were not researching smoking and health. they did not want the answer because they already had the answer. they did not want to fund research that built the walls around them. ctr funding, 6,000 published articles, ten percent on them on smoking and health and to defend lawsuits. ctr funded research that the surgeon general relied on in its reports 600 times. and they withheld the data that showed the relationship between smoking and disease. ctr funded the knapp study in 1963. the very study he just showed you about being addictive in 1963 in that psychiatry journal. and then for the next 40 years publicly denied that cigarettes were addictive when the surgeon general, c. everett koop, in 1988 said it was addictive, they attacked them. the attack on public health continued through this trial. they are never going to stop attacking public health. never. you saw it in the beginning of the case, and you saw it in the middle of the case, and now you see it at the end of the case. and there is a rule that witnesses get, there is three rules. and, you know, parties need to live by these rules when they come try lawsuits in front of juries like you. and that is to tell the truth, and tell the whole truth, and tell nothing but the truth. and there was a slide mr. furr put up that i thought was representative of the way r.j. reynolds has tried this case and argued this case to you. mr. furr put up this slide that said: alcoholism was the dominant characteristic of charles clark's life. and he highlights certain language in this about the loss of his business and the loss of his home, the loss of his self respect, and the loss of his family due to drinking. look what he did not highlight. look what he did not highlight. what he did not highlight says: present living arrangement. still living with wife and three children, 20, 14 and 12. the way they try these cases is they pick slivers of stuff the like and they show that to you as if it is the whole truth. he spent 30 minutes talking to you about how he did not live here; he lived somewhere else. and i did something that lawyers typically do not do in closing argument. i left myself wide open. there is 452 pages of va medical center records over there. and i know a lot about this case, but i can tell you right now, i do not now every one of those pages that medical record involves. i do not. i admit it. and so i asked him -- i did not know the answer to the question. we are not suppose to ask questions we do not know the answers to. probably look smart on a cross-examination. we already know the answers. we certainly do not want to do that in closing argument, because i might get an answer and a big old record showing at me that i never saw before. and i asked him, if charles clark did live here at route 2, box 240 in trenton, a box of 452 pages of va medical center records state, if he did not live here in florida, tell me -- just tell me, what is his georgia address? two hours. two hours of talking. the army of people over there that can go find and sift through records for him and find him an address in the state of georgia where charles clark lived when his lung cancer manifested. and what do you hear from that? nothing. nothing. there are 452 pages of records from the va medical center, and there is a whole bunch of them that talk about residency. and given the fact that r.j. reynolds' lawyer has come here and said that the family members were all lying when they told you that daddy was living with us before he got diagnosed with cancer, they are all liars, they say. charles clark showed up at the va medical center on august 23rd, 1993, and his home telephone number was 904 -- this is back from the 352 days -- his area code number was 904-472 and his address was in trenton, florida. let me keep on going. he is still living -- this is the record i just showed you that mr. furr did not want to highlight because it does not help him so, you know, the truth, the whole truth, nothing but the truth does not always apply with r.j. reynolds -- and still living with wife and three children, ages 20, 14 and 12, and we have a trenton address. then we go to his educational means while he was in the va medical center. and what is he telling you? i want to try to get my life back together. he does not need a halfway house placement. he has a place to stay and he is staying with his wife and his children, which is on the record i just showed you which mr. furr did not highlight for you. we have the substance abuse treatment program, psychological-psychiatric assessment; august 23, 1993, trenton, florida. the voc rehab assessment when he showed up at the va: he lives with his wife at route 2, box 240, trenton, florida, august 25, 1993. continued on the voc rehab assessment: he reports he had just moved to the area. he has worked for a roofer in the area. mr. clark reports he will be returning to his wife. they are working out their marriage and she is definitely against him drinking and will be involved in his recovery. he reports he was working for mac johnson out of gainesville for one month after moving here -from moving here from rome. i had not planned on going through all of this with you because i knew that they knew what was in these records. i did not know they were going to show you one record and not highlight the stuff they do not like, and then if they -- i think he said it was indisputable evidence that he did not live here. he said it was indisputable evidence that he did not live here. i'm going to get to that record in just a second. "mr. clark was able to express his thoughts and maintain some eye contact. he appeared somewhat lethargic during the interview. he had difficulty with dates and specifics. he reports when his wife left he became very depressed and began drinking heavily." that is the story of what happened when he was separated from his family and was still up in georgia and they were down here. the social worker service has a report and summary about mr. clark. and it tells us the date of interview was august 24th; his date of admission was august 23; his living arrangement was with his wife, patricia clark. patricia clark at the address below, trenton, florida, route 2 box 240. undisputed evidence they tell you. "he was in the army from '65 to '67. he has been living with his wife for the past several months. has been roofing. drinks on the ride home, hopes to hide it from wife." there is another record, too, that talks about him hiding it from his family. there is a reason why his children testified to you, i remember him being a social drinker like anybody else. because he did not do that in front of his children. and the reason melissa hausner testified it did not surprise her, which she said in her deposition and she said it again here, was because she found out after her father died about the drinking problem. and so once you find out that somebody has a drinking problem and they ask you whether you are going to be surprised, of course, you are going to say, no, i would not be surprised. because now she knows he is been in alcohol treatment at the va. that was her testimony at her deposition. but the sliver that got presented to you, just that little bit to make it look like she came in here and lied to you. social work assessment from the va: he is a 46-year-old married alcoholic admitted to 2b. this is an inpatient program. on august 23: this is the vet's first program. here to help resolve marital problems. wife will pursue divorce if he does not get help. vet appears motivated and ready for change. his strength was a supportive wife. the discharge plan: vet will return home upon discharge. return home here with his wife, patricia, who he is told them numerous times he was living with. august 18, 1993 was the er visit where he had been on a six-day binge. and you know that patricia had enough. and what happens when he comes in? he had his last beer at 3:00 in the morning. now, i do not know if melissa and jody were up at 3:00 in the morning going to school at 12 and 15 and 14 years old at the time. i doubt they were up at 3:00 in the morning when charles clark was drinking. i doubt they were. there is no evidence that they were. he would drink in the middle of the night to hide it from his family. at the time they wished to go to georgia because he is back with patricia but she is sick of him drink, and so that was on the 18th. but on the 19th: patient changes his mind. he has an alcohol -- alcohol treatment program appointment on august 20th at 1:00. i talked to him on the phone, he is stable, he feeling pretty well. this is a couple of days before he comes in for the treatment. and this is the record from the va medical center from september 12 and patricia clark signed it. again, his address is trenton, florida. the record that mr. furr showed you was this part at the bottom: separated and out of work. no work or a place to stay. and this is -- this is the same record, the exact same record that says: who do you live with: patricia clark, wife. they took one sliver of one record. there is 452 pages over there. they decided -- they choose. you know, they choose to take positions in here. there is no accident in here. there is no accident that they are going to say to you the things they say to you. it is not by chance; it is on purpose. it is a choice that r.j. reynolds makes and their lawyer makes as to what he wants to tell you. what does he think you are going to believe? and he told you that this is undisputable evidence that he was separated and out of work and did not have a place to stay. when the very same record, he says he is living with patricia clark, his wife. who is going to take you home from the hospital? again, the same record. patricia clark's going to take you home from the hospital. on september 12, va medical center: lives in trenton, florida. september 13, va medical center: patient's 46-year-old white male from trenton, florida. september 19: patient's going to go on a pass to visit his ten-year-old son. september 22nd: patient's a 46-year-old white male who lives in trenton with his wife and two children. september 12 to september 30th, his address is trenton, florida. and here is the record from his discharge summary that, he lives in trenton with his family, his wife and two children. but they told you, they told you that it is undisputed evidence that he was living somewhere else, somewhere in georgia. and i asked him, i did not know what their answer was going to be. i was curious what they were going to say in his closing argument. what is his address in georgia? two hours. army of people over here, nobody came up with an address of georgia. they told you that the children knew he had a drinking problem and that he did not hide it from his family. the va medical center record says: he now has -- now has binges constantly when feels like he can hide it from family. we do not make these things up when we come in here. there has to be evidence of it. to say that he did not hide it from his family is to say everybody is lying in the records. mr. furr made a statement during his closing argument and he told you and i wrote it down because it was striking, i thought: there is a claim in this case that mr. clark smoked against his will. do you recall him saying that? there is a claim in this case that mr. clark smoked against his will. and, folks, i can tell you, there is no such claim. it ain't in the jury instructions. it ain't on the verdict form. the claim here is not that he smoked against his will. the claim here is, he is like everybody else that r.j. reynolds knew about that were buying cigarettes from them: that most of those who smoked for any significant time would like to stop. many, but not most -- think about the import of that: many, but not most of those who would like to stop are able to do so. most of them, according to r.j. reynolds are not able to stop. this is r.j. reynolds. we did not type this up. r.j. reynolds' typed this up. this is r.j. reynolds telling you that the folks that buy their cigarettes would rather buy something else and would rather do something else. and the reason they keep doing it is they are addicted to nicotine. they ain't smoking for the turkish blend on their camel when they shut the door on a hospital bathroom and smoke a cigarette after telling the people that they used to be a smoker. they told you that asbestos caused charles clark's lung cancer. i showed this to you in the beginning part, i just need to show it to you again because i want you to see what dr. tetreault actually said after he said, i cannot rule out asbestos. he says, "there is no evidence from the records you have given me that asbestos played any role in his presentation." folks, if there was anything, there were plaques on his lungs, if there was any evidence, biological evidence that asbestos caused his problems, we would still have witnesses on the stand testifying about it. they called nobody to tell you that asbestos caused his lung cancer. they called nobody to tell you that roofing tar caused his lung cancer. nobody. nobody said those things. roofing tar has benzopyrene in it. so does r.j. reynolds' cigarettes. but they tell you it is something other than cigarettes that caused his lung cancer. they brought you no one to tell you what it was. and they brought you no one to tell you that that is what caused his lung cancer. there was a mention about mr. clark's first wife, glenda huckaby, and her testimony that mr. clark came it her after he had cancer. now, i saw you all taking notes. and i do not know what you write in your notepads and no one's ever going to know. but i know you took a lot of notes and i know you have been paying attention and i know that if you were paying close attention to glenda huckaby's testimony, you would have recalled that she heard that he had cancer, but she did not say that he had cancer when he came to see her. she had heard about it later. the point i'm trying to make to you is, i do not know exactly what charles clark said to glenda huckaby in the furniture store in the early 1990s, but i do know glenda huckaby said that he was living in rome, georgia at the time. so it was before he moved down here to florida that he had this conversation with her. and we know from the va records and his own admission in those records that his drinking at that time, when he became separated from his family and he was living in rome, he was binging constantly. he was depressed. the records say he was depressed and binging constantly. if he is binging constantly, he probably looked like death. he probably was not eating well. he probably was not sleeping well. he was probably really looking rode hard and put away wet. and when she had not seen him since 1966 which was her testimony. she had not seen him in 25 years, since 1966, i bet he did look different than how she remembered. i bet he did look like hell, binging constantly and depressed. but that was before he moved down with his family. desperate men do desperate things. that was before he came down to be with his family. there is no evidence that he did this after he was diagnosed with lung cancer. there is no evidence he did this after he was living in florida. and the truth is, if what they offered it for was to show you that he was not living here. well, everyone was within the sound of my voice knows that the jury instructions say that it was when he was -- when his lung cancer manifested is what governs where his residency was. that is what governs whether he was an engle class member. was he living in florida? was he a florida resident at the time his lung cancer manifested? they put it in and told you he already had cancer when he is up here in georgia telling glenda huckaby that he wants to be with her and they will go live at his brother's house. well, they told you that because they want you to punish charles clark, when we know that that did not happen. his brother emmett said, when he was sick he come up. this is trial testimony. i've got transcripts. when he was sick he come up one time. and the one time he came up, he got sick, he weighed 130 pounds and he could hardly walk. and he goes to the hospital. and who took him to the hospital? his family took him to the hospital. his family -- and these records are in evidence. look at the redman medical center records from rome, georgia. he was in the hospital with his family there. his family is at his bedside. his family brings him to the hospital. he is talking with his family. and when he is discharged, he is discharged home accompanied by his family. the reason that this is important is because the one time he ever went back to rome, georgia to see his family was after he had completed chemotherapy and radiation and weighed 130 pounds and he could not even get around by himself. betty jordan said he was sitting in the car, could not even get out of the car. that was the one time he went back to rome, and he had to be carted around by his family and he spent half the trip in a hospital. there was some talk about levulinic acid and how i did not bring that up in the initial part of the closing argument, so i feel compelled to show you the whole truth, not just part of it. we know from r.j. reynolds and dr. cook's testimony that they did this study in their r and d department on enhancement of nicotine bindings and nicotinic receptors by nicotine voluminant and levulinic acids. and we know that in that study they found that if they get the amount of levulinic acid in their cigarettes just right, not too much, not too little, the goldielocks' rule, you know, if they can get it just right they can increase nicotine binding in the receptors in rat brains by 20 to fifty percent. this whole idea that people choose to smoke, and here they are figuring out ways to keep people smoking even though they would rather not do it. we know from dr. cook who tells us that the list of ingredients on the website includes not just the ammonia compounds that they add to increase the nicotine, the free basing of nicotine so the smoker gets more kick like dr. keith described in 1973, but they are putting levulinic acid in their cigarettes. and he made a promise to you in opening statement that he did not keep. the promise was that they were not using levulinic acid in winston cigarettes that charles clark was smoking. now, the important thing is, is that winston became a non-additive cigarette in 1997. charles clark had been dead three years when winston became a no-additive cigarette. but up to 1997, they were monkeying with this just like they monkeyed with the rest of them. and here we have dr. cummings' testimony from here at this trial: there are many additives that alter ph. levulinic acid is an acid that was utilized to affect the ph except it would knock the ph down because if you go too high, you have to hit the sweet spot for ph. if you go too high, if it is too alkaline, like cigar smoke, it is hard to inhale. so using levulinic acid, for example, for it is salt form, it would actually knock down the ph levels and would reduce harshness. and studies from reynolds show that it increases the nicotine binding in the brain so it actually allows the brain to get a little bit more of the neurontin in the brain, and get more effect of the nicotine and that makes cigarettes more addictive. and dr. cummings was asked on cross-examination: you do not know whether levulinic acid was ever used in winston cigarettes when mr. clark smoked that brand, do you? and he said: i've come across some business records that indicate that. and then he tried to impeach dr. cummings with his answer from their deposition a year or two ago and dr. cummings says, yes, i do not know at that time. but we know from dr. cook's deposition that they were using levulinic acid. and we know from dr. cummings' testimony that he is seen documents, the business documents that talk about that very thing. so they have made this promise to you that they were not using levulinic acid. it is on their ingredient site on their website. and dr. cummings did tell you they were using it in winston's. and i want to talk to you for a minute about dr. cummings and dr. burns, because it is as if -- because they are in public health there is this guttural hatred for these folks by r.j. reynolds. and the attack on public health that existed in the '50s and the '60s and the '70s and the '80s and the '90s, it still exists today. they will never stop attacking public health because public health is the cigarette company's nemeses. the public health has been trying to get the message out for decades. the public health is the one's that try to let people know they have been lying. and there is a reason why they have been lying, because the lies work. i want you to think about -- i want you to think about the jobs that dr. burns have and dr. cummings have. dr. cummings is a cancer researcher at the medical university of south carolina, used to be at roswell park. dr. burns, the university california in san diego who is retired now and is a pulmonologist, took care of sick people in the hospital. he told you about all that. their job was to help patients. dr. cummings, his job, he was not a physician but he taught physicians how to deal with nicotine addiction. and they did this for decades before any of the documents that you have seen, why has not that stuff came back? nobody had that. the cigarette companies had all that. they were forced, they were forced at the end of the 20th century to give up all those documents. they were forced to. okay. now, up until that time, dr. burns is working with patients that cannot quit; died from smoking-related disease; quit; tried to quit several times but failed; try to quit; failed; ended up dying. dr. cummings who is run these smoking clinics and started quit lines, in the thousands of people he is dealt with in his career and personally dealing with quitting smoking, and you see it over and over and over again, and you try to tell them that it is bad for you and you try to teach them about how to quit, and they just keep failing, they keep failing. and then one day, then one day you get a grant and you are provided 16 million pages of documents from the cigarette industry. and all these years you are wondering, why is it that these people cannot stop? why is my life's work dedicated in trying to get people to stop and just do not do it? well, i guess their behavior is their fault. and then you find out in 16 million pages of documents -- you all just seen the snippet over in here. i told you in opening we would be here until next summer if we tried to show you all this stuff. and then you find out the truth. it is your job, it is been your job all this time. and you get 16 million pages of stuff and you start reading it and you find out that they always knew. they always knew it caused cancer. they always knew it was addictive and they knew that they needed to -- if they did not get kids to smoke and they made them less addictive, then people were going to stop smoking. and if people found out the truth, they were going to stop smoking. so what did they do? they lied so people would not have the truth, and then they engineered cigarettes to be more addictive, make them addictive as you possibly could. and it is a lawyer trickery kind of question to say: has there ever been a cigarette that was more dangerous or less dangerous than winston's? well, they are all dangerous. how can a public health official say that one cigarette is less dangerous than the other? they all kill you. how can you say one is more addictive or less addictive? they are all addictive. they are all addictive. they are all addictive. it is a trick. once you say, one is less deadly, then they have used it against you then. if you say, they are all deadly, they used it against you. snippets; just snippets; just little slivers of the truth; not the whole truth. the testimony in this case from folks that were from rome that knew charles is a little different than what was portrayed in the defense's closing arguments. in this case, emmett clark testifies that back then, we did not have the warnings and things out and stuff. you just smoked and nobody was telling you not to and what it would do to you. and glenda huckaby said that she never saw the news story talking about the health hazards of smoking back then. she never read about the health hazards of smoking in a newspaper or magazine during that time. she never saw that. and what did harold proctor tell you? he did not even recall hearing about the surgeon general report in 1964. and they might say harold proctor's wife, she remembers having that conversation with charles clark. but whoever it was she was talking to was smoking with her husband, it was not charles clark because her husband never smoked a cigarette with charles clark. so when you step back and look at the whole truth in this case, what you have is somebody who did have life problems. he sure did. he was an alcoholic. we put in every one of those records. and you know that alcoholic can cause nicotine addiction, you know that alcoholic can cause lung cancer. you know that their cigarettes do both. you know they engineered their cigarettes to do both. you know that they lied about all of that. you know that they tried to blame everyone for everyone else's behavior, but they take no responsibility for their own behavior, none. every time. every time. he is talking about, oh, he is not a smoker that started smoking in the 20s or the 30s or the 40s. but what do they do. that is all their fault then, too. mr. furr: objection, your honor. there is no such evidence in this case. mr. gustafson: well, he is the one that brought it up. mr. furr: there is no such evidence, your honor. i move to have that comment stricken from the record. the court: motion granted. jury disregard the comment. go ahead, mr. gustafson. mr. gustafson: r.j. reynolds told you that when they were talking about folks choosing to smoke, that that is what freedom is all about. we get to make choices and take responsibility. well, it is not that way for r.j. reynolds. they make their choices and then they do not take any responsibility. we have seen that in this trial. they lied to people and they knew people would die. they celebrated that their lies worked and people relied on it, and then they blame people for lying. there is not any evidence that charles clark, when patricia clark told charles clark that cigarettes were bad for him in 1971 and he needed to quit, there is no evidence that he believed her. i'll bet you charles clark -- who did you think is going to know more about the dangers of smoking cigarettes, your wife or the company that makes them? who knows more? they mentioned -- mr. furr talked to you about the 1956 alan rodgman document where r.j. reynolds' studied their unfiltered camel brand, the constituents of that smoke, and compared it with their filter brand winston, and winston had 2.5 times as many pahs. and then he said, well, you have never seen another document that said that they did not reduce that. if there was a document that said they reduced that, you would have seen it. you have have seen it. if there was a document where they even attempted to study it, you would have seen it. they were not interested. they could not reduce polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons. dr. rodgman said that in multiple papers. winston's were always that way. charles clark could not have known that. they showed you that instruction, he could not have known. could not have known what r.j. reynolds knew. he could not have known it. he could not have known that. he could not have known that during his entire lifetime -- i'll show this to you again that they did not have answers to this -during his lifetime, r.j. reynolds never admitted publicly that r.j. reynolds knew there has never been a cigarette sold anywhere in the world that was not addictive and did not cause cancer. every day of his life they lied about that very thing. and he could not have known about that. he could not have known that there has never been a cigarette that was not addictive and did not cause cancer. he could not have known that r.j. reynolds, with the winston pure white modern filter had two and a half times as many pahs, but they are expecting -- they expect charles clark to know what was in their company vault and documents that were not released until after he died. one last thing on damages and then i'm going to close, because i know you all are sick of hearing from us. and it is scary to sit down and say, what if i did not cover something i think is important, and then i'll think about it 15 minutes later in the parking lot about, you know, i cannot believe they let me do this, you know. that is the way it goes through in my mind. and but i know that you hear the things we say and you pay close attention to what we say. and i know you scrutinize what we say. i know that. you do not know me and you do not know mr. furr and we do not have your respect until we earned your respect. and you do not listen to us until we earn the right to be listened to. and that is why we have to be careful about what we say here in court, and making promises we do not keep. and nothing else i can say matters. we understand that. we understand that. but, you know, i told you all when i was talking about damages that i had three things. one was to follow the law and follow the judge's instructions. and if you find it in your hearts and any evidence that you are going to give, these children are hurting. follow the law. and the other thing i said was, do not award more than 3 million per child. i did not ask you for $9 million. what i told you, because i know you -- you know, if i do not say anything to you it is like, stick your finger in the wind. and what i'm trying to tell you is, i'm trying to give you parameters. whatever you think fair should be respectful of their loss. i'm not asking you for any money. but i think you heard what i told you. one was follow the law; two, do not award more than 3 million per child. please do not do that. it is too much if you do. and if someone has that idea, tell them do not go more than that. that is not asking you for $9 million, and i think it insults every one of you to think that that is what i meant. what you should do is award damages based on the evidence and the law the court gives you. and i ask you to have be respectful of each of their losses. those were the three things i said, and i stand by them now. but i am not going to stand up here and apologize for showing you the whole truth in this trial. they would love to have a two- or three-day trial. in a two- or three-day trial, we cannot show you a 50-year lie and how it is affecting people and how deep it went. we cannot do that in three days and they know that. so i'm not going to apologize for doing that. this case is important. what they did was important. what they did and how it affected human beings, fellow americans is important. this case is about charles clark and his children. it is not about everybody else out there. the law allows you to consider the harm to everybody else out there in deciding whether to award punitive damages. but you can only award damages if we go to phase two, which is a very short phase. the only thing that you can do then is to award damages, punitive damages, based on the harm to these people. and that is to punish r.j. reynolds. it is not to deter r.j. reynolds. when they told you i think at the end of mr. furr's closing argument he said that r.j. reynolds -- and you do not have to worry about us concealing the health effects of smoking. he just spent two hours telling you everybody knew back in 1954. you see it is both side of their mouth constantly. it is been like that for 50 years and it is always going to be that way. it is always going to be that way. smart folks are going to see through it. i'm going to close with this: it takes gall to blame a loyal customer for believing your lies. it does. it takes gall to do that. charles clark was intelligent and he was hard working, but he was a simple man. and i think anyone that says that he was not uneducated is fooling themselves. he was an uneducated man. he made the best that he could and he did pull himself up by his boot straps. but that is charles clark accomplishment, not r.j. reynolds. but somebody who is a roofer with a fifth-grade education whose father lives from the age of 13 with a host of life's problems that probably most people cannot really fathom, the last thing he needed was a great big company like r.j. reynolds -- forget the rest of them because they all did it together -the last thing he needed was them plotting and scheming and monkeying with his cigarettes to keep him pressing a lever like a lab rat to get nicotine all day long, because that is their business not to. and that is also that reynolds and the others can satisfy their addiction to money. that is what that is all about. they cared about money. they did not care about people. and they did not care about what would happen to charles clark, and you do not see his name in any of the records. they did this with everybody, not just him. they did not care about what he was doing in his 50s or 60s or 70s. they just wanted him to go to winn-dixie and buy another pack. and think did not care about him when he was breathing his last in front of his kids. so when they said that they put the public's health above all other considerations back in january 4, 1954, was that a lie? you bet it was. and now they say, it does not matter. he did not read the paper that day. and the next 50 years he was following the plan that they started with on january 4, 1954, the next 50 years was all about fulfilling that plan. so a guy who is got a fifth-grade education, who struggles to put a business together and raise a family, make ends meet, is supposed to know what is in r.j. reynolds' secret box. he is supposed to know r.j. reynolds was lying when they said it was okay to smoke, that it had not been proven. he is supposed to know that all the fancy science and grants and these ctr people that they like to talk about was just an industry shield. now, that is their document. they called it, it is just an industry shield to give them some kind of credibility. and they are still trying to use it to get credibility with you today. he is supposed to know that the pure white modern filter does not do a thing, and that the tobacco blend in winston was more carcinogenic than what was in the camels. and he is supposed to know that they are putting ammonia, that they there putting levulinic acid in there. he is supposed to know all that and then they come in here and they blame him for not quitting. lawyer word play does not change the truth. that is why -- that is why juries try cases and not lawyers. we get all enamored with each other and how technically great we are and, you know, admire one another's work. but juries see through all the nonsense. they lied about the risk. they did it on purpose. they knew people would die and they did not care. there it is. charles clark was a replacement smoker for some other poor soul who died from a smoking-related disease. ask yourselves what happened in 2000 that made r.j. reynolds and the rest of them come out and say that cigarettes are addictive and cause cancer. what do you think happened? do you think there was some breakthrough, new scientific study that came out that ended the smoking and health controversy? no. do you think one of those nobel prize winners that said they funded the ctr and came out with a study that said winston was addictive? huh-uh. it was because reynolds and the others were forced to give up all secret company documents. the same ones you saw here in the courtroom. they have only been out for about 13, 14 years now. that is why they have to come in here and say what they say. you see, the reason -- the reason the 1964 -- i think he said -- i think he said, the 1964 surgeon general report that came out that said that smoking cigarettes caused lung cancer in men, i think he said that dr. stueck said it was the biggest -- one of the biggest news stories of the 20th century. now, if everybody knew in 1964 that smoking cigarettes caused cancer, how in the world would the 1964 surgeon general report be the biggest news story of the 20th century? how could that be. we pick up the paper and we read it. we do not read news stories about how gravity makes objects fall to the earth. we do not read news stories about how the earth ain't flat anymore; it is round. we read news stories that are newsworthy. and the biggest story of the 20th century since 1964 surgeon general report findings, it is because people did not know. it is because people might have heard about it but they never believed it. and here's proof that it is true, but everybody's doing it. just like when i told you about those cell phones causing brain cancer. you do not believe that is true. but maybe 50 years from now somebody's going to say, well, you are stupid, holding an electromagnetic device to our head. and that we did not love our children because we let our children have them. but we do not believe it. we have heard it, but we do not believe it. i've heard aliens landed in area 51 in new mexico. i do not believe that is true. there is a difference between hearing about it and believing it. and cigarettes, that was a big deal. they were everywhere. everybody did it. athlete's did it, movie stars did it. everybody did it. it was everywhere. we talked about it in openings. everybody in here was smoking. you all could be smoking 20 years ago. when our fathers were trying to quit smoking in the '70s, we made ashtrays in school we brought home for our dad when they are trying to stop. this case, it is not just about what they did to charles clark. this happened to a lot of people. times are different today. you all, you have been wanting this case for a week. follow the jury instructions. and what you do here matters. what you do here is important. and good luck.