plaintiff's closing mr. alvarez: may it please this honorable court. the court: yes, sir. you can put that wherever you want. mr. alvarez: miss hess, counsel, counsel. good morning. the jury: (collectively.) morning. mr. alvarez: the first thing i want to do is thank you all because it really has not escaped our attention how much you all paid so close attention to the testimony in this case. we have watched you very closely and we seen how you look at every single witness; you take notes with every single witness, whether it was for a witness that we brought on or a witness that philip morris brought on, you all gave equal attention to both sides, and that is important, and we appreciate that. i'm going to split my time, my hour time with mr. paige. i'm going to speak for half an hour, mr. paige will speak for half an hour. we are sharing our time. i got a check mark in kindergarten for playing well with others. so we are going to go for a little bit, but it is not going to be cumulative testimony or evidence or argument. what you are going to hear is i'm going to be talking more about the addiction part of the case and mr. paige will address other issues that i think are also important, okay? but let us talk about what this case is about because it is a very, very narrow issue. in a few moments after all the arguments over, the judge is going to give you certain instructions, that is the law that you have to use. think of it as a standard operating procedure, it is a manual, it is the law that you all have to use to decide this case. now, there is certain things that are not in dispute. in fact, there is quite a few. the first thing is that cigarettes that contain nicotine are not addictive -- are addictive, that is not in dispute. the second thing is that smoking cigarette causes lung cancer, that is not in dispute. the third thing is that stuart hess died of lung cancer. that is not in dispute. the fourth thing is that stuart hess' lung cancer was caused by smoking philip morris' cigarettes that contained nicotine. that is not in dispute. the only real question is, was he addicted? and in a few minutes you are going to get some instructions telling you what the issue is, and this is what the instruction's going to say: "the issue for your determination is whether stuart hess was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, and, if so, whether such addiction was the legal cause of stuart hess' death." now, that is a lot of words, but i'm going to break it down for you very simply. what it means is was he addicted and was that addiction the legal cause of his death. okay. now, it is undisputed that mr. hess died of lung cancer caused by smoking philip morris' cigarettes that contained nicotine. that is undisputed. so that portion, the bottom portion of the legal cause of his death, we think we have established that because the evidence is undisputed that he died of lung cancer from smoking the cigarettes that were manufactured by philip morris. so it is a very narrow issue that you are here to decide today. this phase is about addiction, not fault. very important, you have heard a lot of evidence from both sides about what the tobacco company did, what mr. hess knew and did, you have heard a lot of that evidence. it is not your place today to decide that. the instructions are not going to tell you to consider that. in fact, they are going to tell you the opposite. you will not hear one word from the judge's instructions that you are supposed to decide who was at fault, that is for another day. follow the law and the judge's instructions and just decide if mr. hess was addicted to cigarettes, that is it. so when you go back in the jury room and you start deliberating amongst yourselves and you hear one of your other co-chairs say, well, you know, he should have done this and he should have done that, stop, that is not what we are here to decide. what we are here to decide is was he addicted? that it is today. there will be time to discuss those issues, and we welcome that debate, we welcome that debate, we are just not going to have it today. if you find that he was addicted, you will later decide fault of the parties. the judge's instruction on evidence in phase i. this is another instruction, this is another sop, this is another manual, another operating procedure that you are going to hear from the judge. some of the evidence you have heard on the issue presented for your decision may also relate to other issues that are not before you. you should consider such evidence only if it relates to the issue before you. and the only issue before you is, was he addicted? that is it. in other words, choice, fault, responsibility, that is not what this case is about today. we will have time to decide those issues later. evidence of stuart hess' addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine. you know, i thought about this for a little while, and i said what is the best way to explain your job? and i think the way you want to look at it -- there is a television show called csi and they have csi miami, csi las vegas, they have them all over the place now. and what it is, it is a show in about an hour, crime scene investigators analyze a crime and try to solve it in an hour. and we have had two weeks. but your job is similar to that. your job is to decide the mystery, decide the issue, put on your badge that says csi juror broward county to decide this case. and there is three ways that is a tried and true method of investigation that every good investigator knows. physical evidence, the eye witness testimony and the scientific evidence. those are the three foundations for a good investigation. you cannot have a good investigation without those three elements. and guess what? you know you have solved the crime or the mystery or the issue when all three of those fit together like a puzzle. when the physical evidence, the eye witness testimony and the scientific evidence all fit together, you know you have solved the mystery. well, let us look at some of the physical evidence in this case because the medical records are physical evidence. they were made years and years before mr. hess died or before this lawsuit was even contemplated, before anybody hired lawyers. the medical records are physical evidence. and what did they say? they say he started when he was 15 years old. miss hess recalls a conversation, he thought it was 12 or 13 years, it does not make a difference, let us assume he was 15 years old, that is a long time to start smoking. maybe nowadays people are offended by that, but in the '50s, it was normal. but if you look at the medical records, that is exactly what it says. the patient has a long and heavy smoking history starting at age 15. it is in the medical records, physical evidence, we know when it started. he is a two to three pack per day for 40 years, in the medical records. the patient has been a heavy smoker of three packs of cigarettes, in the medical records, physical evidence. when he was in the hospital 1993 for the bronchitis, he smoked in the hospital. now, you heard some evidence, well, maybe he did, he took the cigarette back. well, maybe that was one time. but when the nurse followed him to the atrium, she was suspicious of this guy, saying, hey, he is going to smoke, i know he is going to smoke. use your common sense. that is the other thing you have to do, use your common sense. they documented in the medical records another piece of physical evidence. patient leaving the unit, found off the floor in the atrium smoking. physical evidence. told he had lung cancer, he could not stop. chemotherapy, he could not stop, physical evidence. he smoked right through the majority of his chemotherapy. it is in the medical records. but it is just not the records. miss hess, like any normal family, the hess family kept photographs of them through good times and in those photographs, what do we see? mr. hess always with a cigarette in his hand; at his wedding, at the reception line with a cigarette in his mouth getting ready to light it. now, they talked about that he was overweight -- well, they did not say he was overweight. they said he was obese. look, use your common sense. does that look like an obese man? we also have other physical evidence, the quit aids, they are here. they are introduced into evidence, you can look at them, you can see them, you can read them, the nicorette gum, the hypnosis tapes, the phase out, the hole punching machine. all those are physical evidence that he tried to quit. now, the other part -- we talked about physical evidence. the second part, the second important factor to helping you as a csi investigator to solve this mystery is eye witness testimony. the first one is dr. ross. now here's a guy, he is a physician for 40 years, 40 years. this was the second time he is ever come to court. this guy's not a paid expert. he is not a slick, polished guy who comes in, done this a million times, comes in, that is not him. he sees patients. he cares about people. and he remembered stuart hess. he knew this patient very well. and, in fact, if you recall in opening statement mr. reilly tried to make it sound like they were in cahoots, that they were friends. they were not friends. he was just -- he was a good doctor who cared about his patient. he cared for elaine, he cared for elaine's parents, he knew the family, but they never socialized together. he was just a family doctor. and what did he say? he said he was a chain-smoker. he talked about how if stuart had to wait in the waiting room for a little while, he could not handle it, he would have to go outside to smoke. if they put him in the examine room and he had to wait there longer than he thought he could bear, what would he do? he would go outside and smoke a cigarette and then come back. those are things that doctors do not forget. he knew from conversations, from his care and treatment of this man that he was tormented, and that is the word that he used -- that is not the word that we used -- that is the word that he used. he used the word "he was tormented" by these cigarettes, "tormented." in fact, he was taking ativan and some other drug for anxiety, and he also prescribed it to help him with the addiction. and stuart would come in and say, doc, i cannot take it anymore, i'm trying to quit, please up my dose. that is why this doctor came in here, that is why this doctor remembered him, that is why this doctor came in and told the truth. and when they called him from the hospital in that 1993 admission said, hey, you know, the nurses called and said, doctor, you know, you got a problem with this patient here, he keeps going off the floor to smoke. and what you heard him say was there is an order that i wrote, said let him go outside and smoke. and the only reason i would given him that order was he was threatening to leave because he wanted to smoke. so it was more important that he take his treatments and he stay in the hospital so i gave into him. that is addiction. that is addiction. an unbiased physician. the next one is howard dorfman. this is a gentleman, i do not know if you recall him, we played his testimony by videotape. this is a man who was mr. hess' business partner for ten years. he was also a smoker, he was also a smoker. and he told us all of all the methods that they tried to use to quit, all of them, aqua filters, some extension filters, the gum, the fake cigarettes, the chewing tobacco, they tried them all and they could not quit. here's a man that has no stake in this lawsuit, his ex-partner, who had not been together since 1983 has no motivation other than to tell the truth. and what did he say? he said he was a chain-smoker and he was addicted, another eye witness. dawn aaron christensen, that is the young lady who lived in the neighborhood and was friends with the hess' daughter. she is now all grown up, she lives in connecticut and guess what, she is a psychologist, she knows about addiction. you heard it. and what did she say? she said i remember as a child that this man was always smoking, always smoking. and when he tried to quit the couple times that i remember off the top -- i could not even go over to the guy's house because he got so irate. that is addiction. the son, david hess, he was one of the first witnesses that you heard from, it is funny what people remember when you are a young kid, the things that stick in your mind about your father, and he told a story that i thought maybe was kind of brief but telling. he said, you know, i remember one day we were working on the pool pump, my dad was fixing the pool pump and he had both hands, he was working this, he was doing this, and his addiction was so strong that his cigarette was in his mouth just bouncing up and down, up and down, up and down. i'll never forget that. i'll never forget that. he said he was addicted, that he tried -- in fact, he said how many times does my dad have to try? he tried for years and years and years and years. and mr. paige is going to talk to you about some of those issues that are important but he tried to quit. and he was not successful over all those years because of one reason and one reason only -- and it is not motivation and it is not cause he did not want to -- it is because he was addicted to a drug, a highly addictive drug, nicotine. you heard video of allison gentille. she said her dad was always smoking. she did a project, she wanted to see how much money the family was spending on cigarettes and she figured out it was between two and three packs, she followed it for a week. she added up, she did the math. and the next one, elaine hess. elaine was married to this man for 32 years. he was smoking when she met him and he was smoking when he died. before he stepped foot off that bed every morning, reached over for a pack of cigarettes every morning. that is addiction. dr. ross said addicted, mr. dorfman says he is addicted, christensen says he is addicted, young mr. hess says he is addicted, the daughter said he is addicted, the wife said he is addicted. the eye witness testimony, addicted. let us look at the scientific evidence. that is the third method because everything has to fit together. the clerk: ten minutes, counsel. mr. alvarez: wow, okay. i know i play well with others, but...all right. nicotine is a highly addictive drug, just as addictive as heroin and cocaine, that is established. surgeon general of the united states: "the longer you smoke, the more likely you are to be addicted." this man smoked for 40 years. studies show the most predictive factor for addiction is how long after you wake up in the morning do you smoke a cigarette? before he got out of bed. while he was still in bed he was smoking, and that is the most important predictor for addiction. he smoked two packs a day, that is an extraordinary amount of smoking, and he did two to three. dr. ross said it, the medical records said it, mr. dorfman said it, miss hess, the son, the daughter, they all agree. 17 million smokers every year try to quit, but only five percent, five percent are successful. that means 95 fail. and you can go to one of these top clinics to stop smoking, their rate is not -- it is a little bit better, they think it is great, but it is only twenty percent, which means like 80 percent of the people fail. some smokers are genetically susceptible to nicotine addiction. who says that? dr. glassman. and guess who else said it? dr. nace yesterday said it. let us talk about dr. glassman. he was our psychiatrist, our addiction expert. remember, he was one of the first couple witnesses that we had on the stand, he was an elderly gentleman from new york, world-renowned expert on addiction, published over 50 articles on nicotine addiction. the lawyers were not going to tell him what to say. in fact, if he did not like a question that mr. paige asked him, do you remember what he said? that is not a good question. now, we did not wind him up and send him here. that is the test of a true expert, when he is here to educate you. we did not supply him with any medical research or articles on addiction. he knew it. he knew this material cold. he ran a smoking cessation clinic. he says two packs of cigarettes is an extraordinary amount -- this is his word, it is "inconceivable." mr. hess was not addicted. "inconceivable." and he uses the national institute for drug abuse definition of addiction, nida, the government. he said, listen, i use the government's definition and the government's definition, he is addicted. and when we asked him to a reasonable degree of medical probability, which, you know, means, you know the greater weight of the evidence, do you know what he said? he goes, listen, i know you lawyers talk about greater weight than this, more probable true than that. let me tell you what i think it is. 99.99 percent addicted from one of the top experts on addiction in the world. dr. glassman's testimony makes sense, it is common sense. a man who smokes two to three packs of cigarettes a day for 40 years is not addicted? use your common sense. but who does philip morris call? dr. nace. he is the gentleman that was here yesterday afternoon and morning. he is not written a single article on nicotine addiction. he is never done a single study or research on nicotine addiction. the lawyers had to send him the materials. could you imagine if mr. paige would have sent those articles to dr. glassman, what dr. glassman would have done? he would have called mr. paige up and tell him do not ever call me again, i'm educating you, you do not educate me. i'm the doctor. i'm the expert. the clerk: five minutes, counselor. mr. alvarez: he only sees a handful of patients that are trying to quit, he ignores the definition from the american medical association, the american cancer association, the u.s. surgeon general, the national institute for drugs, and even his own book. he defines it in his own book, he does not use the definition. it is incredible. so what does he use? he uses the dsm-iv. but do you know the problem with the dsm-iv is you are not supposed to use it for this purpose. if you are a csi investigator and the book says you are not supposed to use it for forensic purposes, do you know what that means? it means you are not supposed to use it in a case like this. it is not meant to diagnose dead people. it is meant to diagnose live people. do you know what it reminds me of? that bruce willis movie the sixth sense where he plays a psychiatrist and he is treating this young man who is haunted by ghosts and the whole time in the movie you think that bruce willis is alive and you find out that he is dead. the court: all right. you are ruining the movie for me. mr. alvarez: but the key part of that movie is a phrase. when the young boy finally gets the confidence that he could trust bruce willis, he looks at him and he says, i have to tell you a secret, "i see dead people." well, the dsm is not for diagnosing dead people. in fact, the dsm says that you are -- requires, look at the word they use, requires "obtaining a detailed history from the individual." dr. nace did not even know that. we had to point that out to him. he had to finally admit that there were flaws. in fact, he said i'm going to have to write a letter to the editor about this. he said it kind of jokingly, but do you know what, he realized that he used flawed material, a flawed criteria that was not meant for this purpose. here's some of his famous quotes, i wrote them down. "it is shaky, does not apply clearly, we are not there yet." it is shaky. i'll tell you what is shaky, his whole testimony was shaky. mr. reilly: objection, your honor. the court: overruled. mr. alvarez: or at least his cross examination was pretty shaky. other sources say that the dsm-iv, not proven valid. the evidence for the validity for nicotine dependence is limited, ill-suited for tobacco dependency. that is what he had in his materials that the lawyers sent him. in a serious wrongful death case you better come to court with something reliable. this is a serious case. but do you know what, let us walk through the dsm. there is seven criterias. you have got to meet three. he gave us barely one, right? but do you know what? mr. hess met them all. if not all, most of them. the first one, tolerance, as defined by either of the following. when we asked him in his deposition, do you know what he said? maybe he meets it. but he comes in here to court yesterday and says no. the man has taught -- the man was smoking for 40 years, how could he not have tolerance to it? the clerk: one minute, counselor. mr. alvarez: i'm going to borrow some time from my friend. the second one, withdrawal as manifested by either of the following, and it gives -- remember those eight things? when you look at the eight things, that is why miss hess -- they never asked miss hess those questions. he was irritable, he was restless, he had insomnia, he had a bunch of those things. he had most of them. but you know, if you do not bother to ask? but he said no. he met that one. a great deal of time is spent in activities necessary to obtain the substance. example, chain-smoking. now, here's -- this is the one that should have blown everybody away. he is an addiction expert and he says, you know, i cannot give them that one because i'm an addiction expert to nicotine, but i do not know what chain-smoking is. well, then you better find another line of work. but then again, if you are using a criteria that you do not know the words for, if you do not know what the chain-smoking is, why do you bother using this criteria if you do not know what it means? how does that make any sense? and the substance use is continued despite knowledge of having a persistent or recurrent physical or psychological problem that is likely to have caused or exacerbated by the substance. what they are saying here is, listen, if you are taking -- you know, this is bad for you, you have got a condition that makes it harmful for you and you continue to do it, right? you know, that is fancy words for that. i'm not a fancy guy, you know, it took me a long time to study to get through law school, i had to do it at night, you know, because i had to work through the day. but let me tell you, i can read things like that and make sense of them, and that is what that means, okay. now, they made a big deal about that he had this heart condition, the ihss, do you remember all that? it was bad. in fact, the lady doctor came in and, you know, he asked them, is it serious? and she says, it is very serious. well, you know, to me, serious, i did not know there was any other kind of seriousness. it is serious or it is not, right? but listen to this. if it is serious and he is got a heart condition that is bad and he continues to smoke when they told him he cannot, guess what, you meet that criteria. he had got bronchitis, he continues to smoke. he is got leukoplakia and he continues to smoke in the hospital. boom. and by the way, number three, number six, they do not even apply to nicotine addiction, because this criteria is for all drugs, not nicotine only. but do you know what, forget about that. we still meet five out of the six, using a dead man's book. but they let him believe it was not addictive. and these are the records that we, the documents mr. paige is going to talk to you more about that. they knew this was addictive and they duped him, they kept saying it was not. and do you know what, that is the last thing that you should be telling someone who is addicted; that something's not addicted, because all an addict wants is an excuse to continue to justify that behavior. and that is what they did. and mr. hess was in the majority of smokers believing it was a habit. if you look at those numbers, this is 1982 through 1978, you know, smokers, 25 percent of them thought it was only an addiction. most of them thought it was a habit, they thought they could quit. those are polls. philip morris' three cs: create, condone and confirm. they created doubt about the safety of smoking, they condoned smoking as something glamourous and sophisticated, they confirmed that smoking was safe, the three cs. and what did mr. hess do? he is got the three bs. and what are the three bs? he bit, he believed and he bought. he bit, he believed and he bought. i'll go through some of these 'cause -- do you know what, is not it ironic -- that is a song by the way -- but is not it ironic that mr. -- professor schaller comes in, he is the historian, all right. he comes in for three hours, he shows us all these documents. if you notice, we did not object, in fact, we said from the first one, all, bring them all in, we do not care, right? but for 47 years philip morris refuted those very same documents, those very same studies, those very same reports, they said they were not true, right? but is not it ironic that now they come into court and they want to embrace the very same documents that they criticized for 47 years. is not that ironic? the court: excuse me just one second. deputy, we have no more room. you need to stand at the door. we cannot allow anyone else in the courtroom. go ahead, mr. alvarez. mr. alvarez: to make the argument that mr. hess should have known that philip morris was not telling the truth, i guess what they are saying here is, you know, you should not have believed us, you know, you should not have believed us. when we are telling you that it is safe, do you know what, they are going to come in to court and say you should not have believed us, the manufacturer of a product, you should not have believed us. real quick about professor schaller. this guy never did a lick of research for the tobacco -- he never did a lick of research on tobacco until he was hired by the tobacco lawyers. he was a historian, he had nothing to do with tobacco. all of sudden he gets hired and do you know what, he likes this gig, do you know why he likes it? they paid him over the years over a million bucks, over a million bucks. and do you know what he does? he never bothered to look at the internal documents of the company. if you are a historian on tobacco, do not you think you should be able to look at the documents for the company? it is -- you know, it is free, you know. it is on the website, it is free, anybody can look at them, do you think for a million bucks, maybe you want to google it and get on the computer and look at it, for a million bucks? so what did they do? they come in and they do a character assassination on this man. mr. reilly: objection, your honor. the court: overruled. mr. alvarez: stuart hess was a good man, he was a working man. and if he was anxious, he was anxious because he wanted to provide a good life for his wife, a good life for his son, a good life for his daughter, and he wanted to put them through college. and if he was anxious, well, that is a good thing to be anxious for, to provide for your family. i'll take that anxiousness everyday from any client. so what do they do? they twist, they turn, they manipulate. they put him under this microscope and make it seem like he is an irresponsible man. remember, this is about addiction. it is not about fault. i cannot wait to have that debate, but it ain't going to happen today. you are going to get this verdict form in a little while and it is going to say: we, the jury, return the following verdict. and it does not say anything about fault, responsibility. what it says is: was stuart hess addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, and, if so, was such addiction a legal cause of mr. hess' death? and do you know what the answer to that question is? yes. by overwhelming evidence. thank you, judge. mr. paige: good morning. the jury: morning. plaintiff's closing (continued) mr. paige: good morning. i speak fast, so i have limited time now. i did not have any red bull, but i'll try my hardest. i know everybody knows the evidence and alex pointed out you all paid attention and we do appreciate that. we do -- mr. reilly, mr. brenner, myself we all do appreciate you being here. we had a hard time, as you know, of picking a jury, there a lot of people, a lot of people came here and it was important to elaine and to philip morris that we had six fair-minded people who would listen to the evidence, two alternates, and listen to all the evidence and do what was right and do what was fair. and that is all we want. you know, this is america. this is the only place in the world where we can have six people and listen to the evidence and do the right thing. this is the only place in the world where a widow can come to court and take on a corporation like philip morris. mr. reilly: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. mr. paige: one thing that comes to mind that professor schaller said that i think really sums up their entire defense, that stuart made choices and stuart should be accountable and stuart is to blame and stuart is the one who -- he is not here to defend himself. but we know for years, for decades, for decades the tobacco companies had a simple motto, a simple motto that should not be accepted anywhere, anywhere, this is not right. and you cannot have a tobacco company in the back rooms with corporate men who are making money issuing shareholder reports that are in evidence and their motto, their slogan cannot be "doubt is our product" when they know that there is 400,000 americans every year dying. mr. reilly: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. mr. paige: "doubt is our product," and it is in evidence and i'm going to go through some of the documents -- is not an acceptable excuse to now blame stuart hess. and as mr. alvarez said, this is phase i, this is to determine if he is a member of the class, that is it. if he is addicted, he is a member of the class. he smoked for 40 years. he smoked, whether it was a pack and a half or three packs, he chain-smoked, he is addicted, he is a class member. you cannot exclude him. mr. reilly: objection, your honor. the court: overruled. continue. mr. paige: the evidence does not support excluding him from the class that he clearly belongs to. if he is not a class member, if he does not fit the definition, nobody is, nobody. just because you can quit -- and i will tell you right now, in phase ii, i'm not going to stand up here -- we are not going to stand up here and say he does not bear -- mr. reilly: objection, your honor. the court: overruled. continue. he has to finish his statement, counsel. mr. paige: we are not going to stand here and look you in the eyes, i will not do it, i will not look you in the eyes and say he bears no responsibility. mr. reilly: objection, your honor. the court: overruled. mr. paige: maybe he could have started trying to quit earlier, maybe he could have tried more. no, he tried a lot, he did try a lot. he is not perfect. nobody's perfect. if you have to be perfect to be a class member, we have got big problems. so he is not perfect. and when we get to phase ii, as mr. alvarez said, we are more than happy to talk about who is more at fault, mr. hess or the conduct of the tobacco companies. but right not it is -- mr. reilly: objection, your honor. the court: overruled. mr. paige: i lost my train of thought, and i have a lot, and you know i have sloppy handwriting so i'm doing my best and mr. reilly's making objections, and i do not hold it -- mr. reilly: objection, your honor. the court: overruled, sir. mr. paige: and i do not hold it against him. and he is -- he is -- you know we get along, you see, and he is doing his job, and i respect that. but i do not respect the evidence in the case which philip morris -- and we are going to show the clips of what they did and what they said, and to now turn that and try to exclude mr. hess from being a class member, it is not right, it is not right. and to think if he would have quit, because they are saying, hey, he did not quit, he did not try hard enough. if he did quit, if he did quit, they would say, okay, well, he was not addicted, he quit, or maybe he would have died, you cannot win with that, you just cannot win. and that is how they do it. that is their motto, it is doubt, it is confusion and not accepting the obvious, and that is wrong and that should not be a basis for excluding mr. hess from the class. so some of the -- if you saw my notes, you would wonder how i'm reading this -- but some of the facts that are not in dispute are -- and i just want to go through these quickly. there is 50 million american smokers. 17 million of them try to quit each year. seventy percent want to quit. 17 million try to quit each year. between three and five percent are successful, which means 95 to 97 percent fail, and we know why they fail, because nicotine -- look, when we all came here, when we started working on the case, i had no -- nobody knew how addictive nicotine is. you could not know unless you worked for philip morris and saw their documents. but we know now, we know now how addictive it is. and that is why people try chantix and they fail, they try medications. people quit for a year and they relapse later because we know that nicotine is highly addictive. it is as addictive as cocaine and heroin, there are high relapse rates, and that is the facts. so we know that there is a 95 percent failure rate, and we know that 400,000 people die every year from this addiction. mr. reilly: objection, your honor. objection, your honor. the court: overruled. mr. paige: so was he addicted? i'm not going to get much into it, you know -- oh, i have a board here -- or two boards. can -- can you see okay? the jury: (collectively.) yes. mr. paige: these are the philip morris documents. so the issue is, if we know that 85 or is it ninety percent of smokers are addicted, which is in the dsm -- dr. nace, who did not know the dsm very well -- the one part he disagreed with was the part that said ninety percent of smokers were addicted to nicotine. he disagreed with it because it is not good for philip morris if that is the facts. but that is the fact. and we know -- so is stuart hess one of these chippers, the light smokers that do not smoke very much, is he within the ten percent or is he within the ninety percent? it is absurd to say he is not addicted. it just does not make sense. but here's their documents. and the reason i think these are important is they say that -- it was not so much to prove that people did not know smoking was bad for a while or people did not know it was habit-forming, that was not the reason to show them. it is just to show how addicting nicotine is. this is the important part of these confidential memos that dated back in 1959, all the way -- '69, do we really want to tout cigarette smoking as a drug? it is, of course. 1969 -- all are -- they are talking about why people smoke -- all are perhaps motives, but we hold that none are adequate to sustain the habit in the absence of nicotine. they know people are smoking for the nicotine. he is not -- he is not smoking because he loves the taste. it is not like every morning he is waking up jumping out of bed because he has to taste the cigarette or he needs to hold it in his hand. it is the nicotine. without nicotine, people are not smoking. if they sold a nicotineless cigarette, people would not smoke it. in fact, there is a new quit aide now where they take the tobacco out and they just supply nicotine. so that is what the patch is, that is what the gum is, that is what -- all these medications are to give people nicotine which they have become addicted to. they talk about the effect being the most rewarding to the individual under stress. they know that. they know nicotine is most rewarding to the addicts who are under stress and they are going to come to court and they are going to now criticize stuart hess because he is under stress in this world, in this life, who is not under stress? so maybe when he started smoking as a 15-year-old and he smoked for the first 10 years, he was not under that much stress and he was still addicted, that does not meaning anything, it does not mean a thing. the product is nicotine. the cigarette package is a storage container for a day's supply of nicotine. think of a cigarette as a dispenser for a dose unit of nicotine. these are their documents. 1972: cigarettes are addicting. 1978: the reason for smoking is nicotine. their research program, the high priorities we believe that we sell most is nicotine. that is what it is. i mean, it is not a secret anymore to anybody in the courtroom. people do not know this. people walking around the street who come to court with preconceived notions about is it a choice, is it not a choice, they do not know all this that we know now. and the surgeon general of the united states said it is not a choice. and it is not a choice. it is in their manuals. these are reputable doctors appointed by the president of the united states who are saying people smoke because they are addicted, not because they chose to. it is a disease. nobody wants to be addicted to cigarettes. the only person or the only one who wants people to be addicted to nicotine is philip morris. they want you to be addicted to their product. and now when you get addicted, they want to exclude you from their class. you cannot win with that. 1988: the surgeon general of the united states does a big study on this topic and they find nicotine is a drug, cigarettes are addicting, and they are as addiction as heroin and cocaine, that is not in dispute. it is in all the books. that is the truth about nicotine, it is a poison. and philip morris would not agree with that. that is the craziest thing of all. for 50 years, knowing what they knew, knowing all this stuff on their internal documents, knowing people were dying for 50 years, they would not once admit that nicotine is addictive. in 1994, they are talking about congressional hearings on this document that is in evidence, congressional hearings that were going on on this topic, and they are saying philip morris does not believe cigarette smoking is addictive. well, now the cat's out of the bag. it is addictive. we all know it is addictive. for 50 years, they say, hey, our product does not kill, we are going to do some research, if there is anything dangerous, we will take it out. the cat's out of the bag, they are not taking anything out, okay. the product is deadly. people are dying. they make choices. and now they have one more doubt that they can try to sell, one more little bit of doubt. they can come to you and say, look, okay, we are caught, we are caught, but mr. hess is not addicted, that is their last hope here. they are going to exclude him by convincing you, by coming to you six people and hoping that you will find that they are credible, that they are credible after saying that nicotine is not addictive to now saying that mr. -- that mrs. hess' husband who is now dead was not addicted. and that is not right. could i see that instruction? there is a jury instruction, you are going to get this, and it talks about an addiction is the legal cause. the court: that is going to read "a loss," not injury on the top phrase. that is misstated. i did not catch that yesterday. it needs to be consistent. "loss" in both paragraphs. mr. paige: okay. thank you, your honor. so they are talking about if addiction is the legal cause of a loss or death, it substantially produces his death, which he died of lung cancer from smoking their cigarettes for years. but it says here "in order to be regarded as the legal cause, it need not be the only cause," and that is important because if -- again, we are not disputing, but if you think there are other causes that contributed to his smoking, that he was addicted but he liked the taste, or he was addicted and -- you know, i mean, you know, they think there is some other thing that contributed in terms of their defense, it does not matter, that does not exclude him. that is not the law. addiction just has to be one of the substantial contributing causes to his death. and it and clearly was. he clearly would not have been smoking, he clearly would not have gotten lung cancer had he not been addicted. now, this is a different world, and i just want to backtrack a little bit. these are some of the advertisements you saw that were in the air when stuart was younger and his parents were younger. i just think it is important when you go back in the jury room, you know, we know today it is different. it is different today. people -- you know, people do not smoke, you do not smoke in front of your kids. if your kids come home and they talk about smoking in school, you tell them no, you know, your kids -- if my daughter brought home an ashtray, you would be appalled by it, you would not accept that in today's society. but back then, you know, lou gehrig smoking, you know, that is a big statement; a doctor smoking, that is a powerful statement to an impressionable mind, a 15-year-old kid who is going to become a lifelong addict of their product. that is impressionable, that is the advertising, that the the message they wanted to portray. santa claus smoking? there is nothing more impressionable on a kid that santa claus, athletes and movie stars and doctors smoking. so yes, stuart hess made a choice, he is an impressionable young kid who started smoking. he did not choose to become addicted. that is not a choice, you do not chose something like that, nobody in their right mind would. here's an ad of philip morris back in the '50s that people would see. (video clip played). voice: do you inhale? then light up a philip morris. take a puff, get a good mouthful of smoke and slowly let the smoke come directly through your nose. now light up your present brand and do exactly the same thing. take a puff, get a good mouthful of smoke and slowly let the smoke come directly through your nose. notice any difference? voice: yes. but philip morris is so mild; while my own brand seems sort of harsh and burning. voice: that is irritation. and remember, the irritation you felt in your nose is the same irritation that occurs in your throat every time you inhale your own brand. so for a more -- philip morris, the one cigarette proved definitely less irritating, definitely milder than any other leading brand. do you inhale? then you certainly should. voice: call for philip morris... (video clip concluded.) mr. paige: we saw the commercials with doctors, with lucy, i love lucy, it was just -- that is the way it was back then, so you cannot -- the choice is his to start smoking at 15 years old, that is what they wanted, and now they are complaining about it. here's a board and we just think that this is very typical of what went on here today. not today, but within the two weeks. and i want to say that the phase -- we are talking about phases, and i do not want anybody to be scared, we only finished phase i. phase ii is going to be about one or two days. mr. reilly: objection, your honor. the court: overruled. mr. paige: and phase iii will be about a day. we will be done with the trial next week, i promise, so this is not -- you know, we are just asking to do the right thing, follow the law, do what is fair, do not exclude mr. hess from the class or mrs. hess. we are going to get through this trial timely, promise. but stuart made choices and nobody's going to deny it. i told you, we are not going to deny, you know, what he did, he started smoking, the warnings came out in '66, the cautions, and then they changed them to warnings. and maybe he should have -- there were doctors who were smoking then, president kennedy was smoking, people were smoking. should he have tried to start quitting earlier? would it have mattered? you know, maybe he was an educated man, but he believed their doubt, you know, that is a balancing act. but he tried, in 1974, you know, there was enough doubt, he overcome it. for 23 years, for 23 years this man tried to quit. it is undisputed. we do have the physical evidence, and he tried it cold turkey, candy, gum, fake cigarettes, chewing tobacco, hypnosis, aqua filters, phase out, punching, prescription medication, nicorette gum and the patch. i mean, he tried to quit. he wanted to quit. that was his choice. he chose to quit. he chose to quit, and he failed, you know. he chose to lose weight. he went to weight watchers, he got the bike, so he failed. does that make him a noncompliant person because he could not do in hindsight? they are scouring through his medical records and saying, oh, he did not lose weight, he is noncompliant. this guy's a problem, he is a problem. he is noncompliant. he did not take all of his medicine. he did not take all his medicine, he is noncompliant. we are going to blame him now. let us take him in court. hey, we lied, nobody will notice it. we will just start blaming mr. hess. we will throw out all sorts of junk on him, all the weight he forgot to lose, we will bring in this expert from university of miami who thinks if anybody wants to lose weight, they can, it is really easy; and anybody who says they tried to lose weight and failed is lying, is not telling the truth. well, that is not so. he was a good man. and whether he lost weight or not, whether he took his medicine, whether he ate a hamburger, whether he drank a martini's got nothing to do with the fact that he was addicted to nicotine. and nobody could tell mrs. hess that her husband was not addicted to nicotine. so what are their choices? what did they do to -- what did philip morris do? because choice is a two-way street. it is not a one-way street. why did he do what he was doing? they do not want to take any blame. this is when the research first started coming out -- and all of this is in evidence, these documents are in evidence you will see them again. but this is when the medical research started coming out and they decided to have a meeting, r.j. reynolds, philip morris, and, hey, what are we going to do here, we got this horrible stuff coming out about our product, people are going to start to stop smoking, we got to do something. well, so they met at the plaza, they created that tirc, that research group, looked like an independent body at first. they created hill & knowlton, i mean, this is really -- i mean think -- you want to think about something today, think about today if corporations would do that; have a meeting, get a scientific body together, start issuing statements to shareholders that they knew was false, it would not be tolerated, and it should not be tolerated -- their conduct -- because it was 50 years ago when mr. hess was a kid. they issued the frank statement saying that there is no agreement, there is no proof that smoking is one of the causes. they knew there was proof. there was proof from reputable doctors and they made a decision they were going to create doubt. doubt was their product. as long as they can create doubt in the mind of addicted smokers, people would continue using their product, that is what they wanted. and we all knew why they wanted it. and they knew what the results were, too. that is the sad thing. they knew it was happening. and now, you know, we have ads on t.v. for reasons. but back then, they knew what they were doing. and we have -- and i've only highlighted some of the papers that are in evidence. they are all in evidence, you could look through them again, but i know you all paid attention and knew pretty much what the deal was. the next one, please. this is the hill & knowlton report. this is from 1955: "the cigarette health issue is still considered top news. while there is growing tendency to emphasize the uncertainties and disputes in the issue, the end result is to keep the controversy constantly alive." they wanted to be a controversy. they could not allow the real side, the true side to be told, because once people knew what they know now, people are not going to smoke, people are not going to start smoking. people -- they are going to have less addicts and less people using their products. now i hear 18 percent of people smoke. back then, we know it was -- i think it was 57 percent of men smoked. the next document, the brady memo from 1962: "to date the tirc program has carried its share of the public relations load in providing materials to stamp out brush fires as they arose. so whenever there was bad news, they would have tirc issue an opposition, a different study that said something else, and then hill & knowlton would go and they would do their thing and, you know, they kind of stamp things out. surgeon general reports comes out in 1964. mr. reilly would have believe that they were so cooperative with the surgeon general, they really helped, they really wanted people to know what was going on. and we know when the surgeon general report came out, they had a meeting, philip morris had a meeting, and the president said: "we must in the near future provide answers which will give smokers" -- like stuart hess -- "a psychological crutch and self-rationale to continue smoking and we got to point out the weaknesses in the surgeon general report. and the path for more research is needed." so they knew what they were doing, and now they are going -- hey, how dare stuart hess believe us? who does he think he is to come to court and say that he could have doubted this for 10 years? you know, that is what they wanted. and they know from the polls, there were millions, literally, 10, 25, 30 million smokers who were buying their junk. doctors were smoking. this is after the surgeon general report, this clip, you remember this. (video clip played.) voice: there is something toxic about tobacco which are removable by filter? voice: well, obviously, a filter takes out certain tar and nicotine. i do not think the industry admits there are any bad elements. if there are bad elements, through our laboratories, through the surgeon general, through the a.m.a., through acts of god and luck, we hope we may find them. and if they are found, they will be removed. but at this point, we do not know. voice: do any of the research that the tobacco industry has been engaged in refute any part of the findings here or the conclusions as a whole? voice: well, without reading the report, i could not answer that to begin with. i do not think the tobacco industry as a whole agrees with the conclusions. (video clip concluded.) mr. paige: and that is the same person who wrote the report. and it is a plan. these are not dumb people. they had a plan, they did not think they would get caught and all along they knew exactly what they were doing. the next one -- this is the memo where people started smoking filters. they are telling people, hey, there is anything dangerous, we will take it out, we are doing research. what do you think a smoker who is smoking who is addicted who cannot stop or who is addicted, if he is hearing, hey, the tobacco companies are doing research, the tirc is doing research, if they find anything, they are going to take it out, the filters are helping, that is good news for an addict, that is not bad news. they are putting in their internal memos "it is the illusion of filtration that is important." "the illusion." well, it is important for them for their business so people will keep smoking. that is what they wanted, but that was not made public. the next memo we know about all the doubt they created, this is hill & knowlton. the next page. please, the next page. or the third page, i think; right, the third page, yeah. where it says: "the most important type of story is one which casts doubt on the cause and effect theory of disease and smoking." the cause and effect theory, that is what we are talking about here. what was the cause? did the addiction cause -- did the addiction cause his lung cancer? we know smoking cigarettes causes lung cancer. so they want to come in here and they want to cast doubt on the cause and effect theory of what caused mr. hess to die. this doubt was not just made up. this has been going on for decades. this is their motto, "doubt is our product." and when you are talking about important issues, people are watching, people are interested, it is not right to come to court and tell intelligent people to doubt the obvious. mr. reilly: objection, your honor. the court: overruled. mr. paige: the next one, please. this is another one. (video clip played.) voice: we do talk to the question of whether or not cigarettes are hazardous. we do not believe that cigarettes are hazardous. we do not accept that, because when, as and if any ingredient in cigarette smoke is identified as being injurious to human health, we are confident that we can eliminate that ingredient. voice: do you believe that cigarettes are safe? have they been proved to be safe, mr. cullman? voice: i believe they have not been proved to be unsafe. (video clip concluded.) mr. paige: the next memo, please. and to this doubt thing, you know, they want to create doubt. i mean, this is going on for decades, you know, from '64, there is '71, 1972, and they are not doing this because it is not working. they know it is working. and mr. hess, he is seeing all this, and we know around 1974 he starts trying to quit. there is nothing wrong with what he did. but if you think there was -- and again, i'm not going to stand up here, alex alvarez, or adam trop, my partner -- is not going to stand up here and tell you that mr. hess does not share some responsibility. and there is going to be an opportunity to compare responsibility. and we welcome that debate of comparing the responsibility of an addict who tried to quit with the responsibility of a corporation who lied and knew what they were doing. but that is not for today. the last clip, please. this is 1986. (video clip played.) voice: we asked philip morris, r.j. reynolds, brown & williamson, lorillard to appear on this program. none would. they told us to talk to the tobacco institute. the institute say anne browder would speak for them. voice: the case is still open; the jury has not come in. voice: it may not be harmful; you are not convinced? voice: it may be or it may not be, we do not know. voice: these pictures are from superman 2. marlboro, made by philip morris, is shown at least 13 times. i asked the tobacco institute while marlboros were shown so often in superman 2. voice: do you think cigarette manufacturers had something to do with that? voice: yeah, i think that -- voice: cigarette manufacturers do not make movies. voice: but what do you think, that the movie maker just showing marlboro on his own? voice: perhaps the movie maker was a marlboro smoker. (video clip concluded.) mr. paige: you know, their expert, professor schaller, asked him -- you may recall, you may not -- you know, it is funny, i remember when i do a witness there is like one or two things i remember that i think were good questions and answers, the rest of it probably nobody remembers. but one thing i asked him, i said why, why would the cigarette companies for 50 years tell people like stuart hess if their product did not kill, why would they tell people for 50 years that nicotine was not addictive? and he said there was two possibilities. he said one, maybe they did not believe it. maybe they did not believe it was deadly. maybe they did not believe it was addicting. but the other option he says, he said, well, the other thing is they lied, they lied. he said, those are the two choices: either philip morris did not know or they lied. and now the cat's out of the big, the gig is up, we all know the truth and they want to manipulate one more time. they have manipulated the media, they have manipulated the science, and they are going to manipulate to try to cast doubt one more time and it is not credible -- mr. reilly: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. mr. paige: the evidence is clear in this case that stuart hess is a class member, that is all we are saying right now, is a class member; somebody whose death was caused from his addiction of smoking cigarettes. it is clear. we have had to fight for it for two weeks, and we think we have proved our case. it is not beyond any doubt. it is by the greater weight of the evidence, which means more likely than not; you just have to believe that more than not, 51 percent of the evidence. it is clear he was an addicted smoker. and that is it. they examined his whole life, and i think it is clear. and i want to say in closing, and i -- hopefully i saved -- how much time is left? the clerk: you are actually out of time, mr. paige. mr. paige: how much time is left for rebuttal? the clerk: you have eight minutes left. mr. paige: so i'm going to sit down and i want to just say that i do thank you all and we do appreciate that you are here. i know you are going to go back to your jobs, you are going to go back to your lives and, you know, maybe for a couple weeks, say, hey, i was in this crazy trial, i've learned a lot and it was interesting. and that is fine. but as the years go by, you will go on with your life. mrs. hess will not. she will always remember 20 years from now, 25 years from now, hopefully, she will look back and say thank god the jury in 2009, my jury, did not exclude my husband. mr. reilly: objection, your honor. the court: sustained of that argument. mr. paige: please do not exclude him from the class, the evidence is overwhelming, and i thank you very much. the court: plaintiff. yes, sir. mr. alvarez: how much time? the clerk: seven minutes. mr. alvarez: seven minutes? all right. i do not think i will go seven minutes. this is my last opportunity today to talk to you. one of the issues is the legal cause, you know, he put it up on the board, i put it up on the screen and it is actually pretty simple. it really is a simple concept. of course he was addicted because if he would not have been addicted, he would not have smoked for 40 years, got lung cancer and died. addiction does not cause cancer. addiction causes you to continue to smoke. smoking causes the cancer, and that is why you die. very simple. but, you know, do not get caught up in these slick word games 'cause that is what they are, slick word games, that the tobacco company has been doing for years. and let us play that clip. and you are going to hear these same arguments and these same little slick, you know, arguments that they have made today, they made 40 years ago. (video clip played.) voice: mr. cullman, the conclusions are pretty stark and pretty solid. they say quite flatly the judgment that cigarette smoking contributes substantially to mortality from certain specific diseases and to the overall death rate, then they have the rate ten times as high for smokers in the case of lung cancer and rather higher in other cases. voice: well, that is awful hard to define the word "substantial." (video clip concluded.) mr. alvarez: it is hard to define the word "substantial." that is the same little slick games that they are playing right now. mr. reilly: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. it is too argumentative. do not do that again. mr. alvarez: okay. there is a pattern here, and the pattern is to create doubt. and i do not want -- we do not want doubt. we want the instructions clear so that you understand what you are supposed to do and how you are supposed to get there. no ambiguities. this case is not about dr. glassman's father and whether he was addicted to cigarettes or not. he died before i was even born. it is not what this case is about. it is not about all those things that mr. reilly talked about, could he have made choices, could he have done this. those are going to happen, it is going to happen in a different phase of the trial. your job is to decide whether he was addicted. we have already established that he died of lung cancer, lung cancer for smoking for 40 years. the question was: was he addicted? mr. reilly said that we tried to convince you that somehow stuart hess did not get the message, he did not get the message; that we were trying to convince you of that. in fact, it is opposite. the fact is he did get the message. he got their message. he got the message. the message of lies. that is the message he believed. and for them, after 50 years coming here and saying that they should not have believed them is outrageous. mr. reilly said that the 7th criteria in the dsm that i must have forgot, i must have foregone somehow, that it said that the substance use is continued despite knowledge of having a persistent or recurrent physical or psychological problem that it is likely to have been caused, right. he says, oh, i must have forgot that, but i can read, you know, i can read, because the next word is "or" exacerbated by the substance. well, why do you think that they told him he could not smoke? for fear of exacerbating the ihss, and that is exactly what their doctor said. i got their message. this is the message. the message is he is not addicted. he is not addicted. he is just anxious. but the question is not was his anxiousness the legal cause of his death? 'cause if that were the case, you know, i've never seen a death certificate that said someone died of anxiousness. people do not die of anxiousness. that is not what this case is about. it is about a man who smoked for 40 years, got lung cancer and died. and your job today to follow the law is to decide whether he was addicted. that is it. and we have presented you with overwhelming amount of evidence, both physical, eye witness and scientific evidence that all matches together. the clerk: two minutes, counselor. mr. alvarez: there is a comedian named jeff foxworthy. he is a funny guy. he does this little spiel that, you know, "you must be a red neck if," and, you know, you kind of fill in the blank and then he says you are a red neck. they are really funny. but as i was sitting here thinking about it, you know, we could use some of that here. and the reason i say that is if you smoke for 40 years, you are addicted. if you smoke two to three packs for 40 years, you are addicted. if you cannot stay in the hospital without going outside and smoking a cigarette, you are addicted. if you cannot buy a shirt that does not have pockets for your cigarettes, you are addicted. if you are told that you have a heart condition and you got to stop smoking and you cannot, you are addicted. and if you cannot wait a few minutes in the lobby of your doctor's office before you have to go outside and smoke, you are addicted. and if you cannot even get out of bed in the morning without reaching for some cigarettes, you are addicted. thank you, judge.