defendant's closing mr. reilly: it is still morning. the jury: (collectively.) good morning. mr. reilly: good morning, everybody. i, along with mr. trop, mr. paige, mr. alvarez, mr. brenner, they are all correct, that we have observed you, although i know mr. brenner and i tried very hard not to look at you while we are doing our presentations, i just sort of feel like it is invading your privacy to look at you, so i frankly do not do it. but it is clear from the fact that you have been taking all these notes and been paying very close attention to all the witnesses that have come to the stand; that when i started this case, when i started this trial, i said to you, you folks have a tremendous amount of power and a tremendous amount of responsibility. and obviously you have been performing your task in the very manner in which we would hope jurors do because that is what makes our system work. so everybody here i'm sure appreciates your effort. there is -- at the very beginning of the case i did say that there was one sentiment that everybody in this room would feel, and that was the sentiment of sympathy for the hesses because they have lost a loved one. of course that is an absolutely natural thing for everyone in this room to feel, and i'm sure everyone does. but what you guys all said was we can set that aside and we will focus on just the issues in the case, the evidence that you hear from the witness stand and the issues, the law that judge streitfeld gives you. and so that is all we are asking you to do now. what are the issues in this case? during my opening statement, i indicated that -- i showed you this board and i said the plaintiff is going to have to prove that two things, that mr. hess was addicted; and that if they proved that mr. hess was addicted, they were also going to have to prove that mr. hess' addiction was a legal cause of his death. now, at the beginning of mr. alvarez's closing argument, he put this slide on the screen and he said -- you can see where he is drawn through legal cause of, he is just basically drawn through those words. and he said to you we have already proved that. but, in fact, they have not. and they have to. if they had already proved it, it would not be -- it would not be on the instructions that judge streitfeld will give you just as soon as these closing arguments are over. but this is what the verdict form is going to look like, and it is going to say: "was stuart hess addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, and, if so, was such addiction a legal cause of mr. hess' death?" it is still there. they still have to prove both, that mr. hess was addicted; and that, if he was addicted, that his addiction was the legal cause of mr. hess' death. it is not sufficient to simply prove that cigarette smoking caused him to get lung cancer and die; we have already stipulated to that, that is not even an issue. so no, they still have to prove, they still have the burden of proof on both these issues. so now, what has the evidence been on the issue? let us take them one at a time. what is been the evidence on whether or not mr. hess was addicted? well, yes, there is no question that there were a number of folks who came here, family and friends, who said mr. hess was addicted. but in all reality, we both recognize, both plaintiff and defense, recognize that that really was not going to get the job done. and we both brought experts here. we both brought the psychiatrists here, people who claimed expertise in determining whether or not someone, a smoker, was truly addicted. and in addition to, there is one other doctor in this case to address the issue of whether or not mr. hess was addicted, and that was dr. ross, the treating physician, mr. hess' family doctor, his internist. but dr. ross said -- and his records reflected a number of things, i think, that eliminate him from consideration in determining whether or not mr. hess was truly addicted, truly addicted. first of all, dr. ross very early on indicated "i am not an expert in addiction." he must have said that two or three times during the course of his examination, both direct and cross examination, a very candid statement by a person who practices internal medicine. it is true, he is not an expert in addiction. he also said there are true experts in addiction. and i asked him: so who are the true experts in addiction? and he said: like board certified psychiatrists, like psychiatrists, people who specialize in addiction psychiatry. and of course you would expect them to be the experts, that is what they are trained to do, that is what they are educated to do, that is what they practice doing. and in the case of dr. nace, that is what he researches, that is what he writes about, that is what he writes books about. dr. ross told us some other things that were, i think, very interesting on the issue of whether or not mr. hess truly was addicted. you remember, there is a medical record -- and you are going to have -- because all of the evidence that was presented in this case will be given to you and you will have it in your jury room to review if you choose to -- and among the items that you will have are all the medical records. and there in the medical records is a record dated 8-25, august 25th, 1992, in which -- this is the one and only time that there is an indication in dr. ross' records -- or in any of the medical records, for that matter -- where anyone said to mr. hess, hey, would you like some sort of intervention? would you like, in this case, the patch? it is called habitrol, in the medical record. and you may remember that we asked dr. ross whether or not mr. hess said yes, yeah, i would like that? and did mr. hess get a prescription from it from dr. ross? and the answer was no. the answer from dr. ross was "i have no recollection of that," no recollection of that. did dr. ross make a referral to an addiction specialist? did he make a referral to a counseling outfit, to a smoking cessation group, to anything? no. did he offer mr. hess nicorette gum, for example? no. no. he agreed that mr. hess was a strong-willed, headstrong person who made his own decisions regarding his health and his healthcare. now, mr. paige expended an awful lot of energy standing approximately where i am right now talking about what i'm going to accuse mr. hess of. and in fact what i'm going to tell you right now is that these are just decisions that people make. these are the decisions people make about how they live their lives. and i'm not going to say it loudly and i'm not going to say it energetically; i'm just going to say it matter-of-factly, and now i just did. dr. ross, his family members, virtually everybody who addressed this subject in this case said, look, mr. hess had lots of stress. now whether you call it your woobie or you call it something else, people deal with stress in different ways. in mr. hess' case, he dealt with stress through the prescription medication that dr. ross gave him, through the cocktails he had at the end of the day and through the cigarettes. is there any debate about that? no, there is no debate about it. is that how many people deal with stress? i mean, i agree with mr. paige, life is stressful. there is no doubt about that, life is stressful. and we will talk a bit about how stressful mr. hess' life was and how he reacted to it, but it is just life. dr. ross also said that mr. hess was a conflicted smoker, sure, he knew about the health risks of smoking and through about and sometimes he took steps towards and sometimes he quit smoking. as a matter of fact, at the end of the day, dr. ross wrote in his medical records -- and you will see them -- you have seen them already. i'm not putting it up now because i've shown you these records so many times. the judge said, you know, sometimes jurors get put off by that, do not show them again; and i agree, i agree wholeheartedly. but dr. ross referred to mr. hess as an intermittent smoker. he said, you know, he stopped when he wanted to, he started when he wanted to. he stopped and started. and that is right in dr. ross' medical records. as a matter of fact, i'll show you that note here in a little bit. and do i tell you that mr. hess was strong-willed, headstrong person who made his own decisions as a negative thing? do you know what, it is just how we live our lives. it is just how we live our lives. and about dr. glassman, dr. glassman was an interesting fellow because dr. glassman has written on the topic of nicotine. there is no question about that. but he is written on it in two areas. depression and smoking, which is -- you heard him say my real area of interest and expertise is depression. and he has studied how depression and smoking can work together, what is the interaction there? but ladies and gentlemen, there has not been one minute of evidence in this case from that stand or anywhere else that mr. hess suffered from depression. that is not what this case is about. and in addition to that, dr. glassman has done a lot of work in doing drug trials for pharmaceutical companies that make products to help people quit smoking, they market their products to people to quit smoking. so when they talk about all the papers that he is written, those are the two areas in which they have been written. that is all right. but is he really -- i mean, we are here, the issue of the day is was mr. hess addicted, was he addicted? and if he was addicted, was his addiction so strong that it actually was a legal cause of his death? a legal cause of his death? and is dr. glassman an addiction expert? no, he is not. as a matter of fact, he readily admitted it. i asked him: are you board certified by the american board of psychiatry and neurology in addiction medicine, in addiction psychiatry? he said: no. do you remember, i asked him: do you treat addicted patients? he said: no. i asked him: do you treat people who come to you to quit smoking? he said: no, i have not for years. if a person comes to him and wants to quit smoking, what does he do with them? he said: i send them to somebody else. and that is okay. that is okay. but that does not make you an addiction expert. there are -- as a matter of fact, do you remember i asked him, are not there people who have board certification in addiction medicine? and he said: yeah, i think there is, but i'm not really familiar with it, i'm not really familiar with it. dr. glassman has testified in a number of tobacco cases and in each and every one, whether he is testified in the case or whether he is just consulted, you know, he is been sent a file, dr. glassman has always found that the smoker in the case is addicted, every time. now, why is that? well, it is actually pretty easy to answer because by his definition everybody would be addicted, literally everybody would be addicted. all he wants to know is when do you have your first cigarette and how many cigarettes do you smoke and that is all i need to know, really. that is all i need to know. however, it was interesting that when we asked him about his own father, do you remember, i said: well, but your dad was a pack-a-day smoker for decades, right? and he said: yeah, he was. and i said: do you remember in your deposition when you told me that you did not think he was addicted? he said: well, yeah. but i do not know exactly when he started, when his first cigarette was in the morning. i've tried to remember whether -- i mean, did not that seem like something of a double standard? i mean, everybody's addicted; if they are a smoker and they are filing a lawsuit, but my own dad was not addicted, even though he smoked a pack a day for years. his test, did you see his test in a book? did you see his test? did you see -- did you see a manual like this that said dr. glassman's test is the test that is generally accepted and widely used? you know, i thought it was fascinating that plaintiff's counsel -- i think it was mr. paige that put dr. glassman on -- never even brought out this book, never even brought it out. never even said, dr. glassman, there is the dsm for tr, it has a section in it, it is put out by the american psychiatric association. it is a manual. it is got a whole section in here on nicotine dependence or nicotine addiction, do you accept it, like the surgeon general does? does mr. hess meet the criteria? does he meet the test? did he ever ask him that? not once. not once. why not? well, i'd suggest to you there is a reason why not. and i think you probably already know it. and that is when you do not ask an expert something like that it is 'cause you already know the answer, 'cause you already know the answer the person's going to say. and that second question, the one that mr. alvarez said is already resolved: did they ever ask dr. glassman, hey, was his addiction a legal cause of mr. hess' death? was it so powerful that without addiction mr. hess would have quit smoking and not gotten lung cancer, be alive today? no, he never asked that question. that question never got asked of anybody. all right. i brought you dr. nace. actually, more correctly, andrew and i brought you dr. nace. i do not think i give andrew enough credit. we went to the university of texas school of medicine, we asked dr. nace, first time he would ever testified in a tobacco trial. you heard how much money he is been paid in this case. i think it was like $8,000 or something. in terms of what psychiatrists make, it was nothing. he was a board certified addiction specialist. it is the type of medicine he is been practicing for decades, he teaches it at the university of texas southwest school of medicine and has for -- what did he say -- 35 years. they said he does not treat smokers, but he said he did. what he said was, you know, i do not often times have people come to me only because they want to quit smoking. but he said i have people come to me every week who are there to see me for a variety of reasons, who i say do you want to quit smoking and when they say yes, i help them quit smoking, and i do not care whether they are addicted or not, i do not care, it is not important. if they want to quit smoking, i want to help them. does he treat -- he said i treat hundreds of people every year for -- on direct examination when i asked him -- he said: i treat hundreds of people every year for smoking addiction -- for quitting smoking. he uses the dsm test to determine whether people are addicted, the same as the surgeon general. they said this is a flawed -- how many times did they criticize the dsm, this flawed test? but i guess they just overlooked the fact that in the surgeon general's 1988 report on nicotine addiction, there it is. and what does the surgeon general say? the diagnostic & statistical manual, then which is 1988, and what we have been dealing with is the most current edition, right, the 200 edition. he said the dsm-iiir of the american psychiatric association provides a useful example of the objective criteria, the objective criteria. this is not guesswork. this is not, gosh, i'm addicted to video games and i'm addicted to whatever. this is an objective criteria in determining whether or not someone is truly addicted. he used it to define drug dependence. so it is not just dr. nace who says use the dsm -- oh, and you remember, one of the articles that they showed dr. nace to criticize the dsm, do you remember i had them highlight the part that said -- i think it was widely accepted -- widely accepted and generally used. that is how they describe the dsm test, widely accepted and generally used. now, dr. nace, after reviewing all the medical records, all the depositions in this case -- unlike dr. glassman who did not do that -- he said look, i've reviewed it all and i have sufficient information to make a determination, a reasonable determination of whether or not mr. hess was truly nicotine-dependent or addicted. and he said, frankly, he does not meet the criteria. now, is that unusual? he went on to say, you know, the most recent literature -- science goes on, science goes on -- and he said the most recent literature shows that roughly half of the smokers, even though they maybe smoking a pack or two or three packs a day, half the smokers do not meet this objective criteria for being addicted, half. it was undisputed in this room, undisputed. dr. nace said mr. hess does not meet the dsm-iv diagnosing criteria. did dr. glassman come in and say, oh, yes, he does? did you hear that? of course you did not hear it. did anybody come in and say that? no, nobody did. and you heard mr. paige say -- when he was talking about meeting the withdrawal criteria, mr. paige said, okay, i concede, he does not meet the withdrawal criteria. could mr. hess stopped smoking? yes, because he did. dr. nace said, yes, because he did. and we showed you those medical records. i have them on boards here. i almost -- i almost do not want to show them to you because they are just -- as a matter of fact, i do not think i will. you will have the records, they say over and over again, in november -- maybe i'll show them to you later -- sorry. but they show that in november '93, december '93, january '94, february '94, based on the leukoplakia situation, mr. hess comes in and says to his physicians, i have stopped smoking. and then in december of '94 when he is talking about what he is done in the last year or so, he repeats it, he repeats it, he said, you know, back when i was -- when i had my leukoplakia, i quit smoking and i started again, then i quit a while ago, and now very recently i started again. now, they tried to convince you -- they have tried to convince you that mr. hess was embarrassed, too embarrassed to tell the truth. but i suggest to you, ladies and gentlemen, that for all the times mr. hess told his physicians i am smoking or i am doing what i want to do, you have told me what i should do, and i'm telling you what i will do, the idea that mr. hess -- the fellow that dr. ross described as headstrong and strong-willed -- the idea that in this tiny moment in time he all of a sudden became too embarrassed to tell dr. ross that he was still smoking is really, i think, without basis, without basis. mr. hess, without debate, smoked to deal with the stress of his life. and dr. nace explained to you that after a couple of months, whatever changes occur in the brain have returned to normal. if there are changes that have occurred in the brain, they returned to normal. is it for nicotine that people go back? he said: no. two or three months down the road, that is not why people go back. why do they go back? they go back because, guess what, if you smoked for stress, if you encounter a stressful situation again, it is entirely possible that if you gave up drinking or you gave up smoking or you gave up whatever you do to help you give up stress you may go back to it because, guess what, you are under stress again. is that a shock? is that a surprise? i do not think so. is that what we human beings do in our stressful lives? of course it is. i already mentioned that current science shows that fifty percent of all regular smokers are not addicted by the dsm test. and we showed you that chart undisputed, this chart, undisputed that over time what they keep talking about is, when they talk about the five percent or the three percent or the twenty percent that quit in any given year, that is that snapshot, right? but dr. nace is the only one who took you about how people live their lives. we do not live our lives in a snapshot. i do not take your picture today and then not revisit you next week, not month, next year and the year after that. but there have been folks, scientists, medical scientists, who have followed people over, in this case, 30, 35 years to see whether or not -- well, you may not have quit this year, but do you quit? and the answer is eighty percent of folks quit. now, a hundred percent of them want to quit? no. you have already been told that there is some portion of the smoking population that does not want to quit, so is it any -- i mean, this is a huge percentage of smokers that quit over time, a huge percentage. and that is what dr. nace explained to you. all right. frankly, it seems that the evidence in this case demonstrates that from an objective standard, from an objective standard, that the answer to this first question, have they proved to you by sufficiently strong evidence to convince you that mr. hess was, in fact, addicted? i think the answer is no. mr. alvarez: excuse me, judge. objection to proper instructions. the court: correct, that is not consistent with the issue, sufficiently strong. the word is "greater weight." mr. reilly: greater weight. that is how strong it has to be, by the greater weight of the evidence. have they proved to you that mr. hess was addicted? and i think the answer to that question is "no." but because there are two issues here, i'm going to talk about the second issue, too, because they have to prove both of these things to you. now, what is the instruction on legal cause? you remember in my opening statement -- i actually read from the actual instruction to explain to you what it was: "addiction" -- and it is addiction, not smoking -- "addiction is a legal cause of an injury if it directly and in natural and continuous sequence produces or contributes substantially to producing such injury so that it can reasonable be said that" -- and this is the key phrase here -- "but for the addiction" in other words, without the addiction -- "the injury would not have occurred." and that is true regardless of whether or not there may be some other concurring cause. it still has to be addiction contributes substantially to producing such loss. so regardless of whether there are multiple reasons why mr. hess developed his lung cancer or just one, addiction has to be so important in that process that if mr. hess had not been addicted -- mr. alvarez: objection, judge, this is an improper argument. the court: overruled. continue. mr. reilly: if mr. hess had not been addicted, he would not have gotten lung cancer and would not have died. it is just that simple. well, so what is the evidence on that? do you remember during voir dire -- actually, during voir dire, and i used this during my opening statement, but during voir dire we talked about, would you guys only want to know about somebody's smoking history or would you really want to know about the whole person? and during voir dire, the answer was the whole person. then in my opening statement, i told you, we are going to bring you the whole person, this headstrong, strong-willed, in-control person. now, mr. paige during his presentation in a very energetic way, indicated that i'm going to be really critical of this and i'm going to say all these things about mr. hess, but i'm not. this is neither the time nor the place. what i'm going to tell you about is, in order to understand how mr. hess lived his life, you have to understand the issues in his life. you have to understand the medical conditions in his life, you have to understand his employment, otherwise, how will you understand the stresses of his life? how will you understand why mr. hess smoked? if you only knew his smoking history, you would have never learned about mr. hess being self-employed with the stress that goes along with that, you would have never learned about his family and the stress that goes along with that. of course, the joy goes along with it, too, but you have never learned how he dealt with stress, would you? you would have known none of that, none of that. and, of course, if you do not know how he deals with the medical issues of his life and the recommendations of how to care for himself that the doctors give him, than you would have a very difficult time understanding exactly how he addressed his smoking, it seems to me. so did i bring you dr. bishopric, for example, to say that losing weight is easy? dr. bishopric said losing weight can be very hard for people. that is not why i brought dr. bishopric here. i brought dr. bishopric here to explain to you how mr. hess addressed his medical issues so that you would have an understanding of how mr. hess dealt with the issues in his life that came with the potential for long-term health consequences, including smoking. and that included, yes, i have a hamburger here, it is hard to depict a diet, right? but you know that one of the issues for mr. hess -- in spite of the fact that they continually said his diet, his weight was never an issue -- the medical records say it is an issue. why? because of his particular cardiac problems. now, why they run away from that, i have no idea. it is documented in the medical records. i agree completely that if you want to know an unbiased, not memory-dependent source of information by folks who were there at the time talking and dealing directly with mr. hess, we have such a source, we have such a source. and what is that? it is the medical records in the case. those caregivers, the doctors and the nurses and the respiratory therapists, they did not write in their charts information because they thought there was going to be a lawsuit 13, 14, 15 years down the road, no. they were writing in their charts what they were saying to mr. hess, what mr. hess was saying to them, and what was going on with mr. hess for one reason only, and that was to effect care and treatment to mr. hess, that is it. they have no stake in this case. but what those records will show are how mr. hess dealt with diet, exercise, alcohol, following doctor's recommendation regarding medication -- and i do not mean did he take the last penicillin pill in the container -- smoking, going in the hospital, because only when you know that, only when you see that will you understand the mind-set of mr. hess. they spent a great deal of time -- mr. paige, in particular, spent a great deal of time -- again with great animation -- telling you that mr. hess was one of the folks that never got the message, did not get it for decades, about whether or not smoking came with the risks of health consequences. but i think, frankly, that whole notion was completely dispelled by one of his long-time friends, robert frankenberg. do you remember the guy? i think his deposition was taken in las vegas. and frankenberg -- if mr. paige calls it the cat's out of the bag -- then he spilled the beans; whatever phrase you want to use. do you remember that mr. frankenberg said mr. hess was a very smart guy, and he would remind you that he had two masters' degrees and he met him when mr. frankenberg and mr. hess were both in their early 20's, early 20's, both students in universities on the east coast. and he said mr. hess was incredibly current on current affairs, that he was a voracious -- he read a ton, that he kept up to date, that he knew more about what was going on than mr. frankenberg. and mr. frankenberg said -- here's what he said. "he certainly was aware" -- this was his exact language from the video -- "he certainly was aware if there were -- i would say he was aware of smoking being dangerous, but, you know, you poo-poo things, when you were young, when you were in your early 20's." any question as to when this conversation happened? "when you are in your early 20's. they got married, very young, you get -- you do not think, you are indestructible." that is okay. it is just a decision we make. you remember during voir dire we were talking about the decisions we make in our '20s versus our '30s versus '40s, and i could not find anybody that would say they were in their '50s, as i recall. but, you know, it is just the way we live our lives. but to say that mr. hess was somehow incapable of learning what was going on, that he was one of the folks that did not know, here's mr. frankenberg, has not seen him in years, yet he remembers, he remembers the two of them conversing in their '20s, early '20s: did you express to him that you thought that smoking too much would be bad for his health? yeah. i'm asking you: do you recall what stuart would say to you the one or two times you told him that he should quit? he should cut back on his smoking because it was bad for him. answer: i just think he sort of agreed with me. now, he is not -- this is not a poll of some unknown people. this is not a statistic. this is one friend talking about another old friend. and remembering, amazingly remembering a conversation that occurred in the early '60s, that is what 45, 6 years ago? and this is the timeline i showed you in my opening statement. and here's mr. hess when he meets his future wife, elaine, and you remember that she did not like his smoking and she told him you got to stop if you want to kiss me or you are going to have to brush your teeth or wash your mouth out. now, did anybody come in and say in 1962 mr. hess could not quit, he was addicted and he could not quit? no. how about 1963, or thereabouts, when he meets mr. frankenberg and they have this discussion, anybody come in and say he was addicted and could not quit? no. well, how about in 1964 when the surgeon general's report came out and you saw harry reasoner look right at you, you saw the surgeon general look right at you through the eye of the t.v. and tell you what was going on, did anybody come in and say he was addicted then and could not quit? no. how about in 1966 when the warnings were on the packs? no. how about in 1970? how about in 1970 when mrs. hess said, we are going to have our first child -- allison -- i'd like you to quit. and he said, well, i'll try. and then -- remember, i asked her: did he try? and she finally said: no, he did not try. did anybody say he was addicted then and could not quit? no, nobody. nobody. and that is, of course, the same year that the warning changed on the cigarette packs. but now things change in mr. hess' life, do not they? and in 1973, he comes down here, becomes partners with mr. dorfman in a business enterprise, something he is always wanted to do, right? he always wanted to own his own business, he always wanted to be in charge. but along with being in charge comes the risk of being in charge, right? now, for folks who have been self-employed, they know if the phone does not ring, if the truck does not run, if the bill does not get paid, it goes right to the bottom line, right? if you do not make a sale, if you -- there is no revenue and the pressure's pretty great. and we know that in this time frame mr. hess begins to deal with stress, just as -- he took on a behavior, a habit, whatever you want to call it, that mrs. hess' father had taken on, which was to end the day with some cocktails. now there is nothing wrong with that. you can drink too much if you have ihss -- and, by the way, mr. alvarez said, well, this guy meets this criteria on the dsm because he is smoking after he is been diagnosed with heart disease. but i guess mr. alvarez forgot that for that to be part of the test, it has to be a smoking-caused disease. you have to continue smoking after you have been diagnosed with a smoking-caused disease. and if you remember the definition of ihss, the "i" stands for "idiopathic," which means no one knows what causes it, so -- and the bronchitis, nobody said that his bronchitis was caused by smoking, nobody. look in the medical records, you have them, look in them, if you choose to, no one says his bronchitis was caused by smoking. so -- and you remember that while today they say mr. reilly is trying to distract you, i'm trying to distract you with this talk of mr. hess' lifestyle choices. but during the course of the trial, remember how much time they spent focused on disapproving the idea that mr. hess was being told by his doctors to lose weight, that mr. hess was told to exercise, that mr. hess was told to reduce his drinking? you remember that mrs. hess spent time on the stand testifying they had an exercise bicycle in their home, that they had a rowing machine, and david hess and mrs. hess talked about bicycling around the neighborhood for exercise to satisfy these requirements? but then you remember that it was mr. trop during the cross examination of dr. bishopric when he said: do not you know that he did all these things? and dr. bishopric said, boy, that is not what i read. i read all the deposition and that is not what i read. that is right, because this is what dr. bishopric read. this was the testimony of mrs. hess in the deposition that was taken and you remember that she said -- she was asked by mr. brenner: did he have a weight problem throughout his life? even today when they showed the pictures, they said he has no weight problem. but here's mrs. hess acknowledging later on he put on weight. did he try dieting to address that problem? her answer was: not really. did you ever ask him to? not that i recall. did he ever exercise to address his weight problem? no. no. did he think he had a weight problem? i do not remember. do you recall any of his doctors ever telling him he had a weight problem? i think one or two of them might have said you should lose some weight. well, we know from a review of the medical records that because of his ihss he was told repeatedly over years to lose weight. you saw them tracking his weight. and what -- i'm sorry -- would he say? just dismiss it. it was a non-issue to him. why is that? i do not know. was it an issue to you, his weight problem? personally? yes. his weight problem, no. now, if that is not in direct conflict with what mrs. hess described, a rowing machine, an exercise bicycle, and if this is inconsequential in this lawsuit, then why spend the time? why spend the time? the clerk: twenty more minutes, counselor. mr. reilly: i guess i will show you. do you remember i brought dr. jones here? another fellow who -- he got paid $2500 to come here total. was he here for the money? that is ridiculous. medical records that show that when mr. hess was sufficiently motivated, could he quit? absolutely, he did. the medical records tell us he did. 1993 december, he stopped smoking. he feels it is slowly resolving since he stopped smoking. recently stopped smoking, december 22nd, 1993. that is two different doctors. january 14th, 1994, he is not smoking. can he stop smoking? when he is sufficiently motivated, he can stop smoking. february 11th, 1994, this is dr. maliner, "his vocal cords are almost normal." if this is unimportant, then why did they spend so much time trying to establish that dr. maliner must have cured this leukoplakia by some sort of surgical procedure? why were they so intent on that? ask yourself that, why were they so intent on that? i think the answer's pretty clear, because everyone recognizes that mr. hess could stop and did stop, and it was not just for the two weeks that mrs. hess described. it was for months. here's the look-back. this is the december '94 medical record, "stopped smoking a couple months ago but started smoking recently." he had leukoplakia of the vocal cords and was biopsied about a year ago by dr. maliner. he was advised to stop smoking at that time and he did for a while but resumed. and now, what does dr. -- this is dr. ross' note -- how does he describe him now? does he say he is an addicted smoker? no. he says "he smokes intermittently." now, they said he resumed smoking and smoked all the way through his care and treatment for cancer. what they forgot to tell you -- and the medical record -- you will have the medical record -- in the medical record there is -- and i forget the date of it, but i believe it is in about may of is the '97 -- i forget exactly the date so do not hold me to it -- but there is a medical record explaining what happened. and it says, "when mr. hess got his diagnosis, the prognosis, the likelihood of a cure was explained to him, and he was told, the type of cancer you have and how it is spread already, there is no probability of cure. and so mr. hess said -- he had already quit smoking, and he said, well, would it be all right then if i went back to smoking? and his treating doctor said yes, it would be all right. so that is what happened. now, is that a sign of addiction or is that assign of a guy who clearly at that point is under stress and says, do you know what, i only have a certain amount of time left, i'm going to live it like i want to live it. i'm going to rely on -- does he stop drinking? no, he continues to drink alcohol, too. is there anything wrong with that? absolutely not. absolutely not. now, mr. paige spent virtually all of his presentation up here talking about documents that you saw during the course of this trial generated at philip morris or related sources. and you have to ask yourself -- mr. paige kept saying, this is not about choice, this is not about fault, this is not about -- then why was he showing you all that? why was he doing that? he is right, this is not about fault. this is about -- we have two questions to answer. was mr. hess addicted? and was mr. hess -- if he was addicted -- was his addiction an essential reason why he developed his lung cancer and died? those are the questions before you. so unless they are going to stand up here -- they have eight minutes or six minutes, or five minutes, i do not know how much they got left after i sit down. but unless they are going to come back up here and say, oh, well, do you know what, if philip morris had simply said something different than it did, mr. hess would have quit and he would not have gotten his lung cancer, then all of this is unimportant to the issues that we have before us at this moment, completely unimportant. ask yourself, how is it whether or not philip morris said yes, smoking causes lung cancer, or yes, smoking is addictive -- addicting in 1994, in a -- in mr. hess' case, how will that help you in any way answer the question of whether or not mr. hess was addicted or whether or not -- if he was addicted -- his addiction was so important that if he would not been addicted, the stress would not have caused him to continue to smoke, the -- nothing would have caused him to continue to smoke and he would have quit smoking and he would have not gotten lung cancer and he would be here today. what does it have to do with those two questions? and the answer is, not a doggone thing. and there is an instruction which you are going to get from judge streitfeld that tells you you can ignore all that. it says: "some of the evidence you have heard on the issue presented" -- that should be issues presented -- "for your decision may also relate to other issues that are not before you." and that is exactly what that is, not before you. "you should consider such evidence only as it relates to the" -- it should be -- "issues." my fault, my fault. all right. and frankly, i'm not going to spend any more time on it because it is not the issues of the day. so let me go back to the verdict form. you can see i'm out of boards, you are probably all happy about that. but here are the questions. was stuart hess addicted to cigarettes, including nicotine? i think the evidence has shown that the answer to that is no, based on an objective test. if you think that he was addicted, was such addiction a legal cause of mr. hess' death? was his addiction shown in this case by the greater weight of the evidence to be so important that if mr. hess has not been addicted, that the stress of his life would not have caused him to continue smoking and unfortunately develop lung cancer and die? i think the answer to both those questions, frankly, is no. but a "no" answer to either one of them is a "no," and that will end your service in this case. now i'm going to sit down. how much time do i have left? the clerk: fifteen minutes. mr. reilly: fifteen minutes? wow, i am never that good. i am going to sit down, though. and because they have the burden of proof in this case -- i have no burden of proof in this case. because they have the burden of proof in this case, they get another chance to get back up and talk to you one more time, one more time. and i'm not, neither mr. brenner nor i will, get a chance to come back again and address you again. and so i would just ask you -- frankly, i was talking to mr. brenner last night about this. this reminds me of when you have a child in -- just starting little league baseball, for example, and they ask you to come coach your child's team. and you go, you meet with the players for the first time, and you are checking them out, you see, well, this one seems to field pretty well, this one throws pretty well, this one bats pretty well and you are trying to decide your line up, right, you are trying to figure out where you are going to put everybody. and this one, because he bats very good, you put him in the line up -- anybody who is made a line up before, you know you put him pretty high in the line up. but you do not know yet whether or not these kids have ever played in a game. so when you get to the game, the very first game, your kids get up to bat for the very first time and -- i do not know if this still -- i'm older than anybody in the box, so i do not know if this is still the case -- but used to be that when your team's up to bat, the team out in the field when the pitcher starts to pitch the ball, there is a chant, and the chant runs something like this: the pitcher starts to pitch and the ball starts to come across the plate. everybody starts to yell, "hey, batter, batter, batter, batter." i do not know if it is still the same anymore. but as the ball gets closer and closer and closer to play, the chant gets louder and louder and louder. and right about the time the batter's got to decide whether to swing or not swing, everybody out in the field yells "swing," right? now, i know that mr. paige would have done that a lot differently than i just did. but a little boy, he never played in a game before and guess what he does? three pitches, three chants, three swings, he is out. and he does it three times. gets up to bat three times in the game. he is out three times. and so now you are the coach and you got to take him back, and you got to say, gosh, how do i resolve this? and you put him in the box. you take the bat out of his hand and you get down on the mound and you have him just throw balls. and you tell the little boy, look, i do not want you to swing -- you do not even have a bat -- all i want you to do is watch the ball come right into the catcher's mitt, right into the catcher's mitt, that is all i want you to do. and you know -- you know he is going to flinch the first two, three, four, who knows how many times. but if you do that, you know that eventually he will just watch the ball come right into the catcher's mitt. he will keep his eye on the ball. and that is all i ask you you to do. and i give you the bat back.