mr. boyce: good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. nice to see you again. this is the last time that i get to speak with you during this trial. and so i want to take a moment at the outset to thank each and every one of you for your attention and your willingness to serve as jurors in this case. the american legal system really would not work if it was not for people like you who are willing to put their personal requirements aside and come in and decide a dispute between two parties. it is something that you should be proud of and it is something that everybody here appreciates. so before i get started, on behalf of myself and my team, ms. caseldine, mr. gentle, mr. hutchins and mr. carter, thank you. and -- and especially on behalf of the men and women who are in the r. j. reynolds tobacco company today, thank you again. now, there is more to what you have agreed to do in this case than simply serving as jurors. there is more of what you agreed to do besides waking up early in the morning or sitting through long days with downtime with videos, the most important part of what you agreed to do is the promise you-all made to be fair and impartial jurors and to decide this case only on the facts that plaintiffs prove to mr. hiott. and as i sat through the two closing arguments that we have heard from plaintiffs so far, i found myself asking time and time again what does this have to do with mr. hiott? what do statements from decades before he smoked his first cigarette have to do with mr. hiott? we heard about the british american tobacco company. when reynolds merged with b&w, they did not merge with the british american tobacco company. we heard about rat studies and swiss laboratories funded by swiss brands five years before mr. hiott ever had his first cigarette. we heard about ads that ran before he ever smoked. ads for brands he never smoked. day after day of evidence that had no connection to mr. hiott, no bridge. we talked about this in openings, one of the requirements here is that plaintiffs have the burden of proof. plaintiffs have to show you that something reynolds did or did not do was connected to mr. hiott in a meaningful way and time and time again they failed to meet that burden. you also promised on the very first day that we started not to decide this case on the basis of sympathy for mrs. hiott. it is perfectly natural for all of us to sympathize with mrs. hiott and her loss. her husband died 16 years ago and when she was here she told a sad story. she sat on the stand and told you what it was like during mr. hiott's last days, but you have to remember what she told you when she stopped crying. when i started to ask her questions, she was able to get through, without any tears, and that is what is important to this case because choice is not my word for smoking, choice is not r. j. reynolds' word for smoking, choice is mrs. hiott's word for smoking and that is what she told you in this trial. i asked her: "i want to make sure the jury understands, it is your opinion that smoking was mr. hiott's choice to make, correct?" and she said, "yes, sir. yes, sir." this is after everything, after all the consequences of his choice were known, after she told the story about his last days. i asked her: "was it his choice?" and she said, "absolutely." then she told you that after mr. hiott knew the consequences of his choice, he knew that he was going to pass away from cancer, what did he tell mrs. hiott? he was at peace. he was at peace with himself, he was at peace with his life and he was at peace with the consequences of the choices he made. everything about smoking was known to him at this time. what did he tell his wife? i'm at peace. you move on with your life. and it is right there. "and i think he told you during this last week or so that he was at peace, correct?" "he said he was at peace." and he was at peace specifically with his choice to smoke. it is right there. he never once told you he regretted smoking. this is after all the illnesses, after all the hospital visits, after everything was on the table, he said, "i'm at peace. i do not regret smoking." he said, "i wish i had more time, but i do not." and you know what? after all that, mrs. hiott said she was fine with it. outside of court when it was just mr. and mrs. hiott and they were talking through his life and his choices and the consequences of those choices, what did she say? "you were fine with his choice to smoke?" "that is correct." "you respected his right to make his own decisions?" "i respected my husband's wishes, you are absolutely right." what are we doing here? why is there a lawsuit for money? the plaintiffs asked you quickly and it went by quickly, they asked you for almost $10 million, but when the hiotts were outside of court and they were talking about this amongst themselves with no experts and no lawyers around, what did they say? it was a choice to smoke. i do not regret it. i do not blame anyone. i'm at peace. and mrs. hiott was fine with all of that. now, the reason we are here is because ultimately mrs. hiott did not respect mr. hiott's wishes. you heard plaintiffs say that terence, mr. hiott and mrs. hiott were a family. but you also heard in this case that after mrs. hiott -mr. hiott passed away, mrs. hiott inherit -inherited the entire estate and she never gave terence a thing. not a single memento to remember his father by, not one thing. not his watch, not his wallet, nothing. they had no contact from 1996 until 2012, not a word. they did not speak a word to each other for almost 16 years. you heard the story from mrs. hiott that in mr. hiott's last days terence came along and they told each other they loved him. did you ever see any evidence that what mr. hiott wanted was for mrs. hiott to cut off support? you saw that $11,600 from dr. raffa, those were the support payments that were due to terence when mr. hiott passed away. mrs. hiott did not honor them on behalf of the estate. but more importantly, she never gave terence a memento, nothing of his father's. and then they somehow reunited in the context of litigation. they somehow put those differences aside and they sat next to each other every day in this case, they sat next to each other every day and their stories were remarkably alike. mrs. hiott put terence up in a hotel for three weeks so he could be here every day. just like the choice, just like the being at peace with the consequences of your choice, you have to look at how they handled it outside of court before it became part of a lawsuit for money. and outside of court they had no relationship. mrs. hiott ended it the day mr. hiott passed away. mr. hiott also told mrs. hiott that he wanted her to move on. he said, "i'm at peace, i want you to move on and have another life, have another phase in your life." that is what mrs. hiott told you. she did not do that. she saved pictures of mr. hiott, the pictures that we have seen time and time again. i asked her: "in that two-year period was there any fun times? do you have any other pictures?" "those are the only ones i saved." pictures of mr. hiott with blue marks on them. she saved those for 16 years, then she hired lawyers and experts to come in here and ask you for money and to portray mr. hiott as an addict, as a nicotine junky who was unable to control his own hands. that is the portrait of mr. hiott that mrs. hiott brought to this case. ask yourself if there is evidence of that in real life. ask yourself if anyone ever looked at mr. hiott as an addict, as somebody who could not control his own hand. that is what plaintiffs are saying in this case. and it is an interesting point because plaintiffs like to pretend that mr. hiott was stoic, he was not the kind of man to complain, that he might have had withdrawals and kept it to himself, might have struggled with smoking and kept it to himself. but remember this, dr. giakas looked at upwards of 15 depositions. we can all envision scenarios where the person may not recognize they have a problem, but their friends and family do. happens all the time. you may not know you are doing something, but those around you see it. 15 plus depositions, friends, co-workers, family members, did any of them ever give you any indication that mr. hiott was a compulsive smoker, unable to control himself? no, they did not. they all said the same thing. smoked a little bit, one per break, always ate his lunch first, smoked when he wanted to, how he wanted to throughout his whole life. that is consistent with what mrs. hiott said. he is a grown man, he made a choice to smoke, he was in control. the only inconsistencies come in with plaintiffs experts. they are the ones that are trying to convince you that mr. hiott was out of control and did not know what he was doing with his own hands, that he was disgusted by himself. where is the evidence of that? not one friend said that mr. hiott was addicted. not one family member said mr. hiott was addicted. the only witness in this entire case who opined that mr. hiott was addicted was dr. feingold. that is it. it is perfectly natural for mrs. hiott to look back and wish that mr. hiott had had different priorities, that he had made different choices. that is natural. what is not right is for her to use a lawsuit to encourage you to second guess the man mr. hiott was and to second guess the choices he made for himself, especially when mrs. hiott never once second guessed those choices when he was alive. that is not the makings of a lawsuit. when i'm done talking, you will first be happy that you are almost done here. i know you have been very patient and i appreciate it and i know we are pushing up on the lunch break, but you have been a remarkably attentive jury and i think that is something we all will agree on. i will tell you this is the only jury that ever called me on bad analogy and i will tell you that it shows just how closely you are paying attention from the get-go. and that is something everybody here appreciates because there are some important issues in this case that you have to decide when it is over. but one of the things, one of the overarching things that you have to keep in mind is the credibility of witnesses. the judge is going to instruct you that one of the things you have to consider when you determine the believability of any witness, you may properly consider their demeanor, their frankness, the intelligence, any interest the witness may have in the outcome of the case, whether they have an interest in this case. and with that in mind, i'd like to talk to you about plaintiff witnesses right off the bat. first was dr. kyriakoudes. you remember him? he is the professor of the oral history of the south who came in here and talked to you about tobacco in this country. he was the guy that who said caution does not equal warning. and if you remember -- grab my board here -dr. kyriakoudes's expert opinion was that there was a different -- difference between the word "caution" and "warning." he is the one who thinks tobacco lawyers are dooms. he is the one that takes taxpayer money from the national cancer institute to keep lists of other historians who might testify on behalf of the tobacco company. he is the one who ignored the difference between advertising and promotion. it was only on cross that i got him to admit that those huge figures he came up with, 90 plus percent of them, are for promotion, for buy-one-get-one-type coupons. it is not all advertising. he is the one that ignored the consequences of advertising bans in other countries. when you ban advertising completely people still smoke. did not even consider that. had to bring it up on cross. he attends conferences with plaintiffs' attorneys. he sat up there and told you about the 1967 ftc report. in all honesty, i do not think he had any idea what the source material was for that. i asked him time and time again, "what did they rely on when they made these opinions?" finally, we saw there were two surveys that went out before the '66 warming label and one that went to public health officials. he did not know that. that is something you need to consider when you think about his testimony. he told you that the tirc was youth marketing. we heard that again today. the hilton head document. i showed you the ads that came from there. it was a grown man from south america, a grown man feeding a tooth hammer. where was the evidence that it targeted at kids? it does not even relate to a brand that mr. hiott smoked. it came up when mr. hiott was 24, 25 years old. there is no connection. there never was for any of plaintiffs evidence. in fact, plaintiffs's evidence comes down to two things, an effort to make you feel sorry for mrs. hiott and an effort to make you feel bad or angry at r. j. reynolds. they never connected those two for mr. hiott. they never once met their burden of proof on the actual questions you have to answer. dr. kyriakoudes is the one who told you that the flintstones were supposed to be more evidence of youth marketing. he never once told you that alka-seltzer was the other sponsor or one-a-day vitamins was the other sponsor. he edited the videos themselves. he cut out the clip that showed that alka-seltzer was sponsoring a show at the same time. he talked about the beverly hillbillies. it was on cross that i showed you as soon as the percentage of that audio got too high in terms of people that were under 21, reynolds stopped sponsoring it. this is the stuff you need to think about when you assess the entirety of his testimony. but most importantly, and this is something that every single witness in this case admitted, dr. kyriakoudes admitted that he has no evidence at all that mr. hiott ever saw or heard any of the statements he talked about on direct. there is no evidence in this case at all that mr. hiott ever heard of the ti, heard of tirc, heard of ctr, let alone relied on something they said or did not say about smoking. no evidence at all. then there was dr. feingold. dr. feingold told you that he was a world's top expert, that he is testified more than any other doctor in south florida. he finally explained to you -- i told you in opening statements that he had failed his boards and mr. vinik made a big deal about it and he asked mr. feingold to explain it. i read that testimony last night. it goes on for pages. he told you that he has so many awards they cannot fit on one wall, that he runs them on a loop on a computer screen in his office. he told you that he was certified by the national oceanic and aeronautic administration for hyperbaric work. he went on and on and on. you know what he said at the end of it? i failed my board. had to take the oral test, it did not go well. but guess what, it was not his fault. he did not get along with the examiner. this is stuff you need to remember when you think about dr. feingold. he used to testify under oath that nicotine was not addictive. he testified under oath that when the surgeon general concluded nicotine was not addictive, the surgeon general was dead wrong. and then he changed sides. he stopped testifying on behalf of asbestos companies and he started testifying against tobacco companies. and right around that time, for reasons now that he cannot remember, he changed his mind and he concluded that nicotine is now addictive. that is dr. feingold. that is the only experts plaintiffs brought to you to prove that mr. hiott was an addict, smoking compulsively against his will for the better part of 30 years. dr. feingold prepared 140 charts in this case and just one of them mentions mr. hiott and his smoking, one out of 140. and we will talk about this in more detail when we get to it, but none of them say anything about quit attempts. one chart out of 140 mentions anything about mr. hiott and his smoking. we talked about mrs. hiott, we talked about terence hiott, they both have financial interests in this case. it is that simple. something you need to consider when you look back over their testimony and you try to decide where it fits in your deliberations. and then the plaintiffs called reverend ricks. i would encourage you to compare dr. feingold, dr. kyriakoudes and the highest, reverend ricks, when you think about what credibility really means in this case. reverend ricks sat here and told you that he knew kenney hiott well. they were friends. that he helped mr. hiott prepare for his postal exam. in fact, you will see in evidence that mr. hiott actually listed reverend ricks as a reference on his employment form for the post office. and what did reverend ricks tell you about mr. hiott's smoking? it was measured. it was controlled. he was not a chain smoker. he knew exactly what he was doing. they used to laugh about the viceroy ad that plaintiffs now want you to believe misled mr. hiott. they used to laugh about it. they called cigarettes the cancer sticks and coffin nails in the '60s and '70s. there should be no dispute at all that mr. hiott knew the risks of smoking from the moment he started to smoke and reverend ricks made that perfectly clear. they laughed about how foolish it was to smoke. they laughed about the viceroy ad and how nobody could believe it. and more importantly, they used slang terms of cigarettes that showed precisely what they thought about the risks associated with smoking. now, you have heard repeatedly that this is part of the engle class. and as plaintiffs, i think, got a little bit ahead of themselves, what they are trying to show you first is that mr. hiott evolved with the engle class. and there is a definition here that we have on the board that i think will help you as you think about this issue. the court: mr. vinik, you can move around if you wish. mr. vinik: thank you, your honor. mr. boyce: as you can see here, the engle class is for florida citizens or residents who have suffered or died from the disease of a medical condition caused by their addiction to cigarettes that contain nicotine. could you switch to the elmo, please? thank you. in order to be a member of the engle class, you have to be someone who has a disease caused by an addiction to cigarettes. please forgive me if you cannot see the screen and my boards -the court: can you see the screen, ms. moody? mr. boyce: now you can. sorry about that. and please, on this side, if i get in your way, just -- just let me know. but this is -- this is a concept that the judge is going to explain to you when it is over. but here the disease has to be caused by addiction. cannot just be smoking. the engle class is for a special group of people. it is for people who have a disease caused by addiction. regular smoking is not enough. smoking caused by anything else cannot be considered. and you can see that in this first question. was he addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine? and, if so, was cigarette smoking because of such addiction a legal cause of his lung cancer? and what that means is if you find that mr. hiott smoked for reasons other than addiction, you cannot consider that as smoking. you can only focus on the smoking that you think was caused by his addiction. so, first, you have to find he was addicted. that is only half the inquiry. the second half of that is: was this addiction so powerful, so compelling that you could say that the cigarette smoking was caused by it, legally, and that that amount of smoking was sufficient to cause lung cancer? and you learned in this case how it takes decades of smoking to build up enough risks where somebody could say you have smoking from lung cancer. in fact, it reminds me, plaintiffs like to criticize me because i use the anthony article that shows that nicotine is not like crack cocaine. people smoke cigarettes and put them down every day. it is entirely different that heroin and cocaine, for first-time users stand a huge risk for being addicted for the long-term. cigarettes are different. and that is why if you look at everybody who smoked, only about thirty percent of them ever meet the definition of dependence or addiction. and plaintiffs like to criticize that basically. the first statistic that they cite over and over again, that fifty percent of smokers die of smoking-related disease, that counts other smokers, that is how they get there. if you smoked a cigarette and you die of a heart attack, you are on that list. it does not matter how much you smoked. it does not matter if somebody determined that your smoking caused your heart problem. if you have one cigarette, if you are an ever smoker and you die of a huge list of diseases, including heart disease, you are on that list. so they like it when it helps them, they do not like it when it does not help them. nicotine is and always has been different than those other drugs. there should be no dispute about that in this case. when you answer this first question, if you find that the voluntary smoking or that smoking caused by mr. hiott caused the disease, then reynolds is entitled to a verdict in its favor. it is only if you find that, first, he was addicted and, second, that smoking caused by that addiction was sufficient and long enough and lengthy enough to cause lung cancer that plaintiffs can prevail. the simple fact is that mr. hiott is not a member of the engle class and there is a few key reasons why he is not. number one, he had a warning on every pack of cigarettes he ever smoked, every single pack of cigarettes. mr. vinik: objection, your honor. that misstates what the engle class is. the court: i'll -- i'll -- i'll -- i'll let you cover that in the -- approach -- if you want to approach the side-bar, we can do it, otherwise, let you cover that in rebuttal. (counsel approach side-bar with the reporter and the following proceedings were held out of the presence of the jury:) the court: okay. mr. vinik: he just said if you have a warning, you are not in the engle class, that is a fundamental -mr. boyce: i did not say that. mr. vinik: -- misstatement of the engle class. mr. boyce: what i said -mr. vinik: everyone in the engle class. the court: i did not -- i did not hear him say that. mr. vinik: that is what he said. mr. boyce: no, i did not. the court: but i give both sides wide latitude in the -- in the closing, but i -- if he said -- mr. vinik: fine. but he said -the court: no, if he said that, i could have the court reporter read it back but i do not -- i do not know if he is -- i -- i did not -- i did not hear him say that. mr. boyce: okay. fine. mr. vinik: i'll look at the transcript. the court: yeah, but you can -- you can handle that in rebuttal, too, okay? mr. boyce: thank you, your honor. (the following proceedings were held in open court in the presence of the jury:) mr. boyce: i do not want anybody to think that what we are suggesting here is that there are not people who started smoking in the '50s, there are. there are people who started smoking in the '50s before the warning labels. that was not mr. hiott. there are people who smoked because of addiction. it is not mr. hiott. you can think about a potential engle class member this way. desperately wants to stop, but cannot stop, has withdrawal, complains about smoking, evidence that they are out of control, smokes against their will, complains they are addicted, diagnosed as addicted. did you see any doctor ever diagnose mr. hiott as addicted? in this whole case, other than dr. feingold, did you see any doctor ever diagnose mr. hiott as addicted? no, not one. none of his treaters at the hospital. none of the physicians he saw throughout his life. none of them. the only witness who came to that opinion is dr. feingold. not strong-willed and blames the tobacco companies for smoking. mr. hiott is the exact opposite. he knew what he was doing from the moment he smoked,, he was in control of smoking, and when it was all over, he understood the consequences of his smoking, he said he was at peace. he did not blame anybody for it. he never told anybody he regretted it. mr. hiott has no withdrawal. he never quit once for 24 hours in 28 years. never diagnosed as addicted, never claimed to be addicted, smoked because he wanted to. the simple fact is mr. hiott is not a member of this class and that is what this case is all about. does mr. hiott qualify for engle class membership? and he does not. there are people that do. there are people who start before the warnings, there are people who meet those other criteria, but the evidence in this case shows mr. hiott does not meet this definition. he is not one of the people for whom it can be said that an addiction caused his disease. there is only one cause of mr. hiott's disease in this case and it is mr. hiott. now, to answer these first two questions, we have got to go back over some of the stuff we have learned. and first thing we learned was a lot about nicotine, what it is, how it works in the body. first, we learned that nicotine occurs naturally with tobacco products. mother nature puts nicotine in tobacco, not reynolds. during -- reynolds discovered that different parts of the tobacco plant have lower levels of nicotine, started using that in their products, learned how nicotine has a very short half life. but when you put cigarettes down, half the nicotine's out of your body almost immediately and within two to three days, all of the nicotine is out of your system. it goes away that quickly. it does not stay with you for a long time. you also learned how the receptors in a smoker's brain go back to normal after they quit. there is no permanent change to a smoker's brain. the receptors help regulate, when you stop smoking, they down regulate to baseline within two or three days, that is it. you also learned that the way nicotine works, that that mechanism is exactly the same as the mechanism for a bunch of other substances. nicotine releases dopamine, so does chocolate, so does watching sports on tv, so does drinking water, so does a variety of activities. they all work the same way. they release dopamine, pleasure center of the brain. that is the way nicotine works. it is no different than caffeine or chocolate or reading a book. you need to remember this when you consider what role nicotine played in mr. hiott's smoking. that if he had gone a day without smoking, half of it would have been out of his system. he never did. he never went 24 hours without smoking. the receptors is an important part that i want you to remember. plaintiffs said time and time again that there is a brain injury associated with smoking, a permanent change to the brain. and it is just not supported by the evidence. nicotine works the way other substances do and when you take nicotine away, all of that goes back to normal. there is no permanent brain injury. and, finally, you will learn that there is no intoxication for nicotine. never has been, never will be. there is no such thing as having too much nicotine to thrive. if anything, it enables people to think more clear, to help them focus. that is the fundamental difference from other drugs of abuse. it is always been true for nicotine, it always will be. and that is why there is been such a debate over whether nicotine meets this definition of addiction or not. now, we have heard quite a bit about the different definitions of addiction in this case, probably more than you ever thought you wanted to and probably more than -- than you needed to for this case, but there is two points about the definition of addiction that i want you to remember. first, you can pick any definition you want. you are not obligated to follow dr. feingold's definition, you are not obligated to follow dr. giakas's definition. you can apply any definition for addiction you want in this case. if you want to use the one that the surgeon general used before 1988, that is fine. it is up to you. you are not bound to follow any addition. and time to time again, there is a bunch of different definitions. there is a bunch of different texts. you can apply whichever one you want. i would suggest to you, because you have two questions -if you could go back to the elmo, please. -- because you have two questions to answer, first was he addicted? second, did that addiction cause the disease? i would suggest that you look for a definition that has some connection, some -some connection to a loss of control. if it does not have anything to do with a loss of control, you might as well just say that that person was smoking. addiction is just a term for behavior. it does not answer the questions that you have in this case. and that is, what is the legal cause of mr. hiott's injuries? it does not help you answer the second part unless the definition you look to has some connection, some provision for a loss of control. and i've had dr. feingold explain this. he told you that over the years -switch me back, please. thank you. there we g°. we went through this with dr. feingold, from 1966 or '67 when mr. hiott began smoking until 1988, nicotine was not addictive. dr. feingold felt the same way and r. j. reynolds held that position until after mr. hiott passed away in 1996. you saw reynolds ceo try and explain why reynolds had this position and it is because there is no intoxication and there is no true tolerance, but this is a debate that is gone on in science for decades. and it does not matter to your decision. you can decide which definition of addiction you use and you can decide which test you want to use. now, before i move on to why plaintiffs did not prove that mr. hiott is addicted, why he does not even meet dr. feingold's own definition, i just want to remind you again about how it is the loss of control that is important. dr. feingold looked at -- to this as compulsion. and we showed you one slide that he has. this is the only slide in the whole case that plaintiffs addiction expert prepared to have anything to do with mr. hiott smoking. and it says he started smoking between the ages of 14 and 16, smoked a pack to a pack-and-a-half a day for 28 years, he quit smoking in 1994 and then he does the math at the bottom. plaintiffs want you to think that addiction is as simple as a math problem. that is what they want you to do in this case. they do not want you to think about mr. hiott, they do not want you to think about the man he was, they do not want you to think about the ability to control his own hands that he had, they want you to skip right over him. it is a math problem for them. smoked a lot, smoke every day, must be addicted. under that definition, i'm addicted to sports center. i watch it every day. i put it on first thing in the morning. and i bet you if you looked at my lifetime doses of sports center, it is getting to be pretty high. how can that tell you anything about what real life is about? that is what legal cause means. it is a direct, continuous, substantial cause of behavior. it is not enough to just say he smoked every day and he did it for a long time. think about what that would mean if that is what addiction meant in the real word. it would sweep up everything that people did on a daily basis. it does not tell you anything about the second half of these inquiry. what is the cause? what is going on here? who is in charge of the behavior? is reynolds driving the train or is mr. hiott? because that is what you have to focus on when you decide class membership. here's another way to look at it. dr. feingold told that you quitting smoking is easy for 25 percent of smokers. he told you that quitting smoking is moderately difficult for fifty percent of smokers. think about that for a second. what that means is that quitting smoking is either easy or moderately difficult for 75 percent of people who smoke. addiction does not change this. addiction is just a word. addiction does not change the fact that for 75 percent of smokers, it is either easy or moderately difficult to quit. addicted smokers quit every day. none addicted smokers quit every day. there are 60 million former smokers in this country, 60 million. that is more than a million a year. thousands of people quit smoking every day. many of them meet some definition of addiction. it does not tell you what is going on with the behavior, what is going on with the individual. that is what you need to focus on. and, finally, he told you that quitting smoking was difficult for 25 percent of smokers. now, we talked a lot about the fagerstrom test. and i'll back up and i'll tell you in opening i told you this is a test you could not fail. if you got a zero, you are still considered dependent. and they tried to challenge me on that with dr. feingold and they went around and around and never put the key up. they never put the scoring key. and the scoring key shows quite clear zero to two is very low dependence. you get a zero on fagerstrom, you are considered very low dependence. i want to walk through dr. feingold's scoring and i want you to keep in mind the ranges that he talks about and what this means in terms of mr. hiott and what you can conclude was causing his behavior. the first is he gave mr. hiott three points at the top because he smoked first thing in the morning and he bases that on the testimony of carolyn hiott alone. that is how mr. hiott gets three points. now, his whole score's a five. an average smoker is about 4, 4.3, mr. hiott gets a five. three of those points come from that testimony alone. think about what that means. if you go an hour without smoking in the morning, you get a zero on the first question. okay. so think about what that means in terms of a real life, a real life ability to change your behavior if you are interested in doing so. if one day in 30 years mr. hiott went an hour without smoking, you could take those three points off the board. addiction is not a snapshot that you take at one point in time and then judge them in life as a result. that is what dr. feingold wants you to do. it is a math problem for them. take a snapshot, do a math problem, skip right over to some disease. it is not that simple. that is the legal cause they literally cannot get over in this case. it is right there. three points for smoking in the morning. if he went an hour on one of those cruises, on one of those vacations, one morning he woke up and said, you know what, i'm not going to smoke this morning, one morning in 30 years, three points off the board. now he is at two. now he is at two on the scale. and you can see down at the bottom, that instantly puts him in the easy to quit category. if he is a two on fagerstrom, a two out of ten, he is absolutely in that bottom 25 percent for whom quitting is easy. is this what fagerstrom is supposed to gauge, the strength of the dependence, the effect the dependence has on the person. he goes an hour without smoking that morning, one morning, it is that simple, he is a two. he gets another point because he left at the intermission of the godfather. 28 years, you are supposed to believe that because he stepped outside during the intermission of the godfather, he gets an extra point on fagerstrom. how can that be evidence of real life? how can that be evidence of the legal cause? cannot be. we do not even know if he smoked during the intermission. he went outside with his mom, who is a nonsmoker, he went outside with his dad, whose a smoker. but it was an intermission. he did not leave the movie. he did not miss any of the movie, but that is a point. in a lifetime of smoking, that is how hard they have to stretch to convince you that mr. hiott could not control his behavior. smoking in the morning, may have left the godfather at the intermission. and, last, dr. feingold gave him a point because he smoked between 11 and 20 cigarettes. and i think that was probably fair. you heard mrs. hiott say that he -- mr. hiott smoked between 10 and 15 cigarettes. you have seen the record from the anesthesiologist. i think he probably smoked somewhere between 10 and 20 cigarettes a day and that is one point, but think about that. if you set aside -- first off, let me back up. there is direct conflict in testimony about mr. hiott sitting through movies, too, and it comes from the plaintiff in this case, the woman that wants you to give her millions of dollars because her husband smoked. she says he could sit through a movie, no problem. one witness, one movie, one time, 30 years and they got a point on fagerstrom for it. if that is not true, he goes one hour without smoking, he is a one. if he is a one on fagerstrom, you see where he is on dr. feingold's range of quitting, he is clear down at the bottom. it is easy for him. you just make those two changes to fagerstrom. even under plaintiffs own test, there is no way that mr. hiott is somebody for whom you can conclude addiction is driving a trend, that addiction is causing the behavior, does not matter what you call the smoking, what matters is what you conclude about the legal causes of the behavior. and the only legal cause here is mr. hiott. this is what dr. giakas tried to point out in the criteria for diagnosing nicotine dependence under dsm. this is the book that psychiatrists use. and what it says, basically, is before you even start getting in the checklist, you have got to have evidence that this is causing a problem for an individual. i think that makes sense. and, again, plaintiffs want you to assume that he is having these problems, but he never says anything about them. and he keeps it to himself, he is not a complainer. would not his friends and family notice it? would not the people around him? would not mrs. hiott notice it? when we asked mrs. hiott to describe what the smoking was like, she said he had one in the morning, one on the way to work, one at break, ate his lunch, had another one, one at his afternoon break and that is it. that is not compulsive smoking. that is not addiction. that is choice. that is proof that mr. hiott is the only legal cause of his injury in this case. and this is what dr. giakas was talking about. cannot just be a checklist. it is got to be real life. you have got to see that there is some distress either reported by the individual or observed by those close to him because it is both ways. you can either get it from the smoker's mouth or you can get it from the people who spent time around him. in this case, you did not hear it from either source. and he went through the criteria. tolerance, he said he fits. there is no evidence of withdrawal. there is no evidence of subs— consistent efforts to put it down. and we went through the other factors and i do not want to go through them again. this is all in evidence, you will have dsm before you. i just want to stress again that addiction is just a word. dependence, smoking, addiction, these are all just words. but what you have to decide is what is going on with the behavior. just two quick points about how addiction is not enough. both -- this is one area where dr. feingold and dr. giakas agreed. they said right here in dsm-iv the fact that an individual's presentation meets the criteria for dsm diagnosis does not carry any implication regarding that individual's control over the behaviors. whether they meet dependence or not does not change the ability to control your behavior. that is what smoking is all about in this case here. the choice to smoke, the choice to quit. regardless of what term we use to call smoking, it is always the second part that matters. what is the cause? what is really going on here? dsm says it perfectly clearly. dr. feingold did, too. asked him, he testified that smoking was very much a matter of free choice. he said, i do today. choice is certainly a matter but compulsion affects choice. and this is where it gets interesting with dr. feingold. what he said is addiction's not a cause, addiction's as a predictor. remember, he said, addiction does not make somebody a robot, it does not guarantee that they will smoke again, it predicts that they might smoke again. and it is right here. compulsion and medicine is primarily defined by whether or not the person who is affected by a chemical and whose behavior is affected by compulsion will stop using the particular chemical. it is predictive. all theories in medicine are predictive. they tell the future. we also explained that the fact that addiction means something more important, a little more subtle, but much more important, the fact that addiction predicts what people will do. does not state that they are now machines and that they will definitely smoke tomorrow. it is a predictor. that is what dr. feingold told you. that is plaintiffs experts. think about it this way. addiction is just a predictor, how can that help you answer whether it is a legal cause? i'll give you an example of what i mean. you wake up in the morning and the alarm goes off, it surprises you. all you want to do is hit snooze because you are tired. being tired is a predictor of going back to bed. and i'll tell you something else, if you hit snooze and you go back in your warm bed on a cold morning, guess what happens in your brain? dopamine release. feels good to go back to bed. feels good to hit the snooze button. that is a dopamine release. being tired is a predictor that you might not get up the first time your alarm goes off, but do we all hit the snooze alarm every morning that we are tired? of course not. you drag yourself out of bed, you come to court because you promised to be a juror. you go to work because you have to be there. you go to school because you want to graduate. being tired is a predictor of going back to bed but we all get over it. that is what nicotine is. that is what dr. feingold told you. it is just a predictor. what stands between that prediction and real life, in this case, is mr. hiott, not r. j. reynolds. think about hunger, if they want to go on a diet, everybody's tried it at some point in your life, i sure have, you say you want to go on a diet, you want to lose a few pounds, you get hungry. okay. what happens? first day you go on a diet, you get hungry. hunger is a predictor for eating. but if the diet's more important, what do you do? you fight through it. you have set a different priority. addiction is the exact same thing. it comes from their own expert. it does not tell you that it is a legal cause. it tells you it might predict future behavior. but the difference, what stands between the addiction and the assumption and real life is mr. hiott. the man with a choice and the ability to control his own behavior. when the judge -- when the case is over, the judge is going to explain to you the -- what legal cause means on all different kinds of legal causes, concurrent cause, direct legal cause, all of them. they all have to be but for. but for is just a fancy way of saying if you take it out, it does not make any difference. but for this. and the judge will explain all of this to you and you will have the instructions when you go back in there. but, remember, that if dr. feingold says addiction is just a predictor, the legal cause has to be but for. take addiction out of it, mr. hiott still smokes, he is the but for cause. he is the only cause if you take it out, we avoid all of this. and i'll give you an example of what i mean. you heard from dr. feingold that if a smoker quit smoking before they are 30, they are not going to get sick from smoking. it is that simple. terence hiott was born in 1980 when mr. hiott was about 30 years old. if he had quit during the birth of his first child, we would not be here today. that is how quickly your risk goes down from smoking. if you put the cigarettes down, you start getting better immediately. if mr. hiott had quit smoking in 1975 when his brother did, we would not be here. if he quit smoking in 1980 when terence was born, we would not be here. mr. hiott had the ability to avoid this. mr. hiott is the but for cause. addiction is just a predictor. it is just a suggestion about what might happen. the reason for what did happen is not r. j. reynolds. the reason for what did happen is kenneth hiott. this is what -- plaintiff wants you to look at smoking as if it is a one-time shot. mr. hiott smoked from almost 30 years and they want you to pretend that because he left the godfather that matters. smoking is not like that. real life is not like that. smoking is much more like a highway, where every day you have an exit, an opportunity to get off. and just think about some of the things that we have learned in this case, exit after exit that mr. hiott was not interested in. the warning labels went on in '66 or '67, he started smoking when millions of people are quitting. he is going against the trend. people are stopping smoking in the '60s and '70s when he starts. when reverend ricks warned him about smoking, told him about the advertising, mr. hiott makes no effort to stop. he does not go one day without smoking. we looked at the yearbook, we will look at it again. that yearbook picture comes from 1967. mr. hiott was in high school for four years, his 1967 yearbook is the one that has a picture of the coffin in the back of it. i think you can see mr. hiott in there, it will be in there, evidence for you too. it is not in his senior yearbook. it actually is in the yearbook before he started smoking. he is sees a copy of the yearbook, no effort to stop. he is going in the opposite direction. 1970, the warning changes. even dr. kyriakoudes admits that this is a warning. this is a bridge without scenario here. different than a caution in his expert opinion. mr. hiott does not go a day without smoking in 1970. he does not even get out of the left lane. he is smoking. he is not interested in changing his behavior. the fact that he was not interested in it is not proof that he was unable to change it. all smokers can quit, that is something that every witness in this case agreed upon. in 1971, when warning labels went in the advertisements, i did not realize that was going to be such a big part of this argument until plaintiffs went first. but they kept saying, well, there is four or five years between '67 and '71. he saw a bunch of ads without a warning label. there were not any warning labels in 1971. did mr. hiott go a day without smoking in 1971? of course not. in 1975, mrs. hiott quit smoking. in 1975, mr. hiott's brother quit smoking. in 1980 terence was born. in 1982 mr. hiott moves out, starts a new life with a nonsmoker. does not go to bed without smoking. in 1985 the warning labels changed again. mr. hiott is not interested in stopping. he does not even go a day without smoking. 1988, the surgeon general concludes that nicotine's addictive. mr. hiott does not stop, does not go a day without smoking. 1988, the post office banned smoking inside the post office. no effort to stop for mr. hiott. he does not even go one day without it. no efforts to quit. he knows a bunch of smokers who have stopped, he never reaches out to them for help. and in 1994 he quit smoking cold turkey with no withdrawal either reported by him or observed by mrs. hiott. we have the evidence on the other side. we have the evidence that this -- that proves all of those different exits that he went by was a choice and not a compulsion. you can see it if i just turn my clicker back on. okay. this is what mr. hiott said about his daily smoking. by the time they got home, he had had five cigarettes. he worked in a stressful job. he worked in a place where you heard they get overwhelmed, sometimes they work through breaks. this is mr. hiott's daily smoking, according to the plaintiff in this case. there is nothing compulsive about that. there is nothing about that that fairly characterizes addiction. more importantly, regardless of what you call that, nothing about that is fairly characterized as something that reynolds caused. that is what this is about. reynolds has to be a legal cause here or reynolds is entitled to a verdict in its favor. he did not smoke at work. he did not smoke in the mercedes. there were parts of the house he did not smoke in. he cleans his ashtray each time. that is not evidence that he was disgusted he was smoking, that is evidence that he is mindful of what he is doing. he knows exactly what he is doing. there is nothing compulsive about it. there is nothing where you could look at that behavior and say, you know what, that is reynolds fault. he is out of control. there is no evidence and that is why he is not a class member. finally, you heard the evidence from cesar perales where mr. hiott said, i'll quit smoking when i quit breathing. that is what he told his friends. that is from his own mouth. that is his view of his own behavior and you should respect that as such in this case. now, finally i want to talk a little bit about quit attempts. i should not say finally. finally on this topic. i do not want to get your hopes up. by the way, i have a little bit more to go, sorry, it is my turn to present the evidence and i want to -- i want to give full disclosure. i do not understand why we spent so much time talking about quit attempts in this case. both sides did. the simple fact is you saw two experts on addiction in this case. dr. feingold for plaintiffs and dr. giakas for the defense. both of them told you the same thing. none of these stories count. none of these stories about filters or eggs or gum count because mr. hiott never went 24 hours without smoking. and everybody, from the surgeon general to reynolds, everybody agrees that in order to be characterized as a serious effort to stop, you have got to go 24 hours without smoking. it does not count. if you cannot go 24 hours without smoking, everyone agrees you are not serious and you should disregard it. dr. feingold showed this to you, 140 charts. three different, an affidavit and two different reports and the phrase quit attempt does not appear in any of them. and dr. giakas told you the same thing. i saw the testimony, i do not really know what to make of it because he never went one day without smoking. everyone agrees that anyone who is serious about stopping can go at least 24 hours without smoking. and that is why all of the different anecdotes you have heard do not count for the experts. they are not sufficient evidence that you can base a verdict on. they are just stories. you do not know what to make of them because mr. hiott never went for one day without smoking. now, think about this, these are all the people that mr. hiott knew who did quit. his brother warren, his brother mike, his sister-in-law, ann ralesbeck, reverend ricks, co-workers, tom evans, polly collee, louis collee, mike tart, robert figueroa, harry piper, cesar perales and, of course, the plaintiff, mrs. hiott. all of these people smoked and quit. all of them. mr. hiott is different. but remember what the national cancer institute said about the difference between people who stop and the people who keep smoking. that is in monograph 15. the studies relied on by monograph 15 showed that remaining smokers were no more addicted than those who stopped. you cannot explain the difference. i know this is hard to read. there is little evidence to suggest that there is an increasing level of addiction of a residual population of smoking. residual of the smoking population, as measured by changes over time in either number of cigarettes smoked per day or the fraction of smokers who smoke within the first 30 minutes of waking. whether you looked at the amount smoked per day, whether you looked at how quickly they are smoking in the morning, there is no difference in terms of addiction between mr. hiott on the inside and all the people who quit. and this is also a good point about his motivation, what was important for him. he never reached out to any of these people. some of these people quit after mr. hiott passed away, but he knew people who stopped when he was alive. he never reached out and said, hey, i'm struggling with something, can you help me? how did you do it? that is something we all do. we do that every day. think about it this way. there is no dispute that mr. hiott never went 24 hours without stopping. for what other behavior were we debating whether he was serious about quitting or not? think about it. if you could start that for me, cliff. started smoking in 1966 and '67 and not one day without stopping, not one day without smoking. imagine if you met someone in 1967, and they told you, "i want to get a job." and you bumped into them again in 1994. you say, "did you get that job?" they said, "no." say, "what did you do?" "well, i never spent 24 hours looking for a job but believe me, i wanted it." you would not accept that. if you met someone in 1967 and they told you they wanted to lose ten pounds; you saw them again in 1994 and said, "did you lose the ten pounds?" they said, "no." you said, "what did you do?" they said, "well, i never actually went 24 hours on a diet." what would you conclude about what was important to them? it is only in the context of the lawsuit that would we even be having this discussion. that is 30 years. that is a lifetime that goes by and not one day without smoking. that is why the quit attempts do not count. that is why there is no evidence that mr. hiott was compelled to smoke against his will. the only reason for his smoking is the one that plaintiffs want you to skip over. and that is kenneth hiott. and i want to switch topics just a little bit. i want to talk about some of the other questions that you have to answer on the verdict form. and plaintiffs talked to you about two of them, both related to concealment. plaintiffs have to show you that reynolds knew something about smoking and did not say it and that mr. hiott relied on that. that reliance element is key in this case. plaintiff has to show you that mr. hiott made a smoking-related decision because of something reynolds did or did not do. and the first step of that inquiry is that mr. hiott heard it. the first step is that mr. hiott was aware of something reynolds said, something reynolds said that mr. hiott saw or heard and then made a decision about it. you see any evidence of that at all? no. and how could there be for a man who had a warning label on every pack of cigarettes? there was a coffin in his high school yearbook depicting a pack of cigarettes. that is mr. hiott. that is why he does not fit in this case. he is different. he did not start smoking in the '50s. he did not smoke because of the compulsion. he is different. he is a generation behind all of this. that is why plaintiffs spent so much time going through the '50s. they want to make you mad. they talked about the frank statement time and time again. the frank statement, it ran for one day in 1954 when mr. hiott was two years old. what could that possibly have to do with mr. hiott? time and time again, we saw ads from the '40s smoking, right? statements that he never saw, no evidence of a connection. they have got to build that bridge. they did not even come close. they did not even put one plank down. there is not a single witness in this case, including the expert, who told you that mr. hiott made a decision about smoking because of something that reynolds said or did not say. it is just not here. your answer for both of those questions should be no because there was no evidence that mr. hiott relied on anything reynolds ever said. and the viceroy ad's a perfect example. that is the one plaintiffs talk about time and time again. what does the viceroy ad show us? it shows us that a reverend -- and mr. hiott laughed about the things in the ad. reverend ricks told you he did not believe it. "we laughed it about it. we joked about how foolish you were to smoke." and this is in the '60s when he is just getting started smoking, and then he stopped because he was not interested in it, not because he was unable to. he used phrases like "coffin nails" and "cancer sticks." reverend ricks told him to save his cigarette packs to use as coupons for chest x-rays. how can there possibly be any evidence of a lie when mr. hiott just got started smoking? a close friend of his tells him, "save your cigarette packs; you are going to need a chest x-ray one day." mrs. pollack wants you to think this means may be or may not be. and there is no may not be about somebody telling you to save that pack for a chest x-ray. there is no may not be about a phrase like "cancer stick" or "coffin nail." that is the evidence in this case. the evidence is mr. hiott knew the risks, was not interested in stopping. there is no evidence that mr. hiott relied on something that reynolds did or did not do. and here's the yearbook picture again. and you can see there is two actually. this one is from 1967. you will have this back in the jury room. and then there was another one from an another one of the yearbooks that came out while mr. hiott was in high school. it talks about stopping, seven dangerous signals for lung cancer. he had a warning on every pack of cigarettes he ever smoked. he had specific personal warnings time and time again throughout his life. no evidence of reliance. finally, i asked every witness that came up in this case, i asked them, "do you have any evidence that mr. hiott made a decision because of advertising or the tirc or the frank statement?" time and time again they said the same thing, "no. no, no, no." not even mrs. hiott would say that mr. hiott made a decision because of ads or tobacco company statements. the parents were the same thing. not a single witness said that mr. hiott made decisions because of statements. there is no evidence. for that reason, your answer for those two questions should be no. now, i want to spend just a few minutes talking about some of the documents you saw during this trial. plaintiffs always like to suggest that there are millions of documents out there, right? dr. feingold told you he is got walls of them at home. dr. kyriakoudes told you he is taken road trips to wisconsin to read more documents. when you came in, did you ever think that you would meet a witness who would take federal taxpayer money and keep a list of witnesses for the defense and then drive to wisconsin to read tobacco company documents? that is dr. kyriakoudes. that is dr. feingold. and ask yourself how many you saw. ask yourself if any of them had anything to do with mr. hiott. first, you saw the youth marketing document from claude teague, one document written in 1973. mr. hiott was 23 years old -- 22 years old. we looked at the next one. dr. teague's memo was supposed to lead to the hilton head meeting, and that was supposed to be proof of youth marketing. hilton head, mr. hiott was 24 or 25 years old when that meeting took place. and one of the ads to come out of that, that was the turn. that was the grown man in the suede tank top in south america. it is for a brand of cigarettes mr. hiott never even smoked. that is supposed to be the evidence of youth marketing in this case. mr. hiott never smoked it. and this stuff came out when he was a grown man. then we heard time and time again about hippo, hippo i and hippo ii. let me just remind you, hippo was run by the british american tobacco company. they hired a lab in switzerland to study whether rats retained water when they get nicotine and what nicotine does to a rat's stress defense mechanism. that is hippo i and that is hippo ii. it is from england and switzerland, and it deals with a rat's ability to retain water when you add nicotine to it. that is hippo. that was supposed to be the secret to addiction, right? it showed that there was true physiological dependence. remember dr. feingold explained that? and mr. vinik made a big point about it this morning, said in 1964, they said no physiological dependence. we talked about this article repeatedly, what the tobacco companies published in the american psychiatric journal in 1963. number one, supported by the tirc. number two, nicotine is the active agent, though not the only one, and it appears to have addictive qualities. and, number three, heavy cigarette smokers appear to be true addicts, showing not only social habituation but mild physiological withdrawal. there it is, published in a peer-reviewed journal of psychiatry a year before the surgeon general's report saying nicotine has a physiological effect. it did not make any difference to the surgeon general. in fact, dr. feingold told you that the hippo studies were published in 1973, all of them. they were published in 1973. did the surgeon general immediately change its mind and conclude that nicotine was addictive? of course not. does not reach that opinion until 1988. this is a study from britain and switzerland about rats, has nothing to do with mr. hiott, nothing to do with the brands he smoked. more importantly, we always talk about the american tobacco company. mr. hiott never smoked any brands from american tobacco. he never smoked any brands from batco. batco is not a defendant in this case. they are from britain. think about how many documents you saw from batco. when you try to assess the goal of documents, remember batco, british american tobacco, is not part of this case. that is how far plaintiffs have to go to try to get you angry. dr. teague's document was supposed to be secret as well, "the crucial role of nicotine." he was the only one that knew that nicotine was addictive. he wrote this document in 1972. in 1942, this is literature recited in the 1964 surgeon general's report, exact same statement. "smoking tobacco is a means of administering nicotine. tobacco product is a vehicle for delivery of nicotine." it is almost the same phrase, 30 years difference. "habituated user of nicotine is said to derive satisfaction," from teague in '72. and in '42, we have the surgeon general reporting the same thing. even goes further back. "the decisive factor in the effects of tobacco is nicotine matters directly, whether it passes directly into the organism or is smoked." and there is teague 41 years later saying "nicotine is the sine qua non of tobacco products." there is no secret there. those are the only documents you saw that tell the crucial role. it is all out there. this will give you an idea just how small a fraction you saw. you have heard from dr. kyriakoudes that there are 44 million pages of documents out there, 15 million separate documents, 15 million documents. feingold's got walls of them. how many did you see? you saw 46 total, 46 documents out of 15 million. that is how plaintiffs want you to judge three companies. we have heard the phrase "pack year." you smoke a pack a day for a year. last night i was thinking about a way to explain this, came up with company year. i've got american tobacco, brown & williamson and reynolds for 60 years, three companies, 60 years. that is 180 company years. think about what you saw. you saw 46 documents. 19 documents were authored during the years that mr. hiott smoked, 19 out of 15 million. that is beyond a fraction of 1 percent. that is beyond a snapshot. that is cherry-picking. that is an effort to distract you with evidence that has no connection to mr. hiott in the hopes that it makes you mad, in the hopes you skip over some of these important questions you have to answer in this case. finally, they kept saying, well, this document's marked secret. this document's marked confidential. companies mark these documents confidential for proprietary reasons. it is secret from everyone. we talked time and time again what reynolds did to publish on it. when the cancer scare started in 1953, reynolds hired dr. rodgman in 1954. they put him to work in a lab and gave him eight years to study all the bad stuff he could find in cigarette smoke. he published on it as he went. i went through a dozen publications. they are all in evidence for you. everything he found is published. when it was over, other scientists published methods where other people look and say, well, here's even more bad stuff in cigarette smoke. they took it all and put it in a list and submitted it to the surgeon general. that was dr. rodgman. that is just from 1954 to 1960. all of it is out there. there is no secrets, reynolds is not hiding this. they gave it to the surgeon general. but plaintiffs want you to focus on 19 documents, 19 documents. they want you to focus on things like the flintstones and the beverly hillbillies because they want to distract you. they want to upset you. they want you to assume that some of this had any effect on mr. hiott because there is no evidence that it actually did. your honor, could i ask for just a two-minute break here, please? the court: all right. mr. boyce: do you want to -the court: yeah. i'll just ask the jury to step back in the jury room for just a few minutes. we are almost finished so we will finish up before lunch. (jury excused to the jury room.) (short recess.) (the following proceedings were held in open court out of the presence of the jury:) the court: all right. you ready to proceed? mr. boyce: yes, sir. the court: mr. vinik? mr. vinik: yes, sir, your honor. the court: all right. (jury present.) (the following proceedings were held in open court in the presence of the jury:) the court: mr. boyce, you may proceed. mr. boyce: thank you, your honor. i want to turn now to the verdict form and some of the questions you are going to have to answer at this time. and the first two after the class membership question are whether reynolds' negligence was a legal cause of mr. hiott's injuries and whether the cigarettes that reynolds put on the market were a legal cause of mr. hiott's death. for each of these, plaintiffs have to prove something specific. the judge is going to instruct you this, that you cannot find reynolds liable simply for making cigarettes, marketing cigarettes and selling cigarettes. those are legal activities in this country. they were legal before this case. they are legal afterwards. you cannot base your verdict on the fact that reynolds made cigarettes, sold cigarettes and advertised cigarettes. judge mitchell will explain that to you. for these two, plaintiffs have to show you something specific to reynolds that would have changed all this. they need to show you that if you take reynolds out of the equation, mr. hiott would not have smoked but that he would have avoided illness. is there any evidence of that? did they ever show you anything specific to reynolds for the brands that mr. hiott smoked? are there any evidence that this is what is wrong with the winston or that this is what is wrong with the salem? it was just a general indictment of smoking, a general indictment of tobacco advertising. that is not enough for you to answer these two questions yes. you have to look at something specific, something specific to mr. hiott and the brands he smoked, in order to answer these yes. and the evidence will not let you do so. they never showed you what was wrong with the winstons specifically. they never showed what you was wrong with the salems specifically. on the other hand -if you could switch back, please. thank you. on the other hand, we spent a lot of time talking about all the stuff reynolds did to make cigarettes safer, and when you get back there in evidence, there will be a document by dietrich hoffman, "the changing cigarette, 1950 to 1966." i think it is exhibit 266 and 266 is the exhibit. we will see where dr. hoffman goes through all of the stuff that reynolds did to try to reduce the risks of smoking and we talked about it. but first, in 1979, the surgeon general reported that filter cigarettes and smoking low-tar cigarettes decreased lung cancer mortality rates among smokers. that is the surgeon general. low-tar cigarettes, filter cigarettes reduce the risks of lung cancer in smokers. it is right there. did you see any evidence that mr. hiott was ever interested in a low-tar cigarette? this does not happen. this is not a choice he wanted to make for himself. but reynolds made these products and the surgeon general is telling you that they are safer. the hoffman article's instructive because it looks back. it talks about how reynolds worked on selectively reducing some of the bad stuff. these are the compounds we have talked about, benzopyrene, some of the other carcinogens in smoke. reynolds tried to take them out one at a time and that is selective reduction. reynolds also looked at general reduction. that is where you reduce everything at once, all of the tar, all of the nicotine. in those videos we saw, they kept saying, "well, what did you do to make them less addictive?" reynolds said time and time again, what makes a cigarette addictive is nicotine. reynolds took the nicotine out of the cigarettes for decades. decade after decade, they lowered the amount of nicotine the smoker can get from a cigarette. and it is through these methods, reconstituted tobacco, using stems and expanded tobacco, porous paper, filters, menthol, reduce circumference. they looked at tobacco substitutes. this is what reynolds did to try to reduce the risks of smoking, to make a responsible product. what was the critique of this? reynolds worked with the national cancer institute, the tobacco working group for a decade. plaintiffs at first did not even tell you about this, sat on that stand, told you the whole story, and it is only on cross that this stuff comes out, that they worked with the national cancer institute for decades to try to reduce the risks of smoking. they made experimental cigarettes hand-in-hand with the government. none of this matters to mr. hiott because he is not interested in any other brand, but you have to consider this when you think about whether plaintiff proved that there was something wrong with the winston or wrong with the salem that caused mr. hiott's injuries. this is what happened to the tar and nicotine yield of a salem over the years, a dramatic decline because of filters and the paper and the reduced circumference, expanded tobacco, air delusion, the stuff that reynolds was doing. it is the same with winston, dramatic reductions in tar and nicotine because of the efforts of reynolds. they are trying to make a better product. and here's the range of products that reynolds offers today, ultra low, and you heard about these products like carlton and now that had such low nicotine in them, such low tar, you cannot even measure it. it is that low. they have the middle, which is the average weight for the entire industry, and reynolds still sells winston and salems in full flavor. but here's what is important. in 2001, the national cancer institute looked back all over this, and they said the clear impression from these studies taken as a whole is that there is a lower risk of lung cancer among populations of smokers who use lower yield products. that is the national cancer institute, less cancer from a lower yield product. low-tar products, lower risk of lung cancer exposure. that is what reynolds did. reynolds did not stop there. they developed premier, which we talked about, which heats rather than burns tobacco, dramatic reduction. and you saw the public health community's response. you saw that dr. connolly, only guy involved in the 2010 sgr, so much said, there is no need to wait for the sign-off before declaring a war on premier. the public health community has decided that no one should smoke, that people in this country should not be allowed to choose for themselves whether to smoke, and we see this more and more each day. you have probably seen reports where some cities are considering banning big drinks, too much soda pop. they want to take that choice out of your hands. that is what the public health community decided about smoking, and that is why they attacked premier before the science was even in. they do not need to wait. they do not want anyone to smoke. reynolds kept going and rolled out eclipse and eclipse is still available today. but there is one important part i want you to remember. the one critique that we heard about all this effort was the one chart from the dietrich hoffman article that showed bap going down and nitrosamines going up. remember? we talked about it. nitrosamines are really bad and they are going up as all this other stuff is going down. read the addendum to dr. hoffman's report. it is one part plaintiffs did not show you. he filed an addendum and here's what it says: "a novel type of smoking product has been introduced on test markets in 1996 under the names eclipse in the united states. to effect a drastic reduction of the smoke yields of toxic and carcinogenic agents, the r. j. reynolds company has developed a new version of the type of cigarette that heats tobacco rather than burns it." in the bottom part, "concentrations of carcinogens such as benzo(a)pyrene as well as the nicotine derived in nitrosamines, which reside in the tar, have thus been effectively lowered by 85 to 95 percent." that is what reynolds did to reduce nitrosamines. they claim up with a revolutionary type of product that takes nitrosamines down by almost 95 percent. this is what reynolds was doing. mr. hiott does not smoke premier. he does not smoke eclipse. but this is what reynolds is doing, and there is dr. hoffman telling you that they had success in doing this. finally i want to turn to punitive damages. but before we get to punitive damages, i want to remind you, as you look back through the evidence, remember all the stuff that reynolds published. remember dr. rodgman's speech. nitrosamines are in that speech. it is from 1969. he not only disclosed that he had found nitrosamines in smoke; he drew pictures of them for scientists and from his work. that was in 1969. there is no secret here. plaintiffs never showed you anything specific that reynolds did for winston and salem, and they never showed you anything that they did that caused mr. hiott to not understand the risks of smoking, caused mr. hiott to be unclear about what he should do. dr. feingold told you that this was good work, that these were good scientists. rodgman's thanked in the surgeon general's report as are other reynolds scientists. cooperated with public health community. they offered a wide range of products and acted in a responsible manner. and it is plaintiffs burden to show you if there was something about those brands that was wrong. look through the dietrich hoffman article. it is instructive and it will show you how over the years, reynolds has achieved dramatic reductions in all the bad stuff for cigarette smoke. the same for tirc and ctr. seven nobel prize winners, 6- to 700 other polls published, cited by the surgeon general's report, institutions like the university of virginia, the ama. plaintiffs want you to believe that everybody's involved in this effort to mislead the smokers, everybody, from the warehouse guys and the larus brothers who signed the frank statement, to the university of virginia and the ama and the national cancer institute. they are all supposed to be part of it. but when you take a step back, you will see that what is really going on here is an effort to reduce the risks associated with smoking. plaintiffs will tell you the other critique is that, well, smokers of low-tar cigarettes smoke more deeply or inhale in a different matter than the machine. we showed you the press release from the '50s. before the ftc machine was ever put into play, tobacco companies disclosed that it did not represent individual smokers, way back in the '50s. and hoffman has a sentence on that, which says there no secret. they know that people are not machines. it is a different way of doing things when we like to be able to compare products. and that is how we get the numbers. that is how we get to where we are today. but remember robert figueroa's statements? he is the only guy who said mr. hiott smoked a winston light. he said it was no different, did not puff deeply, did not cover up the air holes. dr. feingold told you when he was on the stand when he talked about compensation, that was a general. that it had nothing to do with mr. hiott and the way he smoked in the real world. finally, with respect to nitrosamines, he also talk about how in the '90s, reynolds discovered where they were coming from. reynolds had reduced them through all the general reduction efforts. they had developed premier, which reduced nitrosamines by 95 percent, and then they figured out where it was coming from. the tobacco farmers were using propane to heat tobacco during the food curing. it was increasing nitrosamines. reynolds published what they found. it impacted what they found. and they paid to retrofit 1200 farms. that is what reynolds did today. that is what reynolds did when they found out about nitrosamines. as i told you in opening, if you go back over three companies in over 60 years, you will find a variety of statements that look peculiar in today's life. when you look back, they look foolish, we saw some of these clips when dr. kyriakoudes was here. but in this case, the purpose of punitive damages are twofold. it is to punish reynolds and it is to prepare future product. and neither of these reasons are justified here. first, all of the people you saw are long gone. there is no one left to punish, all of them. all of the guys who signed the frank statement, all of the people from tirc, they are gone. i asked dr. kyriakoudes when they were born. these guys were born in the 1800s. they are from a different generation. they have been gone for decades. tirc is gone. ti is gone. ctr is gone. they do not exist anymore. there is no one left to punish. the modern reynolds has changed. there is nothing to deter. the fda regulates everything that goes into a cigarette now. all of the ingredients have been disclosed to the fda since the early '80s, all of them. never once has the fda said, "take this one out; take that one out." there are no secrets. there are no organizations left. there is no one left to punish. there is nothing left to deter. the only person that can be awarded punitive damages in this case is mrs. hiott. they can only go to the estate. cannot give it to a public health agency. cannot give it to an antismoking organization. cannot give it to a clinic. cannot give it to other smokers. the only person that can get punitive damages in this case is mrs. hiott. but remember, when you think about whether there is an entitlement to punitive damages, the only two purposes you will consider, punishing reynolds and deterring future conduct. and all you decide in this case is entitlement. if you answer yes, we will come back for another phase with openings and closings and witnesses where we will talk about the amount. but right now we are just talking about entitlement. and here the award, at all, can only go to mrs. hiott, only to the estate. reynolds can only be punished for conduct that harmed mr. hiott. you have heard so much about other smokers, so much about people who are not mr. hiott. you cannot consider that when you decide punitive damages in this case, just for mrs. hiott, just for stuff that affected mr. hiott, and, again, this is just entitlement. the amount will be in the next phrase if you answer it yes. but your answer should be no. as i mentioned, all of this is gone. all of the stuff that plaintiffs want you to focus on, not only does it have no connection to mr. hiott, no proof that he relied on it in some meaningful way but it is been gone and it is been over for decades. finally, you have heard a little bit about reynolds' website, that this is what is on reynolds' website today. it says that: "cigarette smoking is a leading cause of preventable deaths in the united states." specifically tells smokers to quit. "if you are worried about your health, quit smoking." plaintiffs keep saying that reynolds told mr. hiott to smoke. did you see any evidence of that? look back through the evidence when you are in the jury room and see if you find one ad, one statement ever encouraging people to smoke, encouraging nonsmokers to start, encouraging smokers not to quit. it is not there, never was. in fact, for the vast majority of mr. hiott's life, every package he saw had a warning label on it. he smoked with a warning label. this is what is on reynolds website today. and then finally, as ms. pollack pointed out, reynolds points people to the surgeon general. if they have questions about smoking, they should go to the surgeon general. we talked about this a little bit earlier in this case. i want to spend some moments here at the end talking about what plaintiffs have admitted. when the case is over, the judge is going to instruct you that mr. hiott bears some measure of fault in causing his injuries, and it is because of plaintiffs admission in this case. and the admission comes from the complaint. you can see that at the time, they were referring to mr. hiott as a smoker. but this is the complaint in this case and it says: "mr. hiott bears some measure of fault, but less that one hundred percent of the applicable fault for causing his smoking-related injuries. the smoker's acts or omissions relating to his first smoking a cigarette or the frequency and duration of his efforts to quit smoking were a partial proximate cause in combination with the acts or omissions of the defendants. plaintiff therefore seeks apportionment of fault and damages." think about what this means in the context of the evidence in this case. there should be no dispute that mr. hiott knew the risks of smoking. from the moment he started smoking, there was a warning label on the pack. we have talked about some of the evidence that goes to his specific awareness -- reverend ricks, his yearbook, the 1971, his brother quitting, his wife quitting, all of this stuff specific to him. there should be no dispute that mr. hiott knew the risks of smoking. there is also no dispute in this case that every single smoker can quit. addicted, nonaddicted, all of them can quit. and so remember that. mr. hiott knew the risks of smoking. mr. hiott had the power to quit. when you add this fault thing at the end, it becomes quite interesting. mr. hiott knew the risks of smoking. mr. hiott had the power to stop smoking. the plaintiffs admit that mr. hiott was partially at fault due to the frequency and duration of his quit attempts. think about what that really means in this case. if you are asking yourself how we can have a lawsuit in this case, it is because of that last phrase. and we are in a situation where plaintiffs admit mr. hiott knew he should stop, admit he had the power to stop and admit he is at fault for not stopping. but the reason we are still here, the reason we have the lawsuit, is that last phrase, apportionment of fault and damages. plaintiffs want to negotiate one. they want to negotiate over what percentage of responsibility mr. hiott should take. ask yourself, if there is any other situation, anywhere where we bargain over percentages of personal responsibilities. we do not negotiate personal responsibility in this country. if you know you should do something, you have the power to do something and you admit you are at fault for not doing it, you take all the responsibility. that is how it works. that is why reynolds' position is that the only legal cause here, the only legal cause of the smoking, the only legal cause of the injury, is mr. hiott. and before plaintiffs stand up and say, well, reynolds knew and reynolds was responsible, remember what we just talked about reynolds was responsible. they offered a variety of products. they worked with the national cancer institute. they published on carcinogens. they published on addiction. they gave products like premier and eclipse a chance. they reduced all of the bad stuff in smoke. reynolds is responsible to the government. reynolds is responsible to its customers. here in the context of this lawsuit, remember that plaintiff admits mr. hiott knew he should stop; he had the power to stop. they want to negotiate what amount of responsibility he has. makes no sense. it is only in the context of the tobacco lawsuit for money that you will even hear such a thing. in the real world, it does not happen. when you know you should do something, you have the power to do it. you bear all the responsibility and that is why reynolds' position is that is the only legal cause here. the reason mr. hiott is not an engle class member, because he was in control of his smoking. he knew he should stop and he did not want to. in conclusion, i want to point out a few things that i'd like you to keep in mind as you deliberate. first, i want to thank you again for your attention. i know it is been a long morning. i know it is been a long trial. and i want to thank you again for your attention and your diligence as jurors in the case. you should all be proud of your service. that is something everybody here appreciates. i'm here because this is my job. this is what i do for a living. judge, art, my team, this is our job. this is what we do for a living. you guys are different. you guys have agreed to serve as jurors, put your lives on hold to help us resolve this dispute. you should be proud of your efforts. and i want to make sure you understand that the men and women who are r. j. reynolds tobacco company today appreciate it. i want to close by talking a little bit about terence hiott and carolyn hiott and why we cannot decide this case based on sympathy. it is natural to sympathize with terence. dad moved out when he was two years old, moves two hours away, does not see him that much. sees him for vacation in the summer, sees him for christmas holidays. that is tough. you heard how mr. hiott never came up to see terence play in a game, did not exercise his weekend visit. it is natural to sympathize. but remember what terence told you when he took the stand. "my dad told me he was hooked and i should never smoke." but he got to college, he smoked. his dad told him, "be a man." be proud, take responsibility for it. "i had some drinks. i had a cigarette. i take responsibility for it." terence did not blame anybody for his smoking and neither did his father. terence never got anything from his father's estate, not even a memento of his father, puts all that aside to sit next to mrs. hiott, to join her lawsuit in an effort to get money from r. j. reynolds. you have to keep that in mind. terence could have filed this lawsuit if he wanted to. he could have filed it when he was 18, could have filed it when he was 21. he could have brought this lawsuit on his own at any time. he did not. he decided to join up with carolyn hiott's lawsuit after he found out about her lawsuit. you need to keep that in mind. remember how he viewed his own smoking. remember how he viewed his father. remember that this is not a lawsuit that he filed; this is a lawsuit he joined after he found out about it. last, i want to talk about mrs. hiott. we talked about the interrogatories and how she put none for decedent's children. first she said she did not understand the question. then she said she was told to stay away from him. and then they suggested, well, maybe, put it in. frankly, it does not matter what the answer was or whether it was listed or not. what matters is in the context of 15 minutes, mrs. hiott gave you three different explanations for why she wrote "none" on that discovery form. 15 minutes, three different explanations. but it is more important. there are many more changes in mrs. hiott's testimony. i think this undertakes much of what she had to say in this case. first, in her deposition on the left, we asked her: "did you go to the softball games? did you see him smoke during the names?" "no. to my knowledge, i do not recall him smoking during the game." at trial: "did he smoke during the games?" "he did." mrs. hiott sat through every day of trial. this is her testimony, did not smoke at the games, under oath at a deposition. under oath at trial, he did. we asked mrs. hiott in her deposition: "did you ever discuss smoking with your husband?" "no." "did he ever tell you why he picked the brands he picked?" "he never said." she heard dr. feingold go through fagerstrom and heard how one of the factors is being so ill in bed and still smoking. and what happened at trial? "well, the only thing he ever told me was he would smoke salem if he had a cold." it does not even meet fagerstrom. he is not ill in bed. but this is the change in her testimony. you need to ask yourself, is it a coincidence that the one conversation she remembers, 12 years with mr. hiott, just happens to relate to a fagerstrom effect? she is trying to get him an extra point. "so the jury understands, in the entire 12 years you were married, the only conversation you remember is about salem and him being ill." answer: "that is correct." and here's the last one. we asked mrs. hiott in her deposition. she sat through this trial. she heard plaintiffs read from the 2010 sgr time and time again how the most important factor, the biggest predictor is morning smoking. in her deposition, we said: "did he keep cigarettes on his bed stand?" answer: "i do not recall it being on the bed stand." "he did not ever, as they say, light one when he hit the floor?" answer: "that is correct." the trial, she changed it dramatically. "how soon after he woke in the morning did he have a cigarette?" "that was the first thing he did. he had a pack of cigarettes on his nightstand, and when the clock went out, he turned the clock off and picked up a cigarette." that is fagerstrom. that is somebody who sat through a trial, saw the importance of morning smoking according to their experts and changed their testimony. we go from cigarettes not being on the bed stand to cigarettes being on the bed stand. but remember when you think back on this, it is not just a change. mrs. hiott only knows mr. hiott as a smoker for ten years. they were married for 12 years. mr. hiott passed away 16 years ago. there is no evidence of all the smoking before that. that is why the plaintiffs want you to think of it as a snapshot, single event, one-time through fagerstrom and then just leap right over to award them money. now, i'm sure plaintiff does not like opening statements because i get the last word. you can probably guess one of the things i do not like about closing is they get the last word. they get to stand up and talk for about 20 more minutes or so. i want you to encourage you to remember the stuff they are talking about. when you go back into the jury room, i encourage you to hear my voice. i know that is something unpleasant to think about, having my voice in your head. but when you are back there, remember, ask yourselves, what would reynolds say about this? what would reynolds say about what plaintiffs position is? ask yourself as you go through the evidence, did the plaintiff meet their burden of proof? did they take reynolds from 0 to 51 percent on all these elements? because that is what they have do. otherwise they cannot prevail. there is a reason plaintiff gets to go first and last, and it is because the burden of proof is entirely theirs. they are the ones that have to prove to you that mr. hiott did not just smoke. you cannot base your verdict on the fact he smoked. they are the ones that have to prove to you that it was something more, that it was smoking caused by addiction that caused the disease. cannot just be that reynolds sold cigarettes, cannot just be that mr. hiott smoked cigarettes that reynolds made. i know you have kept an open mind so far, and i know that you will keep an open mind as you continue to deliberate. as you deliberate, i'm confident you will see that mr. hiott does not meet any of the definitions for addiction and that there is no evidence that mr. hiott smoked against his will, such that you can conclude that he was out of control, compelled to smoke because of something reynolds did or did not do. the only direct, continuous, substantial cause of mr. hiott's smoking was mr. hiott. he is the man in the middle. he is the man that stands between smoking and disease. and because he is the person in the middle, he is the only legal cause of the injury here, and that is why i think you will see reynolds has the burden in its favor. thank you very much, ladies and gentlemen. let me take that back. one more point. remember this as we go. this may be the most important thing in the whole case. when mr. hiott was alive, when it was all said and done, mrs. hiott looked back and said, "i'm fine with his smoking. i'm okay with his choice." if mrs. hiott was fine with his smoking when he was alive, you should be fine with his smoking in this case. there is no evidence that reynolds controlled mr. hiott or compelled him to smoke. the woman closest to him, the woman who brought this lawsuit, in their own words, was fine with the smoking. she is fine with it, you should be fine with it. thank you.