mr. vinik: thank you, your honor. ladies and gentlemen of the jury, this case is about something that reynolds talked about a numbei of times. the case is about choice. that is one of the issues. it is about reynolds' choice to lie to the public about the dangers of smoking, about the addictiveness of their cigarettes, and it is about reynolds' choice to do that and the effect that reynolds' choice had on kenneth hiott. so what you are going to be asked to do in this case ultimately is fill out a verdict form. the court: can you see, ms. mann? a juror: yes. the court: just wanted to make sure. mr. vinik: if i get in your way at any point just raise your hand and tell the judge. this is page one of the verdict form that you are going to be asked to fill out. the judge is going to give this to you and you are going to go back to the jury room and this is the first question and the verdict form. the first question is: was kenney hiott addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, and if so, was cigarette smoking the cause of such addiction a legal cause of his lung cancer. now, if you answer yes to that question, then that means that kenney hiott is a member of the engle class action, and as a result of that, if this is a yes, there will be certain findings that he will have to follow. and the judge will instruct you on these. but i'll tell you what the class action findings are and we can go through them quickly. the first class action finding is that cigarettes cause lung cancer. and if you answer yes to that first question, that is a given. a prior jury has already found that. the second finding are that cigarettes are addictive. that is a given. another finding is r.j. reynolds was negligent. r.j. reynolds placed cigarettes on the market that were defective and unreasonably dangerous. r.j. reynolds concealed or omitted material information not otherwise known or available, knowing the material was false or misleading or failed to disclose a material fact concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes or both. r.j. reynolds agreed with other tobacco companies to conceal or omit information regarding the health effects of cigarettes or their addictive nature or both with the intention that smokers and the public would rely on this information to their detriment. and those are the engle findings that you will have to follow if you answer yes to this question; this first question. so what is it that you do have to decide? well, the first thing in this question is addiction. was kenney hiott addicted to cigarettes. so that is one of the fundamental questions in this case, as i'm sure you can tell from all the testimony that you have been hearing about whether or not kenney hiott was addicted. now, i'd like to talk a little bit about what the evidence on addiction was. one of the questions you do not have to answer in this case is whether smoking cigarettes was the cause of kenney hiott's cancer. that is been agreed to. mr. boyce: objection, your honor. medical cause. the court: okay. mr. vinik: exactly right. what the defendant have agreed to is that smoking cigarettes was the medical cause of kenney hiott's lung cancer and that is what killed him. so that is what is been agreed to. so let us talk about what the evidence is on addiction. the evidence on addiction was presented by two experts. i'm sure you remember. we have dr. feingold with plaintiff's side, for carolyn hiott's side, the estate's side, and dr. giakas for reynolds' side. now let us go offer the evidence that these two experts presented. so what was defendant's first line of attack on dr. feingold? well, he is from canada. is that really an attack on the science? no. it was a personal attack on dr. feingold. what was the second line of attack on dr. feingold? he is made money testifying. is that an attack on the science? no, that is not. that is a meaningless attack, a personal attack on dr. feingold, and i suggest that that is not something that you -- that really should be much in your consideration. what you should be considering is the science that the two experts talked about. as a matter of fact, i could attack dr. giakas for making $50,000 for testifying in this case. i could attack dr. giakas for reynolds finding him on a website, but actually i do not think you should consider those things. i think that you should consider the science that these two gentlemen testified to and who is more believable. you, the jury, can decide which one of these two witnesses was more credible. that is part of your job. and, in fact, what dr. feingold testified to simply made more common sense. and dr. feingold' testimony was backed up by the data in the surgeon general's reports while dr. giakas tried to mislead you about the data in the surgeon general's reports. so let us go over it. first thing on addiction, pack-a-day for 25 years. now, that is in the medical records. this is the medical record that we have. and this reflects what came out of kenney hiott's own mouth it is what he told his doctors right before they were going to cut his head open to do brain surgery and there is not the slightest chance that kenney hiott would have lied to his doctors right before surgery about his medical history. so consider that on the pack-a-day for 25 years. it would be absurd to think that he would lie on his medical history to his anesthesiologist about anything right before they were going to slice his head open and cut into his brain. as a matter of fact, dr. giakas agreed on the pack-a-day for over 25 years. and you will remember that mrs. hiott testified that she remembers him buying a pack-a-day. every time they went to the post office he stopped at the store and bought a pack. it was like a ritual. so we have established a pack-a-day habit for well over 25 years. i think it was 28 years. so we have dr. feingold saying that a pack-a-day smoker for 28 years is addicted. and we have dr. giakas saying, well, as low as thirty percent of smokers are addicted. you remember that testimony. what did the surgeon general say on this topic? the surgeon general's report, 2010, page 105 -- anc by the way, you will have the surgeon general's reports back in the jury room with you. you will have a lot of the evidence. one of the -- some of the things you will have is the 2010 surgeon general's report. you will also have the 2012 surgeon general's report. you can take your pads if you want, you can write down this page number, page 105, and i urge you to do so. yoi can go back to the jury room and pick up the surgeoi general's report you can look at the pages that we are talking about. you can read the full article, two or three pages, that is all you need. i would urge you to read page 105, 106, 107 of the 2010 surgeon general's report. there is a lot of information in there that we talked about during this trial. a lot of good information. so what did the surgeon general say here? it says nicotine addiction is the fundamental reason, the fundamental reason that individuals persist in using tobacco products, and this persistent tobacco use contributes to many diseases described in this report. so someone who smokes a pack-a-day for 30 years, nicotine addiction is the fundamental reason why they do that. this is totally consistent with dr. feingold's view and completely inconsistent with dr. giakas's view of the world. let us look at the data. let us look at whose opinion is actually backed up by the data. remember when reynolds' counsel showed dr. feingold the stud on the stand that seemed to say that only thirty percent of people who smoke are addicted? he showed him one little sentence out of that study and that little sentence said thirty percent. and then later dr. giakas used the same exact thirty percent figure when he testified. he said that as low and thirty percent of people, some studies show as low as thirty percent of the people who smoke are addicted. well, that was just misleading. the study that said thirty percent of people are addicted, if you remember, included people who smoked even one cigarette in their lifetime. kenney hiott did not smoke one cigarette in his lifetime. he smoked a pack-a-day for almost 30 years. and this is not a game where we should be playing around with the truth. this is an exercise where we are trying to get to the truth. and in order to get to the truth you need to look at the whole truth and all the evidence and not just one little sentence. so what else did the surgeon general say? by virtually any measure, the prevalence of lifetime nicotine dependence is higher for cigarette smoking than for any other category of substance abuse. and remember, we went to that anthony study anc we looked at the actual data. well, here's the data. we went over this with dr. giakas a little bit, and went over it with dr. feingold a little bit. that anthony study, there is that thirty percent number. and next to it, it includes people who ever smoked, ever smoked in their lifetime. and let us look at the study that has daily smokers, someone more like kenney hiott, prevalenci of addiction, ninety percent. in that bottom number, that is daily smokers, smoked daily for greater than two consecutive weeks in the past 12 months. that is on page 163 of the surgeon general. you can go back there. you can open up to that page, you can read it yourself. you can look at that table. now, that ninety percent number includes daily smokers who smoked daily for greater than two consecutive weeks in the past 12 months. that is not even kenney hiott. kenney hiott smoked a pack-a-day for almost 30 years, 28 years. so if you concluded only a pack-a-day smokers that smoked a pack-a-day for that long, you can imagine that ninety percent number would be a lot higher. so that is the actual data and not dr. giakas getting up there and saying, oh, it is only thirty percent, which is that other number which is really not relevant in this case. now, dr. feingold also analyzed addiction under the fagerstrom test. so let us go through the fagerstrom test. and question number one, how sooi after you wake up do you smoke your first cigarette? that is the most important item on the fagerstrom test. surgeon general's report, page 106, 2010 surgeon general's report, the first item: time for the first cigarette after waking is by itself a stronger predictor of relapse than any other self report measure of dependence. and that makes common sense. that makes sense and that makes sense because addiction has a biological basis. as dr. feingold testified, you have nicotine receptors in your brain and overnight the nicotine receptors empty out of nicotine and the receptors start sending out signals to say, come on, fill me back up. so the fact that you smoke -- an addicted smoker smokes right away in the morning makes perfect sense. dr. giakas would not agree with that. so other fagerstrom factors: do you find it difficult to refrain from smoking in a place where it is forbidden? dr. feingold testified about that and he did not sit through a movie without going out to smoke. how many cigarettes a day? remember the fagerstrom test talks about how many cigarettes you smoked because the fagerstrom test is specifically geared to nicotine while the test that dr. giakas uses is not. so that test does not have this. how many cigarettes a day? 20 cigarettes a point. you smoke if you are so ill that you are in bed most of the day a point. remember, kenney smoked salem. he smoked w he had a cold and was sick. he thought the menthol soothed his throat. that is what carolyn hiott testified to. so dr. feingold came to either six points or five points, depending on how you do this test. since kenney hiott is dead we cannot ask him directly exactly every question here. but it is either five or six points, and dr. feingold said -- i think i said dr. giakas before -- dr. feingold said that that means addiction. now, remember dr. giakas used something calle( the dsm. since he is a psychiatrist, that is what they use. they use a diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders. now, dr. giakas did not even look at the fagerstrom test. he went through a bunch of the tests. there are almost a dozen, maybe eight listed in the surgeon general's report. you can look at it yourself. they are all on page 106, 107 i think, the surgeon general's 2010 report, maybe 107, 108. dr. giakas did not look at fagerstrom. he did not look at any of the tests listed in the surgeon general's report. he only looked at the dsm. so he did not even have an opinion as to whether or not kenney hiott would meet the fagerstrom test. but let us talk about the dsm test. the surgeon general specifically criticizes the dsm test because the relevance of some of the symptoms to nicotine addiction may be questionable because the dsm criteria are used across different drugs of abuse. that is at page 106, the 2010 report. what that means is that the dsm test is not specifically designed to test for nicotine addiction. it was designed to test for any substance abuse; heroin, cocaine, anything. so a lot of the factors in the dsm criteria just do not a apply to nicotine. as dr. giakas said, while the addiction mechanisms are similar -- i'm sorry, it is dr. feingold said while the addiction mechanisms are similar for heroin and cocaine and alcohol and nicotine and that they affect the receptors, it is not all exactly the same, and using the same dsm test for cocaine and heroin and nicotine, which it is not really designed for, does not make sense. now, dr. feingold went through the dsm test anc showed that kenney met the dsm. dr. giakas went through the dsm test that said he did not. so let us talk about dsm, even though it is not really designed for nicotine addiction. here's the dsm-iv test. this is actually in the surgeon general's report as well, in the same area, i think it is page 106, 107, 2010 report, you can look at yourself. first is tolerance. dr. giakas and dr. feingold both agreed kenney met tolerance. so let us skip that one real quick. next one is withdrawal symptoms. now, remember, carolyn hiott's testimony was clear, kenney smoked right away when he woke up in the morning. he grabbed his cigarettes, he walked into the kitchen and he lit up, first thing he did. now, dr. giakas simply would not agree that kenney hiott smoked first thing in the morning because his nicotine receptors were empty and he needed to fill them back up. but that explanation makes perfect sense, and that is exactly what the surgeon general says is going on. we also know that kenney woke up if he smoked -- if he woke up in the middle of the night he smoked a cigarette. now, that again, meant nothing to dr. giakas. but the only logical explanation of that is that kenney needed the nicotine. remember also, withdrawal symptoms that kenne; did not complain. never complained about anything. dr. giakas ignored that testimony that kenney hiott did not complain. remember carolyn hiott testified that kenney had these headaches, that is how they knew that the cancer -- lung cancer went to his brain. and the only way she knew that he had these horrible headaches was he would sit there with his head in his hands. remember the picture of kenney in the hospital after brain radiation and chest radiation smiling. is that a person who complains about withdrawal symptoms? dr. giakas did not take that into account at all. also dr. giakas said not everyone who is nicotine addicted has withdrawal symptoms. only about fifty percent of the people who are nicotine addicted have withdrawal symptoms. so the fact that kenney complained -- did not complain does not mean he was not addicted. the fact that he did not have withdrawal symptoms does not me; he was not addicted. let us take the next one. substance often taken in larger amounts for over longer period than intended. as dr. feingold testified, did kenney hiott intend when he started smoking cigarettes sometime between the age of 14 and 16, to smoke a pack-a-day for the next 30 years? we cannot ask him. but you can judge that for yourselves. i think it is doubtful that he did that. persistent desire or unsuccessful efforts to cut down or control substance use. well, dr. giaka: just refused to believe that kenney hiott tried to quit. he just refused to believe all the testimony that he read from numerous witnesses that kenney hiott quit. he was substituting his personal judgment that those people were mistaken or not telling the truth and that is something you can judge. you as the jury, you are entitled to look at the testimony that he looked at and say, i do not believe dr. giakas when he discounted all that. i believe all these people instead. now, was the testimony on the quit attempts believable? what was it? dr. giakas, again, says there were -- i do not think that there were actual quit attempts. let us talk about the quit attempts that he looked at. dr. giakas read his testimony and just did not believe it. carolyn hiott said that kenney went to flagler hospital, took a six-week cessation course. he had this egg that he had to carry around. not something that we would do today but this is a long time ago before there were any drugs, before there were better therapies. and linda beverly talked about three or four more quit attempts using these plastic filters, a series of four filters you put on the end of the cigarette, you gradually filter more and more, and that was a theory of trying to get someone to quit. robert figueroa said that kenney tried to quit using nicotine gum, nicorette gum. if you remember, we went over the testimony, the entire testimony of these people with dr. giakas. we read large portions of it, not just sentences here and there taken out of context, but dr. giakas just refused to believe any of these multiple quit attempts. think about kenney trying to quit over and over and failing. think about that. would not that discourage anybody? would not that zap anyone's motivation to quit? but kenney hiott did not give up. he kept trying to quit even though he failed. now, when dr. giakas tells us all about the great drugs and techniques we have today to quit, he says, the success rate is 30 or forty percent. but there was no wellbutrin for kenney hiott. there wa! no chantix for kenney hiott. there was not even these electronic cigarettes that dr. giakas testified he does so well with. there was none of that for kenney hiott. remember what dr. feingold said about doubt? someone who doubts, has any doubt that cigarettes are bad for you is less likely to be able to quit. dr. giakas did not agree with that. but you can use your common sense to decide whether dr. feingold i right about that or dr. giakas. that is your province as the jury. and the evidence shows that what the tobacco companies were trying to do was sell death. doubt is our product. this is a 1969 internal tobacco company document which we went over during dr. feingold's testimony -- maybe dr. kyriakoudes's testimony. so internally the tobacco companies agreed with dr. feingold, disagreed with dr. giakas. now, i'm already up to three in the dsm. and i think we have met all three. but there are other factors that kenney hiott met here. let us go down to the bottom one. substance use continued despite knowledge of having persistent or recurrent physical or psychological problem likely to have been caused or exacerbated by a substance. now, dr. giakas saw the testimony of kenney hiott's co-worker, robert figueroa. robert figueroa said that kenney was trying to quit using nicorette gum because it was affecting kenney's breathing wher he played sports, when he played tennis, when he played softball. kenney would cough. he would have a hard time breathing. so he was trying to quit. dr. giakas read this testimony and just ignored it. but you can decide that that comes into that last category and makes common sense. now, the last thing i want to talk about on the dsm is this concept that dr. giakas talked about and that is that kenney had to be unhappy, even distraught about his smoking in order for dr. giakas to consider him addicted. and he said that kenney was never distraught over his smoking. now, the notion that you cannot be addicted to cigarettes if you are happy to smoke is nonsensical. that is what dr. feingold said. it was nonsense. addiction has a biological basis. has to do with the nicotine receptors in your brain getting the nicotine, filling up, and then emptying out and sending signals saying i want to smoke more. those nicotine receptors do not know if you are distraught or happy or sad or whether you want to quit. they are just sending signals down to your brain telling you to smoke more. and i tried to do this hypothetical with dr. giakas, although it was difficult. consider someone who was smoking in the 1930s, had no idea cigarettes were bad for them, was happy to smoke, did not want to quit, smoked two, three packs a day. is that person not addicted just because they were happy to smoke? of course they were. brain receptors, the nicotine, that has not changed. it is a chemical, it is a drug, our brains work the same way. they were addicted even thoug] they were happy to smoke. dr. giakas would not agree with that but, again, think about what makes sense. and by the way, kenney hiott was not even happy to smoke. the testimony shows that he tried to quit multiple times. he went to a six-week clinic. used the plastic filters. he used nicotine gum. that is not someone who is happy to quit. that is someone who tried to quit multiple times and failed. some other things that i want to talk about just generally about addiction and dr. giakas. one of the things that dr. giakas said was that kenney enjoyed smoking, as if that was some sort of issue in this case. of course he enjoyed smoking. addicted smokers enjoy smoking. that is part of the biological basis of addiction. as dr. feingold said, they do enjoy smoking. they should enjoy smoking. one of the signals coming from the brain receptors is pleasure. of course they enjoyed smoking. just like a heroin addict enjoys shooting up. so many other things that dr. giakas commented on. he said that kenney cleaned his ashtrays after smoking a cigarette. that is true. that is what the testimony shows. does that mean that kenney was no addicted? actually, you know what that means? that means that kenney saw the habit as disgusting, saw the cigarettes as disgusting, saw the ashtrays as disgusting and still he could not quit. you know what that is? that is addiction. dr. giakas also testified about how kenney was strong and would not smoke in the mercedes; same thing the ashtrays. he knew that it was addictive, but dr. giakas talked about how kenney was strong-willed, intelligent, took responsibility for his actions, set goals and kept them. what does that show? that shows that even though he was strong-willed, intelligent and tried to quit, he was so addicted that all those qualities he still could not quit. and you know what that is? that is addiction. i'd like to leave you with one last thought about dr. giakas's testimony on addiction. dr. giakas said in his testimony that kenney never told anyone he was addicted. well, that is not even true. remember terrence testified that kenney told him he is addicted. and terrence -- you remember th< testimony that dr. giakas read in terrence's deposition, dr. giakas said that he read in terrence's deposition that kenney said "i'm hooked" and he did not say i'm addicted. so for some reason he discounted that. if that does not show -- if that is not nonsense i do not know what is. when someone says they are hooked, it means they are addicted. now, when reynolds talks about choice and they talk about -- and dr. giakas talks about choice, mentions choice over and over again, i think that you should think about choice as reynolds' choice to lie about the addictive nature of the cigarettes and reynolds' choice to lie about whether or not cancer -- the cancer causing properties of cigarettes. and remember about choice what the tobacco lawyers said back in 1980. this is one of their documents. "we cannot defend continued smoking as free-choice if the person was addicted." so now we need to go back to question one on the verdict form: was kenney hiott addicted to cigarettes? the answer to that question is yes, of course he was. was cigarette smoking because of such addictioi a legal cause of his lung cancer? well, reynolds has agreed that it was the medical cause of his lung cancer. he got -- he got lung cancer because of smoking so there is no question about that. so the last question, the last concept on this question number one is: was the addiction a legal cause, legal cause of his lung cancer? what does that mean? legal cause is whether -- and the judge is going to instruct on what cause means -- but the legal cause basically is whether or not the addiction substantially contributed to the smoking. substantially contributed. and remember what the surgeon general said, addiction is the fundamental reason why someone would smoke. and it is the fundamental reason why someone would smoke a pack-a-day for 30 years. and remember what dr. feingold said. yes, he enjoyed smoking, but all addicts enjoy it. it is part of the biological process. it does not mean he was not addicted. and it does not mean that the addiction did not substantially contribute to his smoking. so the answer to that first question is yes. let us talk a little bit about what the tobacco companies knew about addiction and what kenney hiot did not know about addiction. now, remember dr. feingold talked about this research that was done early on before the 1964 surgeon general report by battelle. battelle is a company that the tobacco companies -- they hired to do research into addiction. and this was the proposal that we looked at. and remember what they said. as a result of these various researchers we now, meaning the tobacco companies, possess a knowledge of the effects of nicotine far more extensive than exists in public scientific literature. this is 1962. you will have this document back in the jury room. it is a long complicated document. it is ptx-700. you can look at it if you want. it is up to you. the one of the next documents in the series is after the battelle reports and hippo i and hippo ii, those are part of the battelle reports came out. this is ad yeaman, brown & williamson vice president, a lawyer for brown & williamson, commenting on the implications of battelle hippo i and ii, 1963 document: "nicotine is addictive. we are then in the business of selling nicotine in an addictive drug." this is what their take was on the internal research reports that they did 1963. you will have this document back in the jury room. i'll tell you what the ptx is, 802. you will have binders. they will be in order of plaintiff’s exhibits and defendants' exhibits, different binders so you can look up any document you want by the ptx number and find it. 1963. cable from ad yeaman, brown & williamsoi which is now reynolds, submission battelle or griffith development to the surgeon general undesirable. now, reynolds will tell you, oh, we did not submit it to the surgeon general because it was not good science. this is a cable from a lawyer at brown & williamson. they are not talking about submission because it is not good science. they are talking about not submitting it to the surgeon general because it is undesirable as a legal matter. this is a lawyer, not a scientist. then what happens? 1964, the surgeon general's report comes out. nicotine is not addictive. that is what the surgeon general said. never had an of the internal battelle reports or the hippo studies. surgeon general says, and this is ptx-843, again, you can go look at it, this is the 1964 surgeon general report, page 34: "tobacco habit should be characterized as a habituation rather than as an addition." why did they do that? because as you can see on page 351, there is an absence of physical dependence. exactly the opposite of what the tobacco companies knew in 1963 prior to the 1964 surgeon general's report. they just hid it from the surgeon general. and they did not hide it because -- they did not hide it because the scientific data was no good. they hid it because the lawyers said they should hide it. and then -- got a messed up slide. but what happened after 1964? the tobacco companies continued to -- they knew that nicotine was addictive. this is research planning memo on the nature of the tobacco business. it is ptx-1406. this is an interesting document. i suggest you go look at this one and read it. and it said: tobacco product is a vehicle for the delivery of nicotine. they talked about how people smoke primarily for nicotine and nicotine enjoyment. oh, it is right there. just have to click through. "the tobacco product is, in essence, a vehicle for delivery of nicotine designed to deliver the nicotine in a generally acceptable and attractive form. our industry is based upon design, manufacture and sale of attractive dosage forms of nicotine." 1972, internal reynolds document. 1982, internal reynolds document. went through this during the testimony. this is -- you cannot see it very well, but it is ptx-1932. you can go look it up in the binders that you will have in the back and take a look at it yourself. again, you can look at the whole thing and not just the little strip that i'm pointing out. "we cannot ever be comfortable selling a product which most of our customers would stop usin if they could. that is to say if the exit gate from our market should suddenly open, we could be out of business in almost overnight." the exit gate? what are they talking about here? the exit gate is if their product suddenly became nonaddicted or if there was a cure for addiction -- that is what the exit gate is -- if there was a cure for addiction they would be out of business overnight because they know everybody smokes because of addiction. that'; 1982. remember, at this time the surgeon general is still saying that cigarettes are not addictive. that '64 report has not yet been changed. it is not until 1982 that the surgeon general finally figures it out that cigarettes are addictive. 1988. did i say '82? 1988. the 1988 surgeon general which you will also have back there that the surgeon general figures out that nicotine is addictive. now, that is the end of my presentation on addiction. i'm going to now turn over to ms. pollack and ms. pollack is going to talk some more about the history of the science and the history of what the tobacco companies did and she is going to gc through the rest of that verdict form with you and tell you what is in that verdict form and how you should fieure it out. but i appreciate you listening to me and hope you listen to ms. pollack with as much attention as you gave me, and i thank you very much. ms. pollack: good morning. i'm going to picl up where my colleague josh vinik left off. now, you recall that we talked a little bit about this cancer scare in the mid 1950s and there was a lot of publicity about the speculation and the science that was going on that cancer was caused by cigarette smoking. now, our expert, dr. kyriakoudes who is an expert historian on tobacco matters talked to you about this entire story, the entire cancer scare. now, you will recall that dr. kyriakoudes was the only expert historian here. reynolds did not bring in and put forth an historian for you. but as he explained, the tobacco companies were very worried because if it were true that cigarettes caused cancer and people believed it, this would hurt sales and that would be a problem for them. so what did they do? well, here's a press release in 1953 from american tobacco company. now, i'm just going to remind you that when i say american tobacco comp or i say brown & williamson, that is like me saying r.j. reynolds. r.j. reynolds is responsible for anything it did or said and anything that american tobacco or brown & williamson did or said. so here's the president of american tobacco. he is saying he took issue today with what he called "loose talk" on the subject of smoking in relation to lung cancer. he stated the public should be reassured no one has yet proved that lung cancer is traceable to tobacco. so that is 1953 in november. but he decides he is got to go a little further than that. a couple days later, he sends a telegram to the president of r.j. reynolds. he says, "in view of the highly publicized claims of certain medical men" -- and that was the scientists who were concerned about smoking causes cancer -- "i suggest a meeting of the heads of all of those cigarette companies. the objective would be an industry response." so here's the start of the agreement between all of the tobacco companies to get together and plant doubt into the minds of the public so that people can keep smoking. now, why is this so unusual for them to get together? well, first of all, at this point they are fierce competitors. they do not even like each other. they are competing against each other for cigarette sales. now, they really were not able to get together. they were not allowed to because the government was concerned about price fixing and monopolization. st you are going to hear reynolds' counsel tell you that they told the department of justice that they were getting together and they told the department o f justice what they were going to do. well, there is no evidence that they told the department of justice they were going to get together and do an entire program to plant the seeds of doubt into the minds of the public. if anything, they might have told the government, which we don' even know, it was about price fixing, that they were not getting together to do price fixing. now, in december 1953 right after this telegram, they do get together, and you will remember that they met at the plaza hotel. big meeting, all of the executives from all the tobacco companies are there. and they hire hill & knowlton. and this is a carefully orchestrated plan to hire a public relations company to get the word out that smoking does not cause cancer. here's what they do. they issue something called a frank statement to cigarette smokers at the advice of hill & knowlton in 1954, very beginning oj 1954. this is a public statement. it says, "no agreement among authorities regarding possible causes of lung cancer." this is what they are telling the public. no agreement regarding the causes of lung cancer. and this is a joint statement. you can see on the bottom there all of the tobacco companies sign on to it. so what happened? well, maybe for a little while people get concerned. but as dr. kyriakoudes told you, by 1956 cigarette sales stage a come back. here's a newspaper article in 1956. it says, "a lessening of the cancer scare and the increasing popularity of filter-tip cigarettes are the principal reasons for the industry's recovery in addition to the growing population and prosperity." so what happened? well, cigarette sales went down a little bit and then they were back better than ever. here's 1958. we are going to keep switching between internal documents, what they knew internally, and what they then said publicly because that is very important here. so now let us look at what happened internally. february 1958, american tobacco company writes to their public relations people, hill & knowlton, saying, "the institute's major area of activity and major objective should be to defend the tobacco industry against attacks about health charges." now, at this point they formed these organizations: the tobacco institute, ti, the tobacco industry research committee, tirc, the ctr these are all the funded organizations that they put money into and they funded, they stacked them and everything else, all the tobacco companies chipped in so that that way they could get their message out. now, here's a report on a visit to the usa and canada and a bunch of british scientists came over and they met with american tobacco, the tirc and hill & knowlton. and it was not just a small meeting. it was three weeks of meetings in 1958 and what they say is, they -- after this meeting they say, "with one exception" -- and they named h.s.n. greene -- "the individuals whom we met believed tha smoking causes lung cancer. so they met with american tobacco, tirc and hill & knowlton and all those people agree except one guy, mr. greene, that smoking causes lung cancer. and they also mention berkson is skeptical but his view was not sound. now, the evidence from our experts say that greene was an outlier, berkson was an outlier, but everyone else believed at this point in 1958 smoking causes lung cancer. here's another document. in 1962, internally, the head of one of their tobacco funded organizations gets a memo from another one of their executives saying, "congratulations, we handled the cancer scare effectively." and they say, it is a public relations problem. we have to keep working on this and we have to solve it. so they are congratulating themselves about how well they handled the cancer scare. okay. so now we are in 1963. brown & williamson lawyers basically get a request that they want -- that the surgeon general wants some information from the tobacco companies. and they decide they are actually not going to cooperate. they are going to do everything they can to keep the information from the surgeon general. but one thing is very interesting about this document. it says, "reynolds handling of the matter is, of course, simplified by its being in a better position to deliver considerable amount of published matter." so they are comforted by it. brown & williamson is comforted by the fact that reynolds is going to give the surgeon general some published matter and that helps them feel comfortable that they do not have to turn over anything that they are doing. so what happens? reynolds turns over a public document to the surgeon general after it requests information to do the report it is working on. it is a public document from 1961 and here's what that document says: "tobacco smoking cannot be the causi of primary cancer of the lung." now, you are eoine to hear reynolds' counsel tell you that the surgeon general's report in 1964 acknowledges receiving material from reynolds, public document and the document concludes: smoking does not cause cancer. so that is what they are acknowledging when the surgeon general acknowledge that they got information. so the surgeon general's report comes out in 1964. was it publicized? you bet it was. the surgeon general wanted to make a very big splashy announcement about this because they wanted to get the word out that smoking causes cancer. well, what happens? dr. kyriakoudes told you what happened. let us see what the new york times said on august 14, 1964, which was only eight months later, seven months later after the 1964 report from the surgeon general. "cigarette sales last month indicate that americans are beginning to forget the cancer scare generated by the government report on smoking, a survey of the tobacco industry indicated today." now, keep in mind all of this is before kenney hiott starts smoking. so that is what is going on, and as mr. vinik showed you, in 1963 there is a document evidencing that the -- that reynolds and the tobacco companies knew that smoking was addictive. by 1963. so it was several years before kenney hiott ever picked up a cigarette the tobacco companies already knew, including reynolds, that it was addictive. and do not forget, i'm showing you just a few documents. there are millions of these documents. i'm hitting the highlights. mr. boyce: objection. referencing materials not in evidence. the court: i'll sustain the objection to the phrase millions of documents, okay. go ahead. ms. pollack: now, internally, january 12, 1965, american tobacco says, "the possibility of the presence of nitrosamines in cigarette smoke is of enormous interest. nitrosamines are the most potent carcinogen known to man." this is what reynolds knows internally in january, 1965. january, 1967, earl clements -- we talked about earl clements. dr. kyriakoudes told you about earl clements -- president of the tobacco industry. he has -- there is an annual meeting that they all get together and he says -- and this is really important: "we are competing against the machinery and authority of the government, the voluntary health agencies, medical and scientific groups and a host of interagency counsel throughout the country. all of these groups are engaging jointly and independently in propaganda programs against smoking." they saw themselves as adversaries to the public health authorities. and that is actually a theme that is going to continue throughout the next 40 years. so mr. clements, after he says that, he goes and he makes a public statement. he says publicly, "extensive chemical tests have not demonstrated that any substance as found in cigarette smoke accounts for human disease." so that is what they are telling the public. there is no link between cigarettes and cancer. internally you have seen this document many times. "doubt is our product". so then they go out into the public. here's a document, 1969 press release. it says -- this is from the ctr, council for tobacco research. "the pure biological evidence is pointing away from, not toward, the causal hypothesis." that is what they are telling the public in 1969. also in 1969 they put a big splashy ad in the new york times. it is from american tobacco and th say, the anti-cigarette theory is a bum wrap. we are going to pull our ads from the new york times because the new york times wants us to put a healt caution notice and tar and nicotine figures and they say we will not do that. so we are going to pull our ads. what are they doing? they are manipulating the media and they have the money to do it. they have the leverage. internal document, dr. rodgman. you heard a lot about dr. rodgman. he was one of their star scientists and executive in the r.j. reynolds company. here's what he says in an internal document in 1962. "the statistical data from the lung cancer smoking studies are almost universally accepted. the majority of scientists except these data as indicative of either a high degree of association or a cause-and-effect relationship between lung cancer and smoking." 1962, they know internally there is a link between lung cancer and smoking. now, interestingly, in 1969 there is a document internal to reynolds and it says, "if" -- "we are going to remove research reports from the research department." here's what it says. "we do not foresee any difficulty in the event a decision is reached to remove certain reports from research files." why are they going to do that? "once it becomes clear that such action is necessary for successful defense of our present and future suits we will promptly remove all such reports from our files." here we are in 1970. the subject is best program for ctr. again, they are funded organization -- the tobacco funded organization. it says, "let us face it, we are interested in evidence which we believe denies the allegation that cigarette smoking causes disease." then later on in the document it talks about an option for them. it says, "aim ctr research at the discovery of information of use and value to the cigarette industry." so they are going to divert the grant money that they talk about, millions and millions of dollars in grant money, they are going to divert that to people who are going to find information and come up with information that supports the cigarette industry. public statement in 1972 by the senior vice president of tobacco institute, mr. kloepfer. this is what he says: "the number one problem is the extent to which these officials, meaning the government, knowingly mislead the american public. the surgeon general's statement that there is no honest disagreement among experts on effects of smoking is false." now, this is in response to one of the surgeon general's reports that was issued. mr. kloepfer tells the public the surgeon general's report is false. here we have claude teague. again, we talked about dr. teague. dr. teague was another executive at reynolds, famous scientist, and dr. teague in 1973 writes a research planning memorandum on som thoughts about new brands of cigarettes of the youth market. he says, "realistically, if our company is to survive and prosper over a long term, we must get our share of the youth market. let us target america's youth." here's what he says in that memorandum. "the smoking health controversy does not appear important to that group because psychologically at 18 is immortal." that is what they have figured out. teens, youth, they think they are immortal, so the smoking and health controversy, it is not going to matter to them. we can target america's youth. now, you are going to hear reynolds' counsel say, oh, that was a draft and that was just dr. teague, nobody listened to that. wrong. 1975, a year later, hilton head they all get together and they say, what are we going to do? we have a couple of things we want to accomplish. we are going to increase our young adult franchise, the young adult market, the 14 to 24 age group, they represent tomorrow's cigarette business. they know that if you get hooked when you are 14 to 24 you are going to stay with their brand hopefully and they have to target the age of 14 to 24 when people start smoking. now, keep in mind, mr. kenney hiott is a young adult under these definitions that reynolds has said at this very time. this document also says each of our major special events is directed against young adults. so they have special events going on that are targeting young adults. nascar with winston, reaches 8 million spectators with 63 percent of these under 35 years of age. the evidence in this case showed that mr. kenney hiott went to nascar events and he smokei winston. here we are in 1984. we are in the '80s. reynolds is still denying that there is a link between smoking and cancer. they decide they are going to put out a massive advertising campaign, tons of newspapers, going to spend tons of money and here's what they say: "can we have an open debate about smoking." this is what appeared in newspapers. "studies which conclude that smoking causes disease have regularly ignored significant evidence to the contrary. we think reasonable people who analyze it may come to see this issue not as a closed case but as an open controversy." they are saying to the public it is not decided; there is no link between smoking and cancer; it is an open debate. 1984, three-day conference. brown & williamson is there. and at this tobacco conference this is what they say: "a cigarette is the perfect type of a perfect pleasure. it is exquisite and it leaves one unsatisfied. what more can one want? let us provide the exquisiteness and hope that they, our consumers, continue to remain unsatisfied." well, not only is this knowledge of addiction which they already knew in the '60s, they say they hope that their consumers continue to remain addicted. now, let us go into the '90s. congressional hearings. all of the major tobacco heads stand up, raise their right hand and swear under oath that nicotine is not addictive, despite the fact that they have documents from the '60s, 30 years before that, saying that they know nicotine is addictive. well, about three months after this, kenney hiott coughs up blood. diagnosis is lung cancer. now, in 1989 the surgeon general took a look at some cause and effect kind of things and they looked at the adult per capita consumption. so that is basically how many cigarettes are people consuming. and what they found is that when there is some sort of scare out in the public, there is a little bit of a dip in sales and then it goes right back up again. and there are studies, and they talk about this, they say it has a lot to do with the advertising that the cigarette companies do because they spend so much money on it. well, how much money do they spend? dr. kyriakoudes figured that out, according to interrogatory answers that were given to the plaintiffs in this case by reynolds, and it includes annual advertising, promotion, or marketing expenditures, and this was during the life of kenney hiott and he converted it to 2011 dollars so it made sense, $64.5 billion is what reynolds spent during the years of mr. hiott's lifetime on advertising, promotion and marketing expenditures. mr. boyce: objection, your honor. misstates the evidence. the court: i'll overrule the objection. ms. pollack: what does reynolds say about its advertising? well, during this trial you heard reynolds' counsel show you some documents from 197 to 1989 showing that advertising, well, it only causes brand shifting; it does not really cause new smokers. but dr. kyriakoudes showed you in in monograph 19 in june 2008 that view was outdated; that is just wrong. and if you go to monograph 19, page 212 you can see what it says. it says that -- and one of the ways they found out this was wrong was because of the internal documents that they got access to after the studies that r.j. reynolds' counsel showed you. what else does r.j. reynolds say about its advertising in this trial? well, they claim that according to monograph 19 from the national cance institute cigarettes and tobacco ranked 29th in advertising in 2004 and 2005. well, those are nice years to pick but they are after mr. hiott's death. in any event, what does monograph 19 on a different page -- a few pages before that actually say about that amount of -- that advertising? well, they say that the money was shifted to price cutting. that means discounts. and what does monograph 19 say about that? it says price discounting is very effective, it is a very effective means of marketing and it is especially effective bought youth are vulnerable to price cutting. they do not have a lot of money. it helps them when things are cheaper so they buy mor cigarettes. and that is exactly what is been going on in the 2000s, which is what reynolds' counsel was referring to by talking about 2004 and 2005. let us talk a lit bit about the cigarette culture when kenney hiott started smoking around 1966. kenney hiott's 15 at the time. as dr. kyriakoudes said, smoking was allowed everywhere, you could smoke anywhere you wanted, there were no restrictions and the majority of males over 18 smoked. in fact, many witnesses in this case testified that smoking was everywhere at that time. in addition, cigarette advertising was everywhere at that time. and according to the chart that i just showed you a little while ago from dr. kyriakoudes that he put together, in that time period, 1965 and 1966, according to dr. kyriakoudes's chart, reynolds spent about $1.3 billion in those years, around that level, on advertising, promotions and marketing looking at 2011 dollars. now, let us look at what mr. hiott's brother james testified to. he said kenney saw ads for cigarettes on television as all of them did. the whole family saw those ads because it was so prevalent at the time. of course he saw them. we showed you an ad from tv for viceroy, steve mcqueen, saying "thinking man's filter". we are going to come back to that but kenney remembered that. james hiott also said filtered cigarettes were in vogue at that time and kenney started smoking using filtered cigarettes. what else did james hiott say? well, ken's kenney's family members smoked so he had exposure t it. and at that time none of the family members had died of lung cancer by 1966 when kenney was makinj the decision of whether to smoke. james hiott said his parents did have any rules in the house about smoking. his father smoked in the house, and kenney's mother actually said smoking would stunt your growth. so she told the kids smoking's going to stunt your growth. and, in fact, james hiott's specifically said she never told them it would cause cancer. james hiott said no teacher or coach ever told james not to smoke. he said that no -- there were no guest speakers in the high school and no demonstrations against smoking while he was there. but what were there in georgia schools at this time? designated smoking areas. dr. kyriakoudes talked a lot about the designated smoking areas. it is a place where the kids could go smoke. there it was, go ahead and smoke over there. that is where you should smoke. so that is the environment that kenney hiott grew up in and that is the environment where he was deciding whether to smoke or not. what else was going on when kenney hiott was deciding whether to smoke? not a single witness testified that kenney hiott knew that cigarettes were addictive when he started smoking. but r.j. reynolds knew by this time, from the documents we can tell, that cigarettes were addictive and caused lung cancer. but they did not tell kenney hiott and they did not tell the public. now, up until january 1, 1966, there were no warnings, labels or caution statements on any package of cigarettes. so when kenney hiott was deciding whether to smoke, there were no warnings, no cautions, no labels or anything. let us look what happened in 1966. really hard to see that but it says, "caution, cigarette smoking may be hazardous to your health. what does that mean? that means it may not be. in fact, james hiott said when he was asked about this at his deposition, he said the label was not that specific because it may be hazardous to your health. so this is years, decades later. that is what mr. james hiott remembered about that label. it may be hazardous. it was not specific. well, he was not the only one that thought that because the ftc did a report to congress in 1967. they did a study about this, and they concluded that the language -- the very language that mr. hiott was exposed to on the packs in 1966 was ineffective, and congress actually accepted that and changed the label in 1970. this is important, this ftc report, because this is a reflection of what was going on at that time. and in 1967 the report was sort of a look-back on the few prior years, and that is exactly when kenney hiott started smoking. what else did that report conclude? it says: "cigarette advertising reaches virtually all americans who can either read or understand the spoken word." cigarette advertising was everywhere it also concluded, "because the health dangers of cigarette smoking are not brought home to them in an effective and meaningful way many teenagers take up the smoking habit." well, kenney hiott was a teenager at that very time. what else did they conclude? the ftc -- now, keep in mind the federal trade commission, the ftc they are the ones charged with looking at advertising in this country, so it was their job to go look at cigarette advertising and that is why they are making all these conclusions. cigarette -- "current advertising constitute a force in our society to persuade teenagers to overcome their initial distaste for cigarettes." again, kenney hiott is that teenager at this time. "advertising continues to depict smoking as an enjoyable activity while ignoring completely the health hazards." now, do not forget at this point, there are no warnings on or cautions or anything on cigarette advertising. here's what the pack said in 1970. well, following the ftc's conclusion that the '66 caution language was ineffective, congress changed the language in 1970. of course, kenney hiott is already smoking three to four years at this point, addicted at this point. says, "warning: the surgeon general has determined that cigarette smoking is dangerous to your health." i do not see the word "addictive" in there and i do not see the word "cancer" in there. so the ftc takes a look at all this again in 1981 because they are supposed to be doing this every year and periodically they go and look at this because cigarette advertising is such an important issue at this point and it is such a big concern. ftc report says: "cigarettes are the most heavily advertised product in america." mr. boyce: objection, your honor, preemption not an ftc report. the court: overrule the objection. ms. pollack: then they conclude that the tobacco industry spent more on advertising in one day than the government's primary agency working in this area spent in an entire year. what else do they say? they say in 1979 r.j. reynolds was the largest single advertiser in magazines and its expenditures included $25 million spent on the promotion of just one of its many brands, winston. we know kenney hiott smoked winston. now, i want you to keep in mind something here. every single advertisement is a statement by the tobacco company telling people to smoke. another conclusion: r.j. reynolds, the largest manufacturer of cigarettes, decided recently to increase substantially its billboard advertising to become the number one present in all outdoor advertising. i think we can see here the evidence showed that r.j. reynolds, by any measure, was a massive advertiser of its cigarettes. kenney hiott smoked r.j. reynolds' brands. he smoked winston, he smoked viceroy, and he smoked salem, all r.j. reynolds brands. what else did the ftc report conclude? many of the cigarette advertising techniques appeared to denigrate or undercut the health warning. so they conclude that advertising undercuts the health warning. they also conclude a particular concern are teenagers who are unaware of the potentially addictive nature of cigarette smoking and, therefore, who may be tempted to experiment with smoking. mr. boyce: objection, preemption, your honoi the court: overruled. ms. pollack: the conclusions of the surgeon general were consistent with the federal trade commission all the way up to the present. let us just take a look at two things here. the surgeon general report in 1994, it says: "cigarette advertising appears to effect young people's perception of the pervasiveness, image and function of smoking. since misrepresentations in these areas constitute psychosocial factors for the initiation of smoking, cigarette advertising appears to increase young people's risk of smoking." 1994 this is still going on. let us look up to the present. this is a report from march 9th, 2012, just came out a few months ago. here's the conclusion: "the weight of the evidence shows that the industry's marketing activities have been a key factor in leading young people to take up tobacco, keeping users from quitting, and achieving greater consumption among users." marketing activities of the industry. interestingly, today r.j. reynolds advises that individuals should rely on conclusions of the u.s. surgeon general, centers for disease control, and other public health officials when making decisions regarding smoking. that is today. let us talk about some things that reynolds told you that they would prove when they talked to you in the opening but that actually did not happen. r.j. reynolds told you there was a coffin picture in kenney hiott's high school yearbook. well, we are going to give you mr. hiott's high school yearbook. you will not see that coffin picture in there. it is not true. it was not in his high school yearbook. but anyway -mr. boyce: objection, your honor, there is mor than one yearbook in evidence. the court: i'll sustain the objection. ms. pollack: we are going to give you the yearbook with kenney hiott's name on it and you wi see that there is no coffin picture in that yearbook. mr. boyce: objection, your honor, there is multiple yearbooks in evidence. the court: mr. boyce, i'll allow it. i'll give you both a lot of leeway in closing arguments. go ahead, ms. pollack. ms. pollack: but it really does not matter because it actually is -- this is interesting. i'm going to put up a slide from reynolds' opening. it is a little bit hard to see and i'm sure that you will see it again here today, but this was the picture that is referred to and you really cannot see it, but there is a sign right above the woman on the right and it says american cancer society. now, this says that these women were at the cancer booth at the okefenokee fair. so that is where this coffin was. it was at the okefenokee fair. now, there is no evidence that mr. hiott ever saw this picture. there is no evidence he was at the fair, but let us talk about it anyway. this illustrates the massive discrepancy between the public health eroup resources and the resources of r.j. reynolds. here you have the american cancer society, they have got student volunteers at the okefenokee fair. that is what they can afford to do. now, let us talk about what reynolds can afford to do. you just saw that they were massive advertisers by any measure. you have got -- you come home from the fair and what do you do? you see sponsored programs on television which costs a lot of money to sponsor a program like the flintstones. to sponsor or a program -- to put commercials on tv on the beverly hillbillies. that is the differences in resources. you heard mr. clements say that they fought, they were adversaries to the public health authorities. that is the american cancer society. and the fact is the american cancer society just could not compete with the massive resources, the massive machine of the tobacco companies. and that is contained in ptx-1317 which we talked about during this trial. dr. kyriakoudes showed you a letter from the american cancer society where the american cancel society says -- i'm just going to read you a few sentences: "in response to your press release of january 3rd regarding the american cancer society and other health agencies i want to make a number of comments. your recent letter in your advertising about the industry's commitments to honor scientific research, to help resolve the controversy about smoking and health, provokes a specific answer." "number one. the controversy about smoking an health continues largely because of the energy, time, and money spent by the tobacco industry in keeping this controversy alive. advertisements of the sort you enclose seem to me to have their major forum the reassurance of cigarette smokers that you express in your headline." "the question about smoking and health is still a question." this is from 1971 by the way. it is only a few years after this yearbook. "you speak proudly of the 115 -- 1,115 reports published as a result of tobacco industry research and say they are available to scientists and doctors interested in pursuing the scientific truth on smoking and health issues." does any one of these reports indicate that smoking is safe? of course not. so here is an illustration of the war between the american cancer society and other public health authorities and the surgeon general trying to get desperately the word out that smoking is dangerous and it causes cancer, and then you have got the massive machine and all of the money of the tobacco companies fighting that through public statements, denying it, creating doubt, and also through their massive advertising campaigns and promotions. r.j. reynolds also told you that you would not see any connection with kenney hiott's decision to smoke with anything that r.j. reynolds did. well, that was not true either. kenney hiott knew the viceroy ad, "thinking man's filter, smoking man's taste". got that from r.j. risks. kenney was also aware that r.j. reynolds was saying filter smoking was better for you. again, mr. ricks. kenney also told carolyn that he smoked salem when he was sick because it was cool on his throat. let us see where those things came from. here we go 1959, advertisement, r.j. reynolds, thinking "man's filter, smoking man's taste". that is where they came from. it came from the advertising. there is the link up. kenney hiott with reynolds, specific advertising. another ad, winston changed america's mind about filter smoking. kenney hiott smoked winstons smoked filters. 1961, here it is, a salem ad. "so soft, so gentle, so refreshing in its smoke. take a puff, its springtime." does that remind you of the cool sensation that mr. hiott told carolyn he had when he smoked when he had a cold? and on all three of these ads, you can see there is no warnings, no cautions, no nothing. and these are the ads before kenney hiott decided to smoke. these are things that influenced people to smoke. r.j. reynolds also told you that georgia students were taught that nicotine was addictive. well, that actually was not true either. here's what the book said. "tobacco interferes with growth." that is what mrs. hiott -- mrs. hiott, kenney's mother thought, tobacco would stunt your growth. that is what she told her kids. here's another thing it said in those school books. "smoking a pack or more of cigarettes a day has been shown to give people cancer of the lung." a pack or more? well, that says smoke a pack or less then you got no problem. what else did it say? it says: "it is hard for most people to give up smoking." actually the tobacco companies knew that it was addictive. it does not say it is addictive. it says it is hard. and then it also said, "most scientists believe that filters, by decreasing the intake of tar, reduce the risk of lung cancer." so there you have got the filter statements. that is what the book said. now, r.j. reynolds also told you that kenney helped his brother james in his paper route in 1964 and that was the year that there was a big splashy announcement about the '64 surgeon general's report the only problem is james hiott testified that the paper route was in 1958, not in the '60s. and he said it was two or three years. so it was not during the '60s at all. in any event, when he had the paper route with his brother there were lots and lots and lots of tobacco denials, we have gone through them, about the dangers of smoking. now we are going to talk about damages. as mr. vinik explained, you will have a verdict form and on that verdict form there will be a bunch of questions for you to fill out. and i'm going to take you through all of them. so the first question under damages says, what is the total amount, one hundred percent, of any damages sustained by carolyn hiott for the loss of her husband's companionship, protection, consortium an for her pain and suffering as a result of kenney hiott's jury and death? so the judge is going to instruct you on these issues. but in terms of pain and suffering, in addition to the companionship, the protection, consortium, the pain and suffering component, you can consider carolyn hiott's pain and suffering from the time of kenney's illness up through today and in the future, too. so let us talk about carolyn's testimony. carolyn, kenney and terrence were a family until he got cancer due to his cigarette smoking. they took trips, they went on vacations, they were a family. the evidence showed that they were -- they got along well, they enjoyed each other's companies and they always tried to spend as much time together. carolyn and kenney spent all their time together and even worked together. they did not fight. they had mutual respect for each other and their married life was a very happy life until july 1994 when he coughed up blood, and in august 1994 when he had his lung removed. for the next 22 months i think we can all agree by any measure carolyn's life was excrutiating. she had over 65 round trips to the hospital in jacksonville just for his treatments alone. she took him to every single one. and that did not include when he was hospitalized for vomiting repeatedly. it was 45 miles each way and she was still working through the night at the post office. she had ten round trips to gainesville for treatments and doctors. that was one and a half hours each way and she was still working through th night. again, she took him to every appointment. she did not miss a single one. she did not want him to be alone. she had to lift him in and out of the car and the bathtub at some point when she already had a back injury from working at the post office. she had to help him walk. there were points where he was just debilitated. she was literally carrying him. she never left his side. she slept in his hospital room on a cot for days. she watched him go through the pain of a lung removal, 30 radiation treatments to the chest, 26 radiation treatments to the brain, 13 chemo treatments, two brain surgeries and seizures. and after all of that, on april 1, 1996, the news that no more could be done. after kenney died carolyn went to his grave every day for a year until she just physically could not go anymore. she has not remarried. she has not had any romantic involvement, and on top of that, all of that, she was told never to contact terrence again and she lost that family that she had. so how can you think about all of this? well, how do you put a value on loss of a spouse? well, you heard that they would have had 32 more years together, carolyn and kenney. well, one way to think about it is maybe it was worth a hundred thousand a year. well, a hundred thousand times 32 that would be $3.2 million. it is up to you to decide but this is just one way to look at it. now, the next question on the verdict form is going to say: what is the total amount, one hundred percent, of any damages sustained by carolyn hiott for the loss of her husband's support and services as a result of kenneth hiott's injury and well, dr. raffa actually did these calculations for you and he showed you economics damages from kenney's financial support and home improvement handy work of $565,518. the next question talks about damages for terrence hiott. what is the total amount, one hundred percent, of any damages sustained by terrence hiott, the loss of his father's companionship, instruction, guidance and for his pain and suffering as a result of kenneth hiott's injury and death? again, the same thing. you can consider terrence's pain and suffering during his dad's illness up to today and also into the future. well, terrence has been here through the trial and he testified. you heard him say that kenney was a loving father. even though they got divorced when kenney -- when terrence -- even though kenney and linda beverly got divorced when terrence was only two, he always felt loved by his father. let us face it, a lot of people get divorced and a lot of people move a couple of hours away from their kids. but kenney never gave up. he always spent time with terrence and he made sure that he sent him cards. there was a stack of cards that you will have back in the jury room to look at. and when they were -- when kenney was living in waycross, in 198z and had not yet moved to st. augustine, he did spend every other weekend with terrence and we have lots of pictures of that. once he moved to st. augustine he spent all the school vacations that he could with terrence. they did lots of fun things together. they went to the beach. they went to -- they rented a condo. they went to disney repeatedly. all of the things that terrence loved to do. in fact, i remember there was testimony when carolyn said that they went on their tenth anniversary on the disney cruise so they could take terrence and he would enjoy the time with them.. in addition, there was testimony that they spoke by phone. so there was always time to catch up on events in terrence's life. there was also testimony that they never fought. even though terrence was a teenager they got along great and they really enjoyed their time together. now, once mr. hiott got cancer, things changed. terrence went to chemotherapy with his father and watched him be sick from the chemotherapy. and in the time -- in the weekend before mr. hiott died terrence saw him on oxygen pretty much unable to walk or breathe. that is very debilitating for a 15-year-old boy by any measure. not only that, he never saw carolyn again after that, as a result of the fact that carolyn was told not to contact him anymore. so he lost that family that he had. now, again, how can you value the loss of a father? you only have one father. you do not get that back. we have to figure out a way to value it. again, i suggest the same type of thought process as we did with carolyn. they would have had 32 mor years together. you can value it at anything you want. suppose you value it at a hundred thousand dollars per year. again, it would be $3.2 million for terrence for the loss of his dad. now, the next question on the verdict form says: what is the total amount of any damages sustained by terrence hiott for loss of his father's support up to the age of 25 as a result of kenneth hiott's injury and death? well, dr. raffa showed you that economic losses from kenney's financial support actually was up to age 18 would be $11,600. the next item on the damages -- on the verdict form for damages is for the estate. what is the total amount, one hundred percent, of any damages sustained by the estate of kenneth hiott, the loss of kenneth hiott's net accumulation or savings due to kenneth hiott's injury and death? again, dr. raffa told you that that amount would be $42,527. now let us talk about comparing responsibility. again, on the verdict form you are going to have a place to put the negligence or the fault of r.j. reynolds and the negligence or the fault of kenney hiott and the total of that has to be a hundred percent. so what should you consider when you are making this decision? who knew more about the dangers of cigarettes before and during the years that kenney hiott smoked? did r.j. reynolds know more or did kenney hiott know more? well, r.j. reynolds knew cigarettes were addictive before kenney hiott ever even started smoking and lied about it to congress just months before kenney hiott coughed up blood an was diagnosed with lung cancer. what else did you consider? r.j. reynolds program of doubt amounted to deadly lies to the public about the dangers of smoking, including before and during the entire time that kenney hiott smoked. never once during kenney hiott's lifetime did r.j. reynolds ever admit publicly that smoking causes cancer or that it is addictive. you can also take into account when you consider who is -- how much fault to assign to kenney hiott versus r.j. reynolds the label that was in effect when kenney hiott started to smoke. it said smoking may be hazardous to your health. well, what does that mean? it may be; it may not be. you can also take into account that there were no warnings on any advertisements when kenney hiot started smoking and for several years after that. you can also take into account when deciding fault who is responsible for how much of the fault that kenney hiott tried several times to quit over the years that mr. vinik told you all about that. well, again, how do we think about this? well, here's one way to look at it. if you think that kenney hiott knew ten percent, say, of what r.j. reynolds knew, maybe you would put ten percent fault to mr. hiott and ninety percent to r.j. reynolds. again, these are decisions you have to make based on commoi sense and your judgment. but one thing you should always remember, kenney hiott was doing exactly what the cigarette companies, including r.j. reynolds, told him to do. they told him, you should smoke, so he smoked. he bought a pack of cigarettes and he smoked. now, we admit that he bears, kenney hiott bears some measure of responsibility for that decision. we admit that. but r.j. reynolds does not want to have any responsibility at all for telling him to smoke. and you can consider that when you make th< decision of comparative negligence. now, another thing you are going to be asked to decide on the verdict form is whether plaintiff in this case is entitled to punitive damages. we have to prove only one of these four things to show that plaintiff is entitled to punitive damages. now, punitive damages are for punishment purposes. so let us take a look at what it is that we could show. we can show either gross and flagrant conduct or entire lack of care, conscious indifference, or wanton and reckless conduct or reckless indifference. and one way to look at that is what they did, was it an accident or was it on purpose; did they decide they were going to do the things that we say that they did. 443,000 smoking-related deaths per year. that is the statistic. and i think by any measure, given the amount of business that r.j. reynolds has had of this smoking market, i would say by any measure reynolds is responsible for a substantial number of those deaths. here's the things you can consider when deciding whether you should find that reynolds neei to be punished under the facts of this case. r. j. reynolds publicly and purposely fought and disparaged the public health authorities for almost 50 years about the dangers of smoking. r.j. reynolds purposefully and consciously decided to withhold documents from the surgeon general. r.j. reynolds purposely decided to destroy research files from -- research results from its files that were unfavorable to it. r.j. reynolds purposely created doubt about the health effects of smoking by issuing false statements to the public when internally it knew the truth. we talked a little bit about the fact that there was no lung cancer in the early 1900s. that was a disease created by cigarettes including r.j. reynolds cigarettes, so they created an epidemic of lung cancer that did not exist for money. r.j. reynolds purposefully lied to congress about addiction in 1994 when it new by 1963 that cigarettes were addictive but never disclosed it. r.j. reynolds purposefully engaged in youth marketing to get its share of young smokers. and the surgeon general has concluded in 2012 that yout marketing is still a problem in the united states. we would submit that these facts justify punishing r.j. reynolds. and finally, the last thing i'm going to talk about is the claims in this case. again, on the verdict form you are going to have some questions that you have to answer about each claim in the case. now, the first one i'm going to talk about is strict liability. though it says number two, i'm going to talk about that one first. so the verdict form is going to ask you to state whether the defective and unreasonably dangerous cigarettes placed on the market by r.j. reynolds were a legal cause of kenneth hiott's death. so this is about a defective and unreasonably dangerous product placed on the market by r.j. reynolds. now, as mr. vinik explained to you, if you get to this point where you are deciding these questions, you will have already answered yes to question one, and there are certain findings that you will accept as a result of that. with respect to strict liability, here's the finding that you are going to accept. r.j. reynolds placed cigarettes on the market that were defective and unreasonably dangerous. so that part of it is answered by this finding, and because reynolds has admitted in this case that cigarettes caused mr. hiott's death -mr. boyce: objection, your honor. medical cause. the court: i'll sustain the objection. ms. pollack: -- that the medical cause of kenney hiott's death was cigarettes, that element was satisfied and that claim was satisfied. same kind of concept with negligence. let us talk about negligence, which is number one up there here's the finding on negligence that you will accept at this point, if you get to this question. r.j. reynolds was negligent. so the finding that r.j. reynolds was negligent with respect to cigarettes, coupled with the admission that smoking cigarettes was the medical cause of kenney hiott's lung cancer satisfies that claim. so those two claims are -- we just discussed. let us talk about the two bottom claims. fraud by concealment and conspiracy to commit fraud by concealment. those are sort of sister claims. now, talking about conspiracy for just a minute, we showed you evidence in this case about how the cigarette companies, including r.j. reynolds, were always getting together, banding together, making decisions together. they got together at the plaza hotel. they created a program to plant doubt in the public's mind. "doubt is our product". so we have shown that there was an agreement and that is the conspiracy part of that. now, in terms of fraud by concealment, the finding that you are going to accept, if you get to this point is the following: r.j. reynolds concealed or omitted material information not otherwise known or available, knowing the material was false or misleading, or failed to disclose a material fact concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes or both. so that is the finding that you are going to accept. one thing you do have to decide with respect to fraud by concealment is a reliance element. now the judge is going to tell you that with respect to reliance you can consider all the evidence in the case in determining whether or not plaintiff has satisfied that element of reliance for fraudulent concealment and also conspiracy to fraudulently conceal. so that means you can consider the fact that dr. kyriakoudes testified that due to the pervasive nature of all the statements, and i'm talking about the public statements, i'm talking about the advertisements, all of the public statements and all the advertisements that -- because they were so pervasive that everyone, including kenney hiott, heard those statements. but we have shown even more than that actually. you can consider that and that is true. but we have also shown reliance on very specific statements and advertisements of r.j. reynolds. we went through them. we went through viceroy, "a thinking man's filter". we went through winston, changed america's m about filter smoking. we went through salem, that it is cool and refreshing. those are things that kenney hiott talked about about smoking. he heard those advertisements. he got it. now, when those advertisements were there when he was deciding whether to smoke, those advertisements did not say, well, gee, these are addictive, you should know that before you make you decision. no, they did not -- that was never told to kenney hiott. and when kenney hiott was deciding to smoke, those advertisements did not even have a warning on them. i think this would have been material information. this would have been important to kenney hiott to know whether to smoke or not. he was not told any of that when he was deciding whether to smoke. so when you go back to the jury room and you have to decide whether the behavior of r.j. reynolds was a legal cause, we have talked about this concept of legal cause, it means was it a cause, not the only cause; a cause of kenney hiott's death. did it -- did their behavior contribute substantially to kenney hiott's death? and we would submit the answer to that is yes. i thank you for listening. i thank you for having an open mind and i thank you for hearing all the evidence in this case. thank you. mr. vinik: thank you, your honor. ladies and gentlemen of the jury, i want to apologize beforehand that i will be jumping around in different places. that is just the nature of rebuttal. sometimes i'm taking notes. sometimes my notes are -- on the first page and the third page, it says the same thing and that is just what happens. so i apologize from the start. but hopefully i will not take too much of your time and you can get your lunch. the first thing that i want to address that mr. boyce said was the statement that mr. hiott said that he was at peace. now, what does that have to do with the issues in this case? that is just a statement that is -- that he is trying to sway your emotions against carolyn hiott, terence hiott and mr. hiott. that is a statement that -- that does not really deal with any of the evidence, does not really deal with any of the issues. it is a purely emotional appeal. and mr. boyce made lots and lots of statements like that, purely emotional appeals. but i think what you need to do when you go back in the jury room is concentrate more on the evidence, concentrate more on the science, the things that we put before you on addiction and on what reynolds did wrong and not some vague appeal to an emotional bias. so let us talk about one of the things that mr. boyce talked about. they like to talk about this bridge. that is the main theme. there is no bridge between anything that reynolds did. there is no bridge between any advertisement that reynolds put out. there is no bridge between them and kenneth hiott. and that is just simply not true. it is not true at all. we know that kenneth hiott saw viceroy ads he talked about with reverend ricks. we know because what the reverend had said, that kenney was smoking the filters because they thought they would protect him. where would he get that from other than advertisements? we know that reverend ricks testified that kenney was absolutely was affected by advertising. we know that. and not only that, but there is something else that makes the bridge. it is something even more important than the thinking man's filter and more important than the filters that reverend ricks talked about and more important that he thought salem was cool when he was sick. more important than any of that is dr. kyriakoudes's testimony. the court is going to instruct you that you can look at all the testimony in the case and consider all the testimony in the case when considering whether or not kenney hiott relied on anything that the tobacco companies put out. and you know what you can rely on? you know what you can consider? you can consider dr. kyriakoudes' testimony that the message of doubt that the tobacco companies put out was so prevalent that everyone saw it; everyone knew it. that is how prevalent it was. he talked about all the advertising. he talked about all the statements, and he talked about the fact that everyone -- everyone in this country knew about what the tobacco companies' message was. and that is the bridge to kenney hiott. that is where we connect the bridge. and we do not even need the viceroy ads, the thinking man's filter. we do not need the -reverend ricks saying that kenney was absolutely affected by advertising. we do not need any of that because we have dr. kyriakoudes saying -dr. kyriakoudes saying that everybody was affected by what the tobacco companies did. and that is the evidence in this case that you can consider. now, talking about other appeals to your emotions and not appeals to the science, not appeals to the facts in this case, dr. -- mr. boyce talked a lot about terence and carolyn's relationship after kenney's death. he talked about the fact that carolyn did not see kenney -- did not see terence after kenney's death. and i do not know exactly what the point of that is except maybe to paint carolyn as a bad person. but that is not one of the issues in this case, except for the fact that kenney's death caused the breakup of that family. if kenney did not die, do you think that carolyn and terence never would have saw each other again, would have spent 15 years apart? so kenney's death is part of the consequence of his smoking, and kenney's death is -- kenney's death is part of the consequence of what happened between carolyn and terence. so if you consider it at all, if you consider the relationship between the two of them at all, which i think here is really irrelevant, but if you consider it at all, it goes to pain and suffering of both of them. now, let us call -- let us talk about what the defendant said about dr. feingold and about dr. kyriakoudes. and you know what i heard for 20 minutes of his statement? i heard personal attacks again on dr. feingold and dr. kyriakoudes. and personal attacks on the two of them is not something that you should consider. it is not evidence in this case. when someone makes personal attacks on expert witnesses like that, it is because they do not like what the expert witnesses are saying, and they do not want you to focus exactly on what the expert witnesses are saying. that is what -- that is the reason for personal attacks, and you should just disregard that stuff. now, let us talk a little bit about addiction. again, one of the things that really -- really struck me about mr. boyce's argument is a few statements that he made about nicotine. it is the same as chocolate, the same as water, the same as reading a book. and remember what dr. -- dr. cook said in the video. i know it is a while ago, and the video was long and boring, but dr. cook's -- cook said, from reynolds, that we do not think addiction is a problem. addiction is not a problem for reynolds at all. i think they think it is the same as chocolate, as water, as reading a book. so nicotine addiction is not something that they want to cure or deal with or even think about. they have never looked for a cure for addiction. they have never marketed a -- marketed a nicotine-free product. the products that they market are addictive and there is a reason for that. and as i listened to mr. boyce, i'm thinking when he is talking about addiction that there is no -there is no person in the world that he would ever agree or reynolds would ever agree is a member of the engle class. if nicotine is the same as chocolate, the same as water, why are we here? it is just not believable, absolutely not believable. and as a matter of fact, there is -- there is no debate here that nicotine is addictive. reynolds admits it is addictive. it is not like water. it is not like chocolate. it is -- as the surgeon general says, the fundamental reason why people smoke is nicotine addiction. that is what the surgeon general says. and you know what? mr. boyce went through this very quickly, but he did flash something on the screen, which is something similar that we had flashed on the screen. could i have the elmo, please? this is what reynolds advises today: "individuals should rely on conclusions of the u.s. surgeon general when making decisions regarding smoking." you know what? i agree with reynolds. individuals should rely on conclusions of the u.s. surgeon general. that is what they said. you should rely on the conclusions of the surgeon general report for 2010 that nicotine is the fundamental reason why people smoke. that is a conclusion of the surgeon general. that is what reynolds says you should rely on. and i think it is odd that reynolds would say something different from what the surgeon general says when they are telling the public that they should rely on -- actually the public should rely on the surgeon general. something else that mr. boyce talked about, he spent some time talking about whether or not kenney hiott smoked a pack a day. now, what is the evidence that he -- he talked about it when he talks about the pack-a-day thing. he points to carolyn and points out that carolyn -- when -- carolyn hiott, when she was trying to count up every cigarette in the day that kenney hiott smoked going back 20 years ago or more, she could not count every cigarette. she could not go through the day and say, "here he smoked one; here he smoked one; here he smoked one," and then add that up to 20. and i ask you, who could do that? no one could do that. if you think of friends who smoke, can you count every cigarette that they smoked? even -- even members of your family who smoke, do you think anyone could sit there and count every single cigarette that they smoke? the evidence is that he smoked a pack a day. that is what the medical record says. he bought a pack of cigarettes a day. that is what dr. giakas admitted. so this -- so this other issue of how much he was smoking is simply a smoke screen. on addiction, one of the other things that mr. boyce said, when he is talking about this thirty percent number; he is talking about the ninety percent number. but one of the things that he says is that if you take cocaine once or even if you take heroin once, you -- you are likely to become addicted. there is no evidence of that in this case. and, again, what did the surgeon general say about nicotine addiction? surgeon general said the prevalence of individuals diagnosed as nicotine-dependent is higher than that for any other substance abuse disorder -- disorder. that means it is higher than for heroin, higher than that for cocaine, higher than that for alcohol. that is the evidence, not some statement from mr. boyce that has no basis in the evidence. now, we agree with mr. boyce on one thing. we do agree that an addicted person can quit. that is what dr. feingold said. that is what dr. giakas said. we agree with that. people who are addicted to heroin can quit. people who are addicted to alcohol can quit. people who are addicted to crack cocaine can quit. that is not the issue. the issue is whether the addiction was a substantial factor in kenney hiott's smoking. so when you find he is addicted, the question on legal cause is whether it is a substantial factor in the smoking. and what you can rely on, again, is the surgeon general report, which reynolds says that you should rely on, that nicotine addiction is the fundamental reason why people smoke, fundamental reason. if you accept mr. boyce's argument that anyone can quit, which is true, that nicotine addiction is like water, is like chocolate, that it is just a predictor and it is easier to quit, if you accept all those arguments, then there is no engle class because nobody's in the engle class. no one could meet the test that mr. boyce says -- sets. the bar is just too high. and that is what he wants you to believe. he wants you to believe that the bar is up here, and the legal causation -- legal causation is not the bar is up here. it just has to be one cause, a substantial factor; addiction is a substantial factor in smoking. that is it. now, mr. boyce also talked a little bit about youth marketing. he pretty much denied it ever happened. we looked at those teague documents. we looked at some of the other documents, and he says, well, there is only one or two documents. it never happened. well, what does the surgeon general say in 20 -- in 2012 about youth marketing? surgeon general, 2012, "the weight of the evidence shows that the industry's marketing activities have been a key factor in leading young people to take up tobacco, keeping users from quitting and achieving greater consumption among users." that is the facts. that is still going on today. mr. boyce: your honor, could we approach for a second? the court: if you want to, counsel, approach. (counsel approach side-bar with the reporter and the following proceedings were held out of the presence of the jury:) mr. boyce: mr. vinik is out of time. the court: i've -- i've got about five more minutes. mr. boyce: i'm sorry. the court: yeah. mr. vinik: five minutes from -- from now? the court: yeah. mr. boyce: you will tell him when? will you tell us when? the court: yeah. mr. boyce: thanks, your honor. (the following proceedings were held in open court in the presence of the jury:) mr. vinik: since i am running out of time, i'm going to switch gears a little bit, and i'm going to talk a little bit about harm reduction because mr. boyce talked about harm reduction and all the great things that reynolds is doing today and not doing today, all the great things reynolds did in the past to reduce the harm in the cigarettes. surgeon general's report, 2010, page 16, you can go back and look at. "the evidence today does not demonstrate that efforts to lower machine-measured tar and nicotine yields actually decrease the health risks of smoking, primarily because these changes" -- "changes did not reduce smokers' actual exposure to tobacco toxicants." that is the evidence that we are dealing with, not statements that mr. boyce said about how good the tobacco companies are in doing harm reduction. what else did the 2010 surgeon general report say? "subsequent research demonstrated that" -mr. boyce: your honor, could we have the full sentence, please? mr. vinik: no. the court: that is okay. they can see it. mr. vinik: it is part of the evidence. mr. boyce: objection to redactions. the court: overruled. mr. vinik: "subsequent research demonstrated that the use of ventilation holes produced higher levels of freebase nicotine, leading to a more addictive product." and what else did the surgeon general conclude? "in contrast to industry awareness, the various ways that cigarettes were physically modified and the nature and level of compensation in response to design changes were not well-understood by parties outside of the tobacco industry itself." that is the evidence that we are dealing with on so-called harm reduction. and remember the tables that dr. feingold showed us that, despite all the so-called harm reduction efforts, lung cancer, especially adenocarcinoma, which kenney hiott had, has skyrocketed. that is their harm reduction. finally, i'd like to point out one thing. i do not think mr. boyce ever disputed all the evidence that we put in that rjr lied to the public about addiction and disease. i do not think he disputed it at all, and i think the reason why he did not dispute is because he cannot. the only thing that he would say about that topic is, oh, we put in 10 documents. we put in 15 documents of the -- of the millions. and i've got to tell you, does that make sense to you? would we come in here today and put in 50,000 documents in front of you? how long would you be sitting here if we did that. he talks about cherry-picking. but that is not the issue. the issue is we had a limited amount of time. we could only put in a certain number of documents. thank you for your attention. i know that you are going to go back to that jury room and deliberate carefully. and we do really appreciate the fact that you had to spend so much time in here, away from your work obligations and everything else, but that is something that juries in this country do, and it is something that -- that makes this country good. so we thank you.