mr. persons: may it please the court, counsel, miss hubbird, ladies and gentlemen. good afternoon. the panel: good afternoon. 4351 mr. persons: i want to begin by thanking you, because you have given up almost three weeks of your lives, put all your other business aside to help citizens of equal standing in the community decide a dispute. so that is first and foremost. i think i speak on behalf of both tables, the other one in the courtroom. the system could not function without you, and for that, we are deeply grateful. this case of donald (sic) ellsworth, you have heard a lot about cigarette design. you have heard a lot about inhalability of cigarettes. you have heard a lot about company conduct. and i want to say right upfront, i make no apologies for or try to defend what was said in those documents. it was despicable. but the question is what, if anything, does that have to do with donald ellsworth. in the next several minutes, i hope to illustrate to you why that has no bearing whatsoever on donald ellsworth's decision to start smoking. the court: is that david? mr. persons: david. thank you for the correction. david ellsworth's decision to start 4352 smoking, his decision to continue smoking and his decision not to quit. so let me begin with cigarette design. it will be the first slide. we know that nicotine occurs naturally in tobacco in the field. when it grows out of the soil, it has nicotine in it. the best illustration of this is roll your own cigarettes. the roll your own cigarettes, according to dr. proctor, plaintiff's expert, says they are at least as dangerous and as addictive as a manufactured cigarette, like r.j. reynolds' cigarettes. additive-free cigarettes are no less dangerous or addictive than manufactured cigarettes. the bottom line is no conventional cigarette is safer than a lucky strike or viceroy or a winston. they are all inherently dangerous. and they are inherently dangerous because, whenever you burn organic material, you will release compounds, and many of those compounds are carcinogenic, they are cancer causing. it is a dangerous product. it is an addictive 4353 product. it is inherent in the nature of the product itself. inhalability. plaintiff would have you believe that inhalability came about when american tobacco companies started making cigarettes, and we know that hand-rolled cigarettes, back in turkey, were addictive and they were inhalable back in the 1830s before there was flue curing of tobacco and before there was the invention of the bonsack machine. writers back in the 1870s observed that cigarette smokers almost always inhaled. scientists and health professionals thought cigarettes were uniquely dangerous because they were inhalable. r.j. reynolds did not make cigarettes inhalable. they were inhalable long before r.j. reynolds even came into existence and made its first cigarette. so that is a red herring. plaintiff's counsel alluded to red herrings in his opening statement, and this is a red herring. red herring, there really is no fish that is called a red herring. it is a herring, but they sought the herring and they smoke it. 4354 and in that process, the herring becomes red. they used the herring back in england in the 13th century to train hounds, hunting dogs. and they used it to train them to hunt the fox because the scent was so strong, the scent of the fox is a milder scent, and they used the herring to train them how to make the distinction. so it is a red herring. in other words, it is a distraction. and that is all this about inhalability is. cigarettes today are no more addictive than the cigarettes in 1800s. that is dr. proctor. that is from his testimony. r.j. reynolds and the other american tobacco companies did not popularized smoking. the hand-rolled turkish cigarettes were popular in the united states in the 1860s, the 1870s, the 1880s and the 1990s before flue curing was widely used, before the bonsack machine was invented and before r.j. reynolds even existed. flue curing, the invention of matches and the bonsack machine made modern cigarettes popular before reynolds manufactured its first cigarettes. in terms of advertising, no witness who 4355 came in to testify in this case, either by deposition or live, testified that mr. ellsworth ever saw any skywriting or any billboards or any magazines or any movies, human trademarks, ads on public transportation, vending machines, radio, or point of purchase displays for cigarettes. none. there is no evidence of such. the evidence is that mr. ellsworth did not make smoking decisions based on advertising. there is no evidence that he made any decision about smoking winston based on an ad that appeared anywhere or the same thing for viceroy. in fact, the decision about viceroy, according to ricky mayou, was because the mother smoked, his mother, ms. delois ellsworth, smoked viceroy. mr. david ellsworth switched to viceroy so they could just buy the same kind of cigarettes, not because of an ad. no evidence that lucky strike ads prompted him or influenced him to make the decision to smoke lucky strike. the same thing is true for the tareyton ads, pall mall ads, camel ads, philip morris 4356 ads or marlboro ads, which there is testimony he saw them, the tareyton ad, rather fight than switch, but he never switched to tareyton or to pall mall, camel, philip morris or marlboro. the evidence is that he never bought a particular brand of cigarettes because of advertising. he did not make his decisions about smoking based on advertising. now, dr. proctor. dr. proctor gave generic evidence. he talked about what was generally out there. he gave nothing specific to mr. ellsworth. he did not know when mr. ellsworth started smoking cigarettes. he did not know why mr. ellsworth started smoking. he did not know what mr. ellsworth knew about the dangers of smoking, and he had no evidence that mr. ellsworth saw a single document or statement. there is no evidence mr. ellsworth saw a single document or statement that dr. proctor talked about. he was paid $2 million so far in tobacco litigation, but he knew nothing about david ellsworth's particular circumstances or the decisions that he made or why he made them. so why did the plaintiff spend most of the 4357 case reproving the engle findings? now, the engle findings do not even come into play unless and until it is determined that david ellsworth is a member of the engle class, and the plaintiff has to prove that by the greater weight of the evidence. so the case is about david ellsworth. every question on the verdict form relates to david ellsworth, and the plaintiff failed to prove her case about david ellsworth, and i'll walk through the evidence. no witness who came and testified that heavy plaster dust exposure did not cause david ellsworth's cancer. zero. no evidence. how many witnesses testified that tuberculosis scarring did not cause david ellsworth's cancer? none. the number of witnesses who testified that david ellsworth lost control of his smoking behavior? nobody said that. witnesses who testified that david ellsworth did not make his own smoking decisions? the evidence is to the contrary. that he did make his own smoking decisions. witnesses who testified that addiction to 4358 nicotine in cigarettes caused david ellsworth's cancer? no. no one testified that it was the addiction that caused his disease. there was evidence that addiction to nicotine can cause disease, but not his disease. witnesses who testified that information about the dangers of smoking was unavailable? nobody ever said that. witnesses who testified that mr. ellsworth was confused about the dangers of smoking? nobody came in here and said that, that mr. ellsworth somehow was confused about the dangers of smoking. the evidence is that david ellsworth was a hard-working man who made his own decisions, he had his own mind and made his own decisions. carole mayou was his daughter-in-law, married to ricky mayou, before their divorce. she knew him from the time she was 16 years old in 1977 until the time he died in 1994. richard ellsworth, his brother, who is three years older, they were particularly close because the oldest brother was much older than them, and the youngest brother was much younger than them, so they were the closest in age 4359 among the four brothers. and so he told us the same thing, that he was a hard-working man who had his own mind, made his own decisions. and ricky mayou said that, he was his own man, made his own decisions, hard working. plaintiff failed to prove david ellsworth's case because they failed to prove that david ellsworth had lung cancer caused by smoking, and we are going to go through each of these, the evidence that pertains to each one of these. failed to prove david ellsworth was addicted to the nicotine in cigarettes. failed to prove that addiction was a legal cause of david ellsworth's lung cancer. failed to prove that david ellsworth relied on anything reynolds said or did in making his decision to smoke, to continue to smoke and not to quit. and they failed to prove they are entitled to damages. now, the plaintiff has the burden of proof in this case, as the judge has instructed you, and the burden of proof on these claims is by 4360 the greater weight of the evidence. if the greater weight of the evidence does not support the plaintiff's claim, your verdict will be for reynolds. it is only if the greater weight of the evidence does support some or all of the plaintiff's claims, then your verdict should be for the plaintiff on those claims. so the plaintiff has to prove her claims by the greater weight of the evidence. plaintiff has to prove that r.j. reynolds, that but for something r.j. reynolds did, mr. ellsworth would not have suffered injury and would not have died. the first question on the verdict form is a question that relates to class membership. is david ellsworth a member of the engle class, that is, was mr. ellsworth addicted to smoking cigarettes containing nicotine and, if so, was such addiction a legal cause of his lung cancer? that is the first question. and there are three parts to that question. as i mentioned at the outset of the case, there are three hurdles that the plaintiff has to get over in order to establish class membership. 4361 and the engle findings do not answer those questions. there is medical causation. there is addiction. and there is addiction causation. the plaintiff has to prove, under medical causation, that david ellsworth had lung cancer caused by smoking. that is not the only thing that has to be proven. they have to prove that david ellsworth was addicted to nicotine and the plaintiff has to prove that the addiction was a legal cause of david ellsworth's lung cancer, in other words, but for the addiction, he would not have suffered lung cancer. and the plaintiff has the burden of proof on all three of these. you have a jury instruction, i think it is instruction number 11, that talks about the fact that the engle findings do not establish class membership. it says, "the findings i have described to you do not establish that reynolds is liable to anyone, including plaintiff in this case. the question of whether or not reynolds is liable for mr. ellsworth's injuries and death remains an issue for you to decide based on the 4362 evidence presented by the parties in this case." so the engle findings cannot be used to establish class membership. plaintiff has to prove, by a greater weight of the evidence, all of those elements necessary to establish class membership. so let us start with medical causation. plaintiff must prove david ellsworth had lung cancer caused by smoking. what do we know about that? we know he was diagnosed with two types of lung cancer, bac and squamous. we know that the bac caused his death, and bac is not caused by smoking. we know that he had multiple independent risk factors for squamous cell lung cancer. we know, in terms of the squamous cell, that he had cigarette smoking, exposure to plaster dust and tuberculosis scarring, all risk factors, all independent risk factors for the development of squamous cell carcinoma. dr. robert cerfolio, he said that mr. ellsworth's exposure to plaster dust could have caused mr. ellsworth's lung cancer. 4363 that is what it means to be an independent risk factor, that that alone could have been the cause. he said that mr. ellsworth's history of tuberculosis could have caused mr. ellsworth's lung cancer. that is the scarring associated with the tuberculosis, that that could have been an independent cause. we know that there was -- mr. ellsworth had heavy dust exposure because he told his doctors that he had such. in two separate entries in this medical record, where mr. ellsworth is presenting to the doctor, the doctor writes, he has heavy dust exposures, heavy dust exposure, and this is coming directly from mr. ellsworth while he was alive. we know that his family members confirmed that he had this plaster dust exposure. ricky mayou testified that he created the dust as a laborer, because you start as a laborer before you become a finisher. so, at some point in time, mr. ellsworth himself was a laborer, mixing and creating the dust before he became a finisher. in either capacity, he was exposed to 4364 plaster dust. his clothes had plaster on the legs when he got home, and dust, and he would hit the legs and the dust would fly everywhere. that was an observation that eyewitnesses made. no one ever observed him using a mask or other protective equipment. we have no reason to quarrel with the medical record, that he was exposed to heavy dust. miss sherri ellsworth observed white dust on mr. ellsworth after work and carole mayou said never observed mr. ellsworth with protective equipment. plaster dust. dr. cerfolio told us, squamous cell lung cancer is absolutely associated with dust, that dust is a risk factor for squamous cell lung cancer. and that he could not rule out mr. ellsworth's dust exposure as a cause of his squamous cell lung cancer. that is from dr. cerfolio. tuberculosis scarring. dr. cerfolio also told us that tuberculosis is an independent risk factor for developing squamous cell lung cancer, that tuberculosis infections from 20 years before are associated with squamous cell lung cancer. because it is an inflammatory 4365 process, it creates the scarring, and the scarring can become cancerous. he told us that. that is plaintiff's expert. he also said that mr. ellsworth had a documented history of tuberculosis going back to the 1960s, and he said there is a correlation between mr. ellsworth's squamous cell lung cancer and his tuberculosis, that he could not rule out mr. ellsworth's history of tuberculosis as a contributing cause of his squamous cell lung cancer, could not rule it out. now, plaintiff wants you to ignore these risk factors and assume that cigarettes and cigarettes alone caused mr. ellsworth's squamous cell lung cancer. dr. cerfolio said he could not distinguish which of the three contributed more to the cause of it. he could not break it out. but he said each of them, independently, could cause squamous cell lung cancer. cigarettes. no medical record states that smoking caused mr. ellsworth's squamous cell lung cancer. the death certificate does not say that 4366 smoking was a cause of his death, not either the primary or secondary. nowhere in the death certificate does it say that smoking contributed to it. you cannot assume that smoking caused mr. ellsworth's lung cancer. you have to depend on proof. you have to depend on evidence, and there is not evidence that it was caused by that, and that alone. we talk about the pathologists. now, dr. cerfolio is a thoracic surgeon, admits that he is not a pathologist, and he is admitted that cancer is diagnosed by the pathologists. dr. cerfolio relies on pathologists to diagnose cancer in his regular practice. he says he agrees with the pathologist 98 percent of the time, and in the other 2 percent, he is right fifty percent of the time and the pathologist is right the other fifty percent. but he defers to pathologists when reviewing specimens and slides in his regular practice. he admitted that. he admits that he is not qualified to dispute the pathology opinions in this case. no formal pathology training, not 4367 board-certified in pathology, no pathology expertise. yet, he did not even talk to a pathologist about mr. ellsworth's case. he was asked a question by one of you about the pathology report in this case, and he agreed with mr. ellsworth's pathologist's description of what the pathologist saw. he said, yeah, i agreed that that is what he saw. he is describing what he saw. and what he saw was a predominantly bronchioloalveolar carcinoma, a bac, and he admitted that the bac diagnosis was within the standard of care. there was some question about who prepared the discharge report that described this as being a bac, because there is no signature on the line above dr. capulong's -- the line there for capulong. but we know that dr. rene capulong dictated this, because we have got it right there. those are her initials, and that is whoever transcribed it. that is dr. capulong. so dr. capulong dictated this record. and buried in this record, it will be in evidence, you will have it back there with you, in the middle of a long paragraph in the 4368 middle, it says, "the second lesion discrete from the first, is a non-oat cell carcinoma which is predominantly bronchioloalveolar." now, dr. cerfolio defers to oncologists like dr. okun for diagnosis. he said the medical oncologist is an absolutely critical member of the team, defers to a medical oncologist when he and the pathologist disagree about what kind of tumor it is. and we brought you a board-certified medical oncologist in the person of dr. david okun. dr. david okun said that the bac spread to mr. ellsworth's airway, and it was like a caterpillar that became a butterfly when it became an invasive adenocarcinoma. the bac caused mr. ellsworth's death and there is no dispute by anyone that bac is not caused by smoking. just to kind of recap what dr. okun told us. you will recall dr. okun said that this squamous cell was located up here in the area of the third and fourth, that it was in the posterior region, which is towards your back or your scapula. that up in this region, there was the presence of the scarring from the 4369 tuberculosis. and of course, the scarring is a risk factor for the squamous cell. this was the squamous cell located up here. the smaller of the tumors was the bac, which was located here. the bac became invasive, but bac is a form of adenocarcinoma, but all adenocarcinomas are not bacs. bac is a slow-growing tumor, but it can change, and it can become what he called well-differentiated, which means it becomes aggressive. it became aggressive, and then it metastasized to the mediastinum. you will recall that they took -- they examined 17 of those lymph nodes in this region. this region is just covered with lymph nodes. and typically, when the cancer metastasizes from the lungs, it goes to the lymph nodes. that is so important when they are making a -- diagnosing and they are staging the cancer. it spread to this lymph node. out of the of them, one of them contained this cancer, and the cells were similar to the cells that were in this smaller of the two tumors. the 4370 larger one was the squamous, the smaller one was the bac. in fact, he said it spread -- that this lymph node became four centimeters, and it became larger than the tumor from which it had metastasized. it grew to the point that it encroached on the bronchus, and that is what cut off his airway, and that is what brought about the death of mr. ellsworth. it is plain and simple and straightforward, without this bac, you would not have had this invasive adenocarcinoma, and you would not have had the blockage of the airway, and he would not have died when he did. plain and simple. i think what he described it as, he used the butterfly because the term is lepidic, and that is a derivative of the word butterfly in latin. and you cannot have -- i think he said a caterpillar, you cannot have the butterfly without the caterpillar. so when it is over here, it is in this cocoon-like phase. and then it becomes a butterfly, but it is the same thing. it is the same kind of cell with the same dna, and that is what brought about 4371 mr. ellsworth's death. so the bottom line is, you cannot establish class membership if you do not have medical causation. am i doing something wrong? thank you, ma'am. so the answer to this one, on class membership, the answer is no. and if that is marked no, then you proceed no further. you sign the verdict form, and that is it, the end of the deliberations. now, let us talk about addiction. the plaintiff failed to prove that david ellsworth had cancer caused by smoking. he had a bac that is not caused by smoking, and that is what caused his death. let us talk about addiction. plaintiff must prove david ellsworth was addicted to nicotine. and what was the evidence that you heard on that? well, you heard from dr. o'brien, the plaintiff's expert. he said addiction is a change in the brain that causes loss of control. but he also said that mr. ellsworth was able to control his smoking. his testimony 4372 was that mr. ellsworth controlled his smoking by not smoking in certain places. he said that mr. ellsworth did not smoke in kerri's bedroom. he did not smoke during dinner. did not smoke in church, and did not smoke on certain jobs. he did not smoke around certain people. he did not smoke around his brother, donald, when he was around him, because he knew that donald and donald's wife did not like smoking. mr. ellsworth never told anybody that he had lost control. there was no evidence that mr. ellsworth ever lost his free will over smoking. in fact, dr. o'brien admitted that mr. ellsworth did not lose his free will over smoking. we know that david ellsworth did not meet the definition of addiction set out by the plaintiff's expert in terms of losing control. dr. roger samuel came and testified that he employed diagnostic criteria. i think he set out 11 of them that he wrote on a board right in front of you. he said that smoking did not cause 4373 significant clinical impairment or distress in mr. ellsworth. mr. ellsworth controlled his smoking, and smoked until he decided he was going to quit smoking. the touchstone of the addiction analysis is the significant clinical impairment. someone's addicted to something, it impacts their ability to carry out their activities, and there is no evidence of that in this case. both dr. samuel and dr. o'brien say that all smokers, even heavy smokers, are not addicted. they say fifty percent are, fifty percent are not. we know david ellsworth was not addicted. no medical record described david ellsworth as being addicted. david ellsworth never received any medical treatment for nicotine addiction. his treating doctors never diagnosed him as being addicted. plaintiff failed to prove that he was addicted to nicotine. so, again, the answer on the verdict form in terms of addiction is no. not only are you required to prove medical causation, but you got to prove that there was addiction. 4374 let us talk about addiction causation, the third aspect of this class membership question. plaintiff must prove addiction was a legal cause of david ellsworth's lung cancer, a legal cause, that but for the addiction, he would not have had cancer. we know that he could have quit smoking because millions did during this time frame. we know that, between 1955 and 1965, 17.6 million people quit smoking. and that, between 1964, when the surgeon general's report came out, and 1979, 30 million quit. and then, as of today, up to 60 million. dr. proctor has it pegged at 60 million. dr. samuel said between 50 and 60 million people have quit. and this includes those who were heavily addicted. so we know that addiction does not prevent people from quitting. and they were not just light smokers. most of them quit without any assistance, something like ninety percent. and there are now more former smokers than current smokers. so addiction does not prevent people from quitting. 4375 in fact, dr. o'brien says that he never tells any of his patients that they cannot quit. and i do not believe he ever said, in this case, that mr. ellsworth could not quit. in fact, what he said was that internal motivation is required in order for a smoker to quit. whether the person wants to quit is the key question in determining whether someone is addicted. and we saw no signs that mr. ellsworth wanted to quit. so internal motivation is very, very, very vitally important. if you took the 60 million people who quit, you would fill sun life stadium about 750 times. that is a lot of people who have quit. dr. o'brien tells all of his patients they can quit. he has never told a patient that they should not try to quit, and he would never tell a patient that they cannot quit, because he knows that addicted smokers can quit. we know that heavy smokers quit in the 1960s, '70s and '80s. dr. proctor told us that. male smokers who quit in the '60s and '70s smoked an average of 30 cigarettes a day. other smokers who quit in the 1960s and '70s 4376 smoked more than 30 cigarettes a day. that is a pack and a half. most smokers who quit were not light smokers. we know that people have many reasons for smoking. both dr. o'brien and dr. samuel told us that, that people smoke for enjoyment, they like the taste. it helps them relax and ease stress. we know that was the case for mr. ellsworth. there is a social aspect to smoking, improved attention, helps with weight control and relieves boredom. and we know that david ellsworth was no different than the 60 million smokers who did quit. were the cigarettes he smoked more addictive than the cigarettes of people who quit? no. was his brain affected differently than the smokers who quit? no. they had memory paths as well. they had uptake of the nicotine receptors as well. but they managed to quit. was mr. ellsworth exposed to advertising different from those smokers that quit? no, he was not. was he exposed to tobacco company 4377 statements different from the smokers who quit? no, he was not. did he smoke more or longer than the smokers who quit? no. did he make his own decisions and choose not to quit smoking before 1993? yes, he did. plaintiff admits that mr. ellsworth may have some fault for his injuries or death. now, what does that mean, because when sherri ellsworth was on the stand, i asked her questions. she said, yeah, he may have some responsibility for his injuries. and what does that mean? that means that david ellsworth knew that smoking was dangerous, yet, he continued to smoke. it means that he had the ability to quit smoking early, and thereby avoid suffering from a smoking-related illness. it means that he had the ability to quit smoking at the time -- at a time that would have prevented his death. that is what it means to be partially at fault, that there is something you could have done more of that could have enabled you to avoid that fate. that is what that means. 4378 we know that mr. ellsworth had to make the decision to quit smoking. his own expert, dr. o'brien, said mr. ellsworth had to make the decision. nobody could make it for him. no one else could decide that he was going to quit smoking. he had to do that for himself. dr. o'brien also said there are two kinds of smokers. he said there are people who do not even want to quit, and then something bad happens to them, and they stop without any help. that is the category that mr. ellsworth fell into. then there are those who need help and they keep coming back and they keep relapsing. there is no evidence whatsoever that mr. ellsworth had any relapsing or continued to seek help in quitting smoking. those are the two kinds of categories that dr. o'brien described. we know from sherri hubbird and kerri ellsworth, they never observed mr. ellsworth try to quit smoking before 1993. kerri said that she saw him sucking lollipops and chewing gum and she assumed from that he was trying to quit, but he never told 4379 her he was trying to quit. he told her he attempted to quit sometime in the past when they had a discussion about that 1977 term paper that she wrote on nicotine, and he said he was addicted and had tried to quit sometime in the past. there is no eyewitness that ever saw any of that. and when he did quit smoking, he did not use any assistance. he quit cold turkey. dr. charles o'brien said that addiction can cause disease. he did say that. but he never said addiction caused mr. ellsworth's disease. he did not say that. he did not say that nicotine addiction caused mr. ellsworth's disease. and that is a very important distinction. we know that mr. ellsworth enjoyed smoking, because carole mayou, the former daughter-in-law, testified she saw him, she was with him. she was a smoker. she smoked with him and his wife during the time that mr. ellsworth was living, and he enjoyed it. well, how did she know he enjoyed it? how do you know anytime somebody enjoys something? does somebody have to tell you that they enjoy 4380 spending time with their children or their grandchildren? no. you can say it. or if somebody enjoys a meal or a glass of wine? you can tell if somebody is enjoying something. based on her observations and based on her interactions with him, she said he enjoyed smoking, and there is not anything wrong with that. that is just a fact of the matter. david ellsworth enjoyed it. he used it for stress relief. he enjoyed having a cigarette when he was drinking beer. there is nothing wrong with that. he enjoyed it while he was playing board games with his family members. he enjoyed it while he was socializing with others, including the people on his crew. he enjoyed it after a meal. he enjoyed it while watching television and he enjoyed it while he was drinking his coffee. he enjoyed smoking. now, no witness saw david ellsworth quit for a single day in 43 years. the evidence is that he did not take a single step, according to the eyewitnesses, to quit before 1993. we do know that he said to kerri that he quit for six months at some point in time prior 4381 to when she showed him the term paper in 1977. when it was, under what circumstances, we do not know. on the other hand, we have the plaintiff coming in and saying he did not quit for a single day for 40 some years. you will have to decide what is more plausible, what is more likely to you. what we do know for a fact is that he never sought any help from family and friends to quit smoking. that he never sought any medical assistance. did he throw away his cigarettes? no. did he throw away his ashtrays and lighter? no. did he attend smoking cessation clinics? no, he did not. did he quit for a single day? according to the plaintiff, he did not quit for a single day. did he take a single step to quit smoking? no, he did not. if someone -- and actions speak louder than words. you heard dr. samuel say that yesterday. actions speak louder than words. 4382 we have all heard that. but did he ever pick up the telephone and call smoke enders to make an appointment? there is no evidence of such. did he ever throw out ashtrays? there is no evidence of such. or get rid of other smoking queues, like try to cut back on beer consumption or take some steps? no, he did not. no witness saw david ellsworth quit for a single day in 43 years. again, actions speak louder than words. now, how do we know that mr. ellsworth could quit at any time? he did quit. so the evidence is overwhelming that david ellsworth's choice to begin smoking, to continue smoking and not to quit were the only -- that was the only legal cause of his death. he quit in 1993 the first time he tried. so plaintiff failed to prove that david ellsworth had lung cancer caused by smoking, failed to prove that david ellsworth was addicted to nicotine, failed to prove that addiction to nicotine was a legal cause of david ellsworth's lung cancer and his death. 4383 what the plaintiff spent two weeks doing is reproving the engle findings, but failed to prove that david ellsworth is an engle class member. so on question number one, is he an engle class member? was the addiction the legal cause of his lung cancer? the answer is no, not an engle class member. at this point, with no to that answer, the case is over. but if you do not answer no to that question, then you proceed to the question concerning concealment, and that question involves whether information that was withheld from david ellsworth or reynolds and the other tobacco-related entities' agreement to conceal information, was that a legal cause of david ellsworth's lung cancer? in other words, but for that information, would he have contracted - developed lung cancer. i submit to you, you cannot conceal information already known or available to mr. ellsworth. and the evidence is overwhelming that he knew that cigarette smoking was dangerous, and he knew that it was addictive. 4384 number two, the death legally caused by lung cancer that was caused by smoking cigarettes, the answer to that is no. on wrongful death, concealment. did david r. ellsworth reasonably rely, to his detriment, on any statement made by r.j. reynolds tobacco company which concealed or omitted material facts not otherwise known or available to him concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes, and, if so, was such reliance a legal cause of his death? i submit the answer is no. number four, did david ellsworth reasonably rely, to his detriment, on any statement in furtherance of an agreement to conceal or omit material facts not otherwise known or available to him concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes and, if so, was such reliance a legal cause of his death? the answer to that is no as well. i'll tell you why. see, there has to be a connection. you have to connect up the concealment and the agreement to conceal with the lung cancer. there has to be a connection. 4385 and the question becomes, was information about the dangers of smoking unknown or unavailable? was it unknown or unavailable? i submit it was not unknown or unavailable. before i do that, i want to show you a couple of instructions that may be helpful in guiding your decision making. this is instruction number 13. it says, "the next issue for your determination is whether david r. ellsworth reasonably relied, to his detriment, on any statement or omission of material fact by r.j. reynolds tobacco company that omitted material information concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes not otherwise known or available to mr. ellsworth and, if so, whether such reliance was a legal cause of his non-bac lung cancer or death." it makes mention of material information. you also have an instruction on what constitutes material information. the judge is going to tell you. it is instruction number 14. "a material fact is one that is of such importance that david ellsworth would not have 4386 acted as he did but for the concealment or omission of that fact." so, in other words, it is a game changer. the concealment or omission of that fact would have changed his behavior. and i submit it would not. and the reason i say that is the information about the dangers and addictiveness of smoking has been known since the 1800s. it is been known that nicotine is a chemical in tobacco since the 1830s, when it was isolated as a chemical in tobacco. addicted to smoking is terminology that is been in use since the 1850s. smokers' cancer was popularized as a description for mouth cancer in the 1850s. schools have taught the dangers and addictiveness of smoking for over 100 years. we know that from dr. proctor, plaintiff's expert. more than a hundred years ago, cigarettes were banned in states like florida because they were deemed to be dangerous. we know that information about the dangers of smoking have been available in the popular 4387 culture since the 1800s. slang terms have been used to describe cigarettes since the 1800s. and there are hundreds of different slang terms. in the early 1800s, they used terms like "coffin nail" that came into use, and still are using it to show the concern that cigarettes would be like a nail in your coffin. and, of course, slang terms show a broader cultural knowledge of something. if somebody says they are taking a selfie, we know what that means. it means something different now than it would mean ten years ago, or whenever, but that is just what slang does. it comes into the common usage and people know what you are talking about. we know that the reader's digest covered issues of smoking and health in the 1920s and the 1930s. one of the issues of reader's digest from 1924 said does tobacco injure the human body. and it says, "tobacco is injurious to the human body. it lessens resistance to tuberculosis and other diseases. its use sometimes induces cancer." 4388 so it is no secret that tobacco use can cause cancer. there are other articles on giving up smoking. i quit smoking. nicotine knockout or the slow count, are you a man or a smoke stack? all of these articles dealt with the issues of the danger of cigarettes. we know that mr. ellsworth was overseas in the pacific between 1952 and 1955, and we know that the stars and stripes had articles that talked about the dangers of cigarette smoking. said nonsmokers said to outlive puffers. that is june 1953. 1954, cigarette cancer tie found. they interviewed 187,768 people. smokers' hack can kill, new york doctors say. what we do know is the stars and stripes did not publish the frank statement. so all this business about what was in the frank statement, mr. ellsworth did not see it. he was stationed in korea and the stars and stripes did not carry the frank statement. it only appeared in the newspapers nationwide, major newspapers, on one day. and on that one day, 4389 he was in korea. smoking and health warnings. he moved to the miami area in 1955 after he was discharged from the service and took the miami herald. and the miami herald had lots of stories about the dangers of smoking. smokers, bad risk, doctors say. the evidence pointing to smoking as a cause of lung cancer is overwhelming. that is 1955. lung cancer ruptures tied to cigarette smoking. cigarette smoking widely blamed for lung cancer, may be even more hazardous than has been hitherto recognized. that is 1955. heavy smokers, cancer victims. that is miami herald, december 1955. cigarette blamed again for cancer. miami herald, march 1956. and this is just a small sampling of the thousands, literally hundreds of thousands of articles that appeared in newspapers throughout the united states, and magazines, about the dangers of smoking, and linking cigarette smoking to lung cancer. more miami herald. british survey, lung cancer rise laid to smoking. that is 1957. 4390 filter is no help, medical doctor tells smokers. miami herald, 1958. says there is not any question or doubt that cigarettes cause lung cancer. no doubt. cigarette lung cancer link seen by many smokers. we know the public was well informed of the scientific studies about the dangers of smoking. dr. proctor testified that scientific studies about the dangers of smoking were big news. and they did, they got coverage in newspapers and magazines. they were widely covered in medical journals, but they were picked up in the mainstream media, and it would become a newspaper story for laypeople to read. 1953, wynder/graham study was the biggest cigarette story up until that time. that was the mouse skin painting study that was done by wynder and graham in 1953. four years later, there was a study that received even more publicity in the news. "cancer stick" was a term that was widely used in the 1950s following the publication of these epidemiology studies talking about the 4391 link between smoking and lung cancer. here is a copy of the cover of that wynder and graham life magazine article that is describing the wynder/graham study, and showing the mice with the tumors growing on their backs once they were painted with the smoke condensate. and dr. proctor told you that this kind of information was covered in radio, television, magazines. it was widely covered. here's newsweek and time magazine. time magazine article on how to stop smoking. the psychological urge is reinforced by pharmacological urge. the true physical craving for tobacco. 1958, newsweek. smoking is a most serious sort of drug addiction and with a real psychological basis. and you saw the video deposition of mr. heimann, dr. robert heimann, who had been president of american tobacco company. the deposition was taken in 1986. he had left the company in 1980, and somebody had asked him, well, what is going on at the company now. he said, i do not know. he could only 4392 speak to what was going on while he was there. one of the things they asked him was, despite what the american medical association says, the american cancer society, the american heart association, the american lung association, the american association of thoracic surgery, the american college of chest physicians, the american public health association, and the world health organization, all saying that smoking causes lung cancer and other diseases and it is addictive, do you deny that, sir? and he denied it. so there was an overwhelming amount of information from the public health community about the dangers of smoking. in fact, the surgeon general, in 1957, said -- the surgeon general had informed the public, through the excellent coverage of the press, radio and tv, said newspapers, radio and tv and other media did an excellent and objective job of covering this problem. so you would have to be in a cave not to know about the dangers of smoking, because it was everywhere. the information was all over. dr. proctor says the information about the 4393 1964 surgeon general's report was widely available. it was headline news across the united states. every major newspaper covered it, every single television station had it, because there were only three networks and they all devoted two hours to it. it was in magazines. it was the biggest medical story of that year. in fact, it is the biggest medical story up until the aids epidemic. the 1964 surgeon general's report was widely covered in the media. here's the miami herald coverage of the 1964 surgeon general's report. i quit smoking at 2 p.m., saturday. that is it. cigarettes guilty. and that is from january 12, 1964. miami herald. here's what study by us revealed. lung cancer to strike 400. will you be one of them? no ifs, ands, or butts, pal, try smokers anonymous. there is no evidence that mr. ellsworth ever joined smokers anonymous. here is the miami herald, 1960s. smoke link to cancer emphasized. cancer cause found in cigarette smoke. cigarette smokers again 4394 warned of the cancer dangers. abstinence from smoking affords the best protection against lung cancer at present, the council asserted. they truly are coffin nails. that is one of them. 1967. another article in 1967, miami herald, says, "high death rates cited among smokers. us strengthens smoke cancer tie." we know that mr. ellsworth watched the news. we know that he read the newspaper and we know he listened to the radio. eyewitness testimony to that effect. we know that he took the orlando sentinel when they moved to deland, and he read the deland sun times in deland. and when he lived in miami, he read the miami herald. we know that mass media played a big role in publicizing the dangers of smoking. so the information is available. whether someone took advantage of it or not is beside the point. the jury instruction says information otherwise known or available, and that is the key thing, available, and it was available. we know there were the scientific studies 4395 that were done, the epidemiology studies in the '50s, the mouse skin painting studies in the '50s bringing to the attention of the public the dangers of smoking and how it was linked to lung cancer. this culminated in -- and then we have the 1964 surgeon general's report. this culminated in this warning that appeared on every pack of cigarettes after 1966. in 1966, this warning was adopted. "cigarette smoking may be hazardous to your health." that began appearing on every pack of cigarettes sold in the united states of america. and it was effective. how do we know it was effective? because people started quitting. millions of americans quit smoking as a result of seeing articles about the mouse skin painting studies and other epidemiology in the 1950s. large scale quitting began in the 1950s and accelerated through the 1960s and the 1970s. dr. proctor says quitting is an expression of knowledge. in other words, the people got the message. they knew that it was dangerous. 4396 they knew it was addictive. they started quitting. we know that this was true for two of mr. ellsworth's brothers. in fact, one of them, the older of the two, donald ellsworth, he said he knew in 1948 that it was dangerous, that it was unhealthy. richard ellsworth said, well, i quit smoking, my wife and i quit smoking in 1980 after smoking viceroys for 30 something years. and i knew, since 1960, that it was dangerous. but after having some health problems in 1980, he quit smoking. they quit cold turkey, never picked up another cigarette to this day, so he was one of those people who quit as an expression of knowledge. the clerk: one hour, counsel. mr. persons: thank you, ma'am. and the warning label itself got widespread media coverage. the warning bill, signed into law by president lyndon johnson, and this is from the miami herald, july 28, 1965. and then the american cancer society put up these posters that were displayed for the 4397 public to see. congress has acted. the next step is yours, with a picture of a pack of cigarettes and the warning label on the side. again, widely publicized. okay. in 1970, the warning was strengthened. and it now reads, "warning. the surgeon general has determined that cigarette smoking is dangerous to your health." so if you are smoking two or three packs a day, and you are smoking 20 cigarettes out of each pack, you are picking this up and the warning is available. whether you read it or not is your own business. it is available. and that is a warning that is there. now, if you are not going to heed this warning, where is the evidence that you would heed a memo from r.j. reynolds or an internal document from r.j. reynolds and stop smoking so as to save your life? there is none. there is none. newspaper articles about the benefits of quitting. so you had newspaper articles about the benefits of quitting smoking in the '70s and '80s. here's the miami herald, 1976. study. 4398 quitting cigarettes greatly cuts lung risk. ceasing smoking may save years. that is 1983. it is never too late to quit smoking. even people who have been smoking for four or five decades decrease their risk of cigarette-related diseases if they give up the habit. if you stopped smoking cigarettes ten years ago, your life expectancy rate equals that of persons who never smoked. all of this information is out there and being publicized, and people are acting on it, because -- we know that because people are quitting. and then there was the great american smokeout. and 88,648 heavy smokers stopped quitting as a result of the great american smokeout. entire towns would go cold turkey in quitting smoking habit. class to help douse smoking. that is miami herald. and the class was on mondays and wednesdays, and it cost $15 to go and get help to quit smoking. no evidence that mr. ellsworth ever availed himself of it. now, if you are not going to heed what is in 4399 the local paper that you read and you are not going to drive down to -- it was on 12th avenue, 1400 northwest 12th avenue, and pay $15, what makes you think that something that reynolds said in an internal document is going to prompt you to quit smoking? smokers kick habit in clinics. they went to smoke-ending clinics to get help. best way to quit. abruptly and totally. just quit cold turkey. now, how did the public respond to the message? well, we know that millions of heavily addicted smokers quit. let us look at 1953. the publicity surrounding the wynder/graham study attracted a great deal of attention and caused american smoking rates to drop profoundly. we know that. 1957, the surgeon general said the public had been warned through excellent coverage of the press, tv and radio. and we know, between 1955 and 1965, 17.6 million americans quit smoking. much of that was in response to the scare from the wynder/graham studies and other 4400 scientific studies that were coming out, and this public information from the press, radio, tv coverage of the science. 1964, all of the news media and the us covered the link between smoking and lung cancer that was part of the '64 surgeon general's report. 1966, we know the warning label went on. 1970, the warning label was strengthened. 1971, cigarettes no longer advertised on tv or radio. between '65 and '79, 30 million people quit smoking. and then, in 1985, we had the rotating warnings on packs of cigarettes. again, as dr. proctor put it so eloquently, quitting was an expression of their knowledge of the dangers of smoking. that is how you know that people were getting the message. here are the rotating warnings. "smoking causes lung cancer, heart disease, emphysema and may complicate pregnancy." that is one of them. another one, "smoking by pregnant women may result in fetal injury, premature birth and 4401 low birth weight." another one, "quitting smoking now greatly reduces serious risk to your health." so if you want to protect your health, you need to quit now. take steps to quit now. do something to try to quit. "cigarette smoke contains carbon monoxide." one of those warnings would be on -- an equal number of times on every pack of cigarettes sold in the united states. it is a warning that was right there, a warning that the smoker can see. and if you believe that mr. ellsworth smoked two packs a day, 40 cigarettes a day, that would come to his seeing that warning or having it available 280 times a week. more than 1,000 times a month, the warning was there. so the bottom line, david ellsworth did not develop lung cancer and die because information about the dangers of smoking was unknown or unavailable to him. there was a lot of information known and available to mr. ellsworth. 4402 he knew smoking was dangerous and addictive. how do we know that? well, we know that because of the federal and state government and regulatory agencies, the information from the surgeon general, information from public health authorities about the dangers of smoking. that information was widespread. information that circulated word of mouth, from family members. antismoking, donald ellsworth said he -- antismoking for more than 50 years. knew as early as 1948 that it was unhealthy for you, that it was dangerous. kerri ellsworth knew that it was addictive in the 1970s when she did that paper in 1977. you have got the american lung association, american cancer society and doctors telling patients about the dangers of smoking. you remember dr. o'brien said that he would have been very surprised if mr. ellsworth's doctors, since he was being treated for tuberculosis, did not tell him that he needed to quit smoking, because as someone who had suffered tb and had the lung scarring, that smoking would not be good for him. that 4403 was dr. o'brien who said that. we know that the mass media, and mr. ellsworth did take the newspaper and watched television, that that covered the dangers of smoking. ricky mayou was punished, along with his brother, michael, by mr. ellsworth, for smoking, and he made them smoke a cigar until they got sick and threw up, telling them this is bad, and you should not be doing it. we know that the baptist church had literature about the dangers of smoking. and then one of his brothers, i think it was donald ellsworth, said, well, it was just common sense. for those of us growing up in rhode island, it was common sense that smoking was unhealthy. carole mayou met him when she was 16 years old in 1977. she said, we knew the harmful effects in the '70s of smoking. and grace fisher warned him about smoking being addictive. and, of course, the slang terms that we know about that were in use, like "coffin nail" and so forth. 4404 we know that the parents of david ellsworth, donald ellsworth, douglas ellsworth and richard ellsworth warned their children against smoking, taught mr. ellsworth and his brothers that smoking is bad for you. in schools, schools did not allow them to smoke. mr. ellsworth's middle school health teacher taught that smoking was bad. in the church, smoking not allowed in church. the church warned members about the dangers of smoking. so those are personal warnings about the dangers of smoking from an early age. and one of his brothers, i believe it was donald ellsworth, said, i knew, in 1948, it was bad for you. he was 20 years old in 1948. said because people were choking and coughing from smoking. so i knew from that, that it was bad. he did not need the surgeon generals report to tell him to quit. he knew it was bad. richard ellsworth did not wait on the '64 surgeon general's report to know that it was bad. he said i knew in 1960, but i wanted to continue smoking until i had a health scare in 1980, and my wife and i quit cold turkey. 4405 here we go, donald ellsworth. the dangers of smoking were common sense growing up in rhode island. he grew up in the same household, same neighborhood, went to the same schools as david ellsworth. he knew, it was common sense, he said. so it stands to reason that david ellsworth would have known that it was common sense as well. it does not take a leap in logic or a speculation to arrive at that conclusion. information about the dangers of smoking was available to david ellsworth. i told you about donald ellsworth, his older brother. he knew that smoking -- oldest brother -- he knew that smoking was harmful in 1948, he said. now, of course, he left home in 1945 to go off to world war ii. and he is the one that said, well, yes, they had cigarettes in the rations, but that did not make me take up smoking because i knew it was bad for you. but it stands to reason, if he knew it was harmful in 1948, left home in '45, same household that david ellsworth lived in, that david ellsworth knew, too. of course, he is been at it, smoking for more than 50 years, 4406 wife opposed to smoking, do not allow it in their house. when he went to see david ellsworth and came and visited him in florida, david ellsworth refrained from smoking in his presence. even though, on a couple of occasions, he spent the night, david ellsworth did not smoke while he was staying at the house. i talked about this, where they were forced to smoke the cigar until they got sick. we know about kerri ellsworth's preparing the school report in junior high. the report concluded that tobacco is addictive. she showed the report to her father. he said, yes, it is addictive. and she talked to him about -- talked to her father about quitting smoking, and he said, i tried twice and i'm addicted, i could not quit. kerri ellsworth told mr. -- sherri hubbird told mr. ellsworth that smoking made her sick, asked him not to smoke around her children, and he respected her wishes. sherri hubbird told david ellsworth that he needed to quit smoking. this was in late 4407 1981 or early 1982, and carole mayou shared this with us. that sherri hubbird did not like mr. ellsworth's smoking, and would sigh in frustration when she saw him smoking. told him, you need to quit smoking, it is not healthy. he smiled and walked out the door. and carole mayou has no dog in this fight, has no reason to be anything other than just totally candid about what she saw, what she observed. so when we get to the verdict form, and you get to the questions on concealment, did david ellsworth reasonably rely, to his detriment, on any statement by reynolds which concealed or omitted material facts not otherwise known or available to him concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes and, if so, was such reliance a legal cause of his death? the answer is no. the answer should be no to number four as well, which is on the agreement to conceal. now, let us talk about fault. the assignment of fault relates only to actions that were a legal cause of david ellsworth's 4408 lung cancer and death. reynolds cannot be assigned fault for actions that were not a legal cause of david ellsworth's lung cancer and death. now, i do not have time to go through that long list of things on that fault board that mr. kaiser held up, just do not have time. you would not want me to go through all that anyway. i'm going to try to finish in a minute. but you have to link those things to mr. ellsworth. were any of those things, did any of those things cause -- were any of those things the legal cause of mr. ellsworth's lung cancer and death? but for any one of those things, would he have made a different kind of decision about continuing to smoke? we do not have any evidence about why he began smoking. there is no proof, and the burden of proof is on the plaintiff, to demonstrate why he started smoking and how does that connect with any of those things on that board. or his continuing to smoke, how are they related to any of those things on that board? and i submit to you they are not. 4409 reynolds cannot be assigned fault for actions that were not a legal cause. and in order to be a legal cause, it has to be a but-for cause. but for those things, would he have quit smoking or would he have refrained from taking up smoking? as dr. o'brien put it so well, smokers are fully responsible for making the decision to try to quit smoking. that is their expert, their addiction expert. he said that being addicted does not mean that a smoker cannot try to quit or is not responsible for the choice to quit. he also said something else, that internal motivation is required for a smoker to quit. and so the responsibility lies with the smoker in order to take steps to quit smoking and to give up cigarettes. david ellsworth was a hard-working man who had his own mind and made his own decisions. that is ricky mayou, richard ellsworth said that, and carole mayou. any damages awarded must be fair and just, and i'm not, by any means, suggesting that damages should be awarded. but if they are, 4410 they have to be fair and just in light of the evidence. i was reminded of something i did not do. now, if you went to the alternative survival claim, you will see these same set of questions about concealment, and the answer would be the same. it would be no on each of those. a thing that is important to know on the concealment and agreement to conceal claims, there is no reduction for fault on those, and so that is a very important distinction on those. that no matter how much fault rests with mr. ellsworth, there would be no reduction on those -- any amount awarded for those claims, if any, on the concealment claims. now, the jury instruction i was about to show you -- thank you, todd, for reminding me of that -- is number 26. and it says, "the purpose of an award of compensatory damages is not to punish or penalize reynolds for its conduct or to make an example of reynolds for the publics good. it is to compensate the plaintiff." the other thing to keep in mind, the judge 4411 is going to tell you that, in reaching your verdict, do not let bias, sympathy, prejudice, public opinion or any other sentiment for or against any party influence your decision. and that is instruction number 35. i will not read that to you, but i just wanted to tell you that. it is in your packet of instructions. now, this claim for more than $6 million in damages, or any amount, defies common sense. here's what is not at issue. plaintiff is not seeking damages for kerri ellsworth's pain and suffering, sherri hubbird's pain and suffering, loss of relationship with david ellsworth, support and services provided to kerri ellsworth by anyone other than david ellsworth. they are not seeking compensation for services provided, for instance, to kerri ellsworth by sherri hubbird. no claim for mr. ellsworth's medical expenses. there is no claim for kerri ellsworth's medical expenses, and there is no claim for funeral expenses in this case. the plaintiff can only recover for one or the other of these, wrongful death, which is 4412 kerri ellsworth's loss of mr. ellsworth's support and services from 1994 to 2013, or the survival claim, which is david ellsworth's pain and suffering, mental anguish or loss of enjoyment of life. you cannot recover for both. it is an either/or proposition. now, on punitive damages, punitive damages can be awarded only for conduct that was a legal cause of david ellsworth's death or injury. they are in addition to damages that fully compensate. punitive damages can only be -- can be awarded only to mr. ellsworth's estate, only to mr. ellsworth's estate, not to any other entity. i want to share with you some law on punitive damages. i submit to you that -- i omitted something. on number five, when we are talking about fault, one hundred percent of the fault rests with mr. ellsworth, zero on reynolds. and the same thing is true on the alternative survival claim. it would be one hundred percent mr. ellsworth, zero on reynolds. let me read to you some law, and this is 4413 jury instruction number 29. this is on punitive damages and the burden of proof on punitive damages. unlike the other claims in the case where the burden of proof is by the preponderance of evidence, which is more likely than not, the burden of proof, or the greater weight of the evidence, the burden of proof on punitive damages is clear and convincing evidence, and that is evidence that is precise, explicit, lacking in confusion and of such weight that it produces a firm belief or conviction, without hesitation about the matter in issue. so if there is any hesitation whatsoever, then the burden has not been carried. that is what clear and convincing evidence means. it is a much higher burden than proof by a preponderance of the evidence or by the greater weight of the evidence. the burden of proof on other issues, plaintiff must prove all elements of her claims by the greater weight of evidence. burden of proof for punitive damages, plaintiff must prove punitive entitlement by clear and convincing evidence. so if there is 4414 any hesitation whatsoever, then plaintiff has not met that burden and should not be awarded entitlement to punitive damages. so on that, i submit to you that the answer is no. i'm going to tell you why. reynolds should not be punished. the council for tobacco research awarded more than $350 million in grants to fund independent scientific research projects. dr. proctor did not like all of them, but the fact of the matter is, they did fund this research. it resulted in 7,000 published scientific or medical articles and reports. the surgeon general himself in the surgeon general's reports cited more than 600 of the articles. so if they were of dubious value on the issue of smoking and health, why would the surgeon general's report cite 600 of the articles? they funded ten nobel prize winners, and the council for tobacco research funded research at virtually every major university in the country. one of the articles that they provided 4415 funding for appeared in the american journal of psychiatry in 1963. and one of the things that that article said was that heavy cigarette smokers, thus, appear to be true addicts. it went on to give credit to the sponsor. said this work was sponsored, in part, by grants from the american cancer society and the tobacco industry research committee. and they funded what was called the pillars of consensus. in other words, they funded epidemiology studies. they funded animal studies. they funded research on the chemistry of tobacco smoke. very important lines of evidence, according to dr. proctor, when evaluating whether smoking causes a disease is to do this kind of research. this was in response to a request from the public health community, called on the tobacco companies to sponsor this kind of research in the 1950s, and they did so. reynolds tried to reduce the levels of carcinogens in cigarette smoke starting in the early 1950s. this is from dr. proctor. they started developing a heat-not-burn technology 4416 in the 1960s. they spent a billion dollars to develop the premiere cigarette. but the public rejected it. they did not like the taste of it. they rejected it. it was a commercial failure. well, that is what happens in capitalism. that is what happens in business. if the consumer does not want it, they are not going to buy it. and dr. proctor even admitted that a cigarette that nobody buys is not going to provide any health benefits to the public. they developed another heat-not-burn technology called eclipse. and dr. proctor says the tobacco company spent a fortune trying to make cigarettes less hazardous, but they are a dangerous product. reynolds should not be punished. cigarettes have carried warning labels since 1966, so nobody can say they have not been warned. reynolds has not disputed the dangers of tobacco for over a decade. and punitive damages are not needed to prevent reynolds from concealing the dangers of smoking, because the public already knows about the dangers of 4417 smoking. i thought i had something else. i've already done that. there we go. thank you. so plaintiff has failed to prove david ellsworth had lung cancer caused by smoking. we know that he had a bac, and that is not caused by smoking. squamous cell had independent risk factors, independent of smoking. dust, heavy dust exposure, and the scarring from tuberculosis. they failed to prove that david ellsworth was addicted to the nicotine in cigarettes. dr. samuel took you through the 11 criteria. he satisfied only one of them, and that is if you accept what he said about having attempted to quit sometime prior to 1977. they failed to prove that addiction was the legal cause of david ellsworth's lung cancer. failed to prove that david ellsworth relied on anything reynolds said or did. there is no evidence that he ever saw anything from reynolds, any information that was put out by r.j. reynolds and relied on it to his detriment. 4418 failed to prove money damages or even an entitlement to it, because if he is not a class member, then you do not even get to talk about money damages. the bottom line is david ellsworth was a hard-working man who had his own mind, made his own decisions, lived his life the way he wanted to live it, and that is just the bottom line. that is who he was. that is how he lived. he chose to do what he wanted to do. he was an independent man. he enjoyed smoking. it helped relieve his stress. if he did quit for six months, nobody knows why he started up again. there is no evidence about why he started up again. what we do know, and what there is evidence of, is that he enjoyed cigarette smoking, even though he knew that it was dangerous, and even though he knew it was addictive. he took no steps to quit smoking because that was his own business and that was something he enjoyed doing. and so for all of those reasons, you should find in favor of r.j. reynolds tobacco company. 4419 again, i thank you for your attention throughout these days, and i thank you for giving me your attention right after lunch and listening to me. i will not get a chance to get up and say anything else to you again, because i do not have the burden of proof, so i do not have the last word. but i do want my last word to be thank you for your time and attention.