3 mr. kaiser: may it please the court, counsel, ladies and gentlemen of the jury, good morning. jurors: good morning. mr. kaiser: what i'm going to do is to track the verdict form that you will have, you will be able to read it and you are going to consider it when you go in and deliberate in this case. and i'd like to start off with the first question you are going to be asked, and it goes to class membership. so we are going to talk about addiction, and we are going to talk about the medical issues. and your first question on the verdict form is going to be: "is david ellsworth a member of the engle class? that is, was mr. ellsworth addicted to smoking cigarettes containing nicotine; and, if so, was such addiction a legal cause of his lung cancer?" so in order to begin our discussions on engle class, let us talk about addiction. and you will recall the evidence, because the evidence showed the following: you will recall that david ellsworth started smoking at a young age. there are medical records that you have that show he started perhaps as young as 14. there is been other testimony as well that, suffice it to say, david ellsworth was a child, was a kid, when he started smoking back in the '40s or the '50s. we know that. david ellsworth started smoking as a young kid at a time when his brain was not yet fully developed. we know that. we know that when david ellsworth started smoking as a kid and whose brain was not developed, he became more susceptible to becoming addicted quicker and having a stronger addiction that, according to dr. o'brien, would be harder to treat. we know that. we know that throughout david ellsworth's life, he smoked from morning, noon till night. we know that he smoked a lot of cigarettes. we know that he smoked at least two packs of cigarettes a day, maybe more. we know that he smoked two packs of cigarettes, maybe more, every day of his life without a day off. i ask you, do you know is it feasible that anybody can engage in an activity or use a substance with such frequency as david ellsworth was able to do smoking a cigarette every single day of his life without taking a day off that is not addicted? and it is humanly impossible because no one on the face of the earth was able to engage in an activity with such frequency, and no one is able to use a substance with such frequency. no one can eat that much food, no one can drink that much drink. it is just humanly impossible. and if someone uses something frequently, they do not have to do it every day of their life if they are not addicted. the bottom line here is: do you really think that david ellsworth smoked every single day of his life without taking a day off just because he liked it? that is silly. he smoked every single day of his life without a day off because he was addicted, because it affected his brain to such an extent that he could not stop. and just think of this. if you have any lingering doubt about whether or not this was just for enjoyment or not, maybe for another reason. do you think when david ellsworth had pains in his ribs, and he was coughing up blood for three weeks before he went to a doctor to get diagnosed with lung cancer, do you think if he was not addicted that maybe he would not be smoking a cigarette knowing full well this is probably a lung problem, i'm coughing up blood and i've got really serious rib pain, and the man is smoking. that is addiction beyond doubt. now, remember dr. o'brien. dr. o'brien testified. he testified about changes to the brain. he testified about memory. he testified about learning, that each puff of a cigarette is a learned behavior. it is a memory. it is not like doing some activity that you will adapt to. and that is why he explained, you can look at a sunset, and that releases dopamine, and that activates the pleasure zone in your brain; but you adapt to it so that after a thousand times the sunset is not a real big deal. with cigarettes, dr. o'brien told you, with each puff it is the same reinforcing effect, it is the same learned behavior, it is the same memory; and when you have millions and millions of those memories stored in the brain, you do not adapt, you become addicted, and that changes your brain permanently. now let us take a look at what he said, briefly, and we will move on to medicine. dr. o'brien said, you know, addiction is very often a lifelong problem. of course it is because it changes your brain for years, and that explains why, after quitting smoking for 20 years, 25 years, one day the person relapses, starts smoking, does not know why. the drug activates this reward system and it tends to produce learning. just like he said, with any of the cues that are also present that a person learns to associate with the effect of the drug. that is dr. o'brien talking about that whole reward system and the cues. remember what else he said? sometimes these cues are involuntary, you do not even see it and yet you are smoking a cigarette. and when he is trying to counsel people to stop, he tells them that, and they cannot believe it. that is an involuntary response, that is a diminished control in your ability to control your smoking. it is a loss of control. if you do not see a cue and you automatically smoke because of that, that is not something you are doing on your own volition. well, based on what i know, it is believed that younger people, when they start smoking, become hooked, become -- develop the disorder much more rapidly than older people. we know in this case, david ellsworth started as a young person. does one's addiction cause a diminished or loss of control? yes, that is pretty much part of addiction. well, what it has to do with, the fact that you have this reflex activation of the reward system, which produces craving, and some of it is at the unconscious level. so you are not consciously deciding to do something. like dr. o'brien said, it is an involuntary response to a condition. addiction is a disease that impairs free will. it is not that they want to do it. it often seems that they are pushed to do things that are against their own -- their own benefits, their own life circumstances. and finally, when dr. o'brien testified, "i've never seen anybody who had this much evidence and was not addicted." and remember in response to one of the questions by you as the jurors: "do you think david ellsworth could have quit?" and what was his response? "i do not think so." he may have had such a smoking history, smoked so long, that dr. o'brien thought he probably could not have quit smoking. there is no question, based on the evidence you have heard in this case, ladies and gentlemen, that david ellsworth was addicted to the nicotine in his cigarettes. that he smoked day in and day out almost every day of his life, without a day off, never got bored, never enjoyed it, he was addicted. let us talk about the medical evidence in this case. the dispute is whether or not david ellsworth had this bac you heard about or the adenocarcinoma along with the squamous carcinoma. that is the issue. not whether he had squamous carcinoma, that is undisputed. that is undisputed. he had squamous cell lung cancer. it is also undisputed that smoking caused that. there was not one question asked of dr. okun during his direct examination about other risk factors other than smoking, and he agreed, that is about an 85 percent chance with smoking. so that is not an issue. let us talk about the issues. remember, this is the initial pathology report from september of 1993 before he had the operation and they took the lobe out. this is just the needle biopsy. this is very important because look at what it is showing. remember dr. cerfolio. the needle biopsy is showing poorly differentiated carcinoma, not oat-cell type. remember dr. cerfolio was saying that the pathologist is telling you what he sees, and he is saying that it is not oat cell. that is that small cell lung cancer that is extremely deadly, with prominent fibroblastic reaction. so we know in september this is a poorly differentiated lung cancer, a carcinoma. now, by definition, like dr. cerfolio said, cannot be a bac, because a bac is a well-differentiated tumor carcinoma. cannot be. now, this is the proof in the pudding. this is the saline washings, the left lung needle biopsy, and what does it tell you? it says, these features are suggestive of adenocarcinoma differentiation, and most importantly, malignant cells present consistent with origin, not evolving, but origin from poorly differentiated carcinoma, not oat-cell type. there is not one word, ladies and gentlemen, that this cancer evolved from anything. the only word you see and that what the pathologist read was that this was consistent with an origin from poorly differentiated carcinoma. and even dr. okun said: bac is a well-differentiated carcinoma. even before the pathology from the lobectomy, it is demonstrated here that this was not a bac, this was an adenocarcinoma and a poorly differentiated one at that. and like dr. cerfolio said, everything is against the bac. bac is not a poorly differentiated cancer, so there is nothing there for bac. these features are suggestive of adenocarcinoma differentiation. just really based on this, it is clear, there is no bac. the bac is nothing but a red herring in this case. now we come to the pathology report. remember the october 1993 pathology report we spent a lot of time on? and we see that there is no issue. there were two separate tumors. we know that. there is an issue -- there is an issue with the location of the types of tumors. remember dr. cerfolio, when he had the diagram, he drew this one large circle, and inside the circle was another circle. there was the large mass, which was the squamous cell, and this adenocarcinoma right on it. dr. okun drew two circles, one bigger, one smaller, one next to each other, totally different location than dr. cerfolio. they differed greatly in their interpretation of where the cancer was and how it was. but at any rate, we know they were two separate ones, regardless of where they were located. we know that this pleural-based poorly differentiated carcinoma was a squamous cell. we know it was an invasive carcinoma. we know that it invaded the wall of a large blood vessel, we know that it invaded ribs, we know that it invaded the chest wall. there is no issue that david ellsworth had an aggressive squamous cell carcinoma that occurred. we also know there was a second lesion, again, this non-oat cell discrete from the first. and it does say: predominantly a bronchioloalveolar, but has focal large cell differentiation as well. remember when i was talking to dr. okun and he had talked about this evolving and the bac evolves into the aggressive tumor. and he distinguished the different kinds of non-small lung cancer. remember there is a squamous cell that is totally distinct, there is an adenocarcinoma that is totally distinct, and there is a large cell carcinoma that is totally distinct. and remember dr. okun said, "well, a bac can evolve into an adenocarcinoma." he said that. he said, "a bac cannot evolve into a squamous cell because they are different." and he said, "most importantly, a bac cannot evolve into a large cell." and remember the pathology report? we have got large cell differentiation that belies any contention that this bac somehow evolved into an adenocarcinoma when, before it even goes to the lymph node, there is large cell differentiation. there is no bac. and then when we get to the lymph node, the lymph node seems to be associated with this second lesion, which is the large cell differentiation, but this time what the pathologist sees is adenocarcinoma differentiation. and remember what dr. cerfolio said. lung tumor, unique to most tumors, lung cancer unique to most cancers, are heterogeneous. most tumors everywhere else in the body you have one type. lung cancer you can have many different types in one cell. you can have an adenocarcinoma, you can have a squamous cell carcinoma, although they are distinct, it is called an adenosquamous. you can have an adenocarcinoma and you can have a large cell carcinoma. they are heterogeneous. and that is what dr. cerfolio said, and that is often seen, and it is a big problem in lung cancer because these are invasive cancers. and so dr. cerfolio was saying, people who smoke have a more poorly differentiated cancer, you commonly see an aggressive tumor, bigger than three or four centimeters, commonly poor, dedifferentiated, and very aggressive. that is the squamous cell. ninety percent of squamous cell carcinomas are from people who smoke. so it is by far the number one. he differs with dr. okun by five percentage points. dr. okun said it was 85 percent; dr. cerfolio said it was ninety percent. and then dr. cerfolio is telling you there is a second lesion discrete from the first, and he explained why this is not a bac. you might see some bac in a heterogenous tumor, you might see some bac along with adeno and large cell, but that does not mean it evolved from anything. and remember i asked dr. cerfolio: "where does it start? how can you tell us where it starts?" and he said: "no one knows, only the good lord knows," is what he said. and that is the pathology. and, finally, we have the report of the radiation oncologist. and the radiation oncologist, what he was doing was he was cutting and pasting from the pathology report, but then when he did not cut and paste, he referred to that second lesion that we just saw that it was a poorly differentiated carcinoma, non-oat cell type similar to the adenocarcinomatous differentiated lesion. so when he was not cutting and pasting, he said the same thing, this was an adenocarcinoma, not a bac. so certainly more likely than not, this was not a bac. there is no doubt this was not a bac. anyone who thinks that maybe he had this bac just lingering and nobody knew because they are so slow growing. remember dr. cerfolio said: these are indolent, slow-growing, nonaggressive tumors, that when he sees them, and he is seen a lot, he does not do anything, he watches them. and like he said in this case, if david ellsworth, that is all he had was a bac, he would be sitting here today, because he would have lived a long time, because these are nonaggressive tumors. so if you think there might have been this bac lingering for many years, look at this. david ellsworth was getting tested. so we know in 1993 they tested his left lung. they found no fungus, everything was negative for tb. do not you think at that time they might have seen another growth if there was a bac? they did not see anything. everything was negative. so there is no lingering bac that nobody knew about that was just lying there. and, finally, just some of the things that dr. cerfolio said. of course you are to consider all of the testimony, but this is just some of them. and what did dr. cerfolio say? "bac, usually in middle-aged women who do not smoke." and his testimony was in all of the patients he has, he has never had a man with a bac. and dr. okun, in response to one of your questions, said, "bacs are commonly found more in women than in men." without treatment of a bac, how long can a person live? they can go forever. when you are treating someone with cancer, is it the case where a person's lung cancer is always either a squamous cell, an adeno, or some other type exclusively? and his answer was: no, that is what makes lung cancer -- and it should be "unusual" -- if you really look under the microscope, it is almost always heterogeneous. it is got all of these things there. what is your opinion with regard to both of these cancers and their contribution to the death, in this case, of mr. ellsworth? i think both the squamous cell that was growing through the ribs and was very aggressive and growing through arteries, and the adenocarcinoma that metastasized to the lymph nodes, both of those together took his life. that is dr. cerfolio's opinion. you have no question about addiction in this case. there is no question about the medical causation this not being a bac. how, then, is addiction a legal cause of the disease? and remember what dr. o'brien said. when you are addicted, it causes you to smoke more cigarettes; when you smoke more cigarettes, you get more toxins; when you get more toxins, you have more of a risk for developing an illness. and in this case, that is exactly what happened to david ellsworth. he was addicted to the nicotine in the cigarettes. it compelled him to smoke more than he would, he developed, he got more toxins from inhalation of these toxins, which ultimately caused his lung cancer, resulted in his lung cancer, and he died. that is class membership. so in answer to question number 1 on the verdict form: "was mr. ellsworth addicted to smoking cigarettes containing nicotine; and, if so, was such addiction a legal cause of his lung cancer?" the answer is beyond doubt, not just more likely than not, it is beyond doubt here, yes. "was david ellsworth's death legally caused by lung cancer that was caused by smoking cigarettes manufactured by r.j. reynolds tobacco company?" well, the evidence in this case was that the only cigarettes david ellsworth smoked were manufactured by r.j. reynolds tobacco company, or subsidiaries that became r.j. reynolds tobacco company. lucky strikes we have evidence he smoked, viceroys we have evidence he smoked, winstons we have evidence he smoked. nothing more, all rjr products. the cigarettes, if they killed him, were cigarettes manufactured by r.j. reynolds. the answer to question number 2, obviously that is yes. the next thing that you have to consider then is what we call the reliance element. and what i want to do is once we prove class membership, remember, you are now entitled to consider the engle findings. they are binding on you, we did not need to prove any of these facts independently. and so you know, smoking cigarettes causes lung cancer, does not cause bac, does not cause bac. there was not a bac in this case. that cigarette -- that nicotine in cigarettes is addictive. the fact that the cigarettes manufactured by r.j. reynolds are what killed david ellsworth, we have demonstrated that there has been negligence and the strict liability we have proved. so those two claims, done. you do not need to consider them again. what else do we have to do? for reliance. we know, because of the engle findings, that defendant concealed or omitted material information not otherwise known or available, knowing that the material was false and misleading, or failed to disclose material fact concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes, or both. and that defendant agreed to conceal, agreed to conceal and omit information regarding the health effects of cigarettes or their addictive nature with the intention that smokers and the public would rely on this information to their detriment. so let us talk about reliance. what we do know from the evidence in this case is that r.j. reynolds had more information about their product than david ellsworth did. r.j. reynolds, for a long time, knew that their product would cause lung cancer, and david ellsworth did not. r.j. reynolds knew for a long time what their product contained, what chemicals, what toxins, what was in their cigarette; and we have no evidence that david ellsworth knew that. and so we know as a given, r.j. reynolds had more information about their cigarettes, and they concealed information about their cigarettes. we know, number two, that david ellsworth was exposed to mass media. we know david ellsworth was exposed to radio, we know david ellsworth was exposed to television when he was a kid, in the '40s and the '50s, and we know david ellsworth would have seen commercials for cigarettes on television. we know he would have heard commercials for cigarettes on radio. we know he did because his brother said he did, because his brother, richard, said they remembered, they would sit together, listen to the radio at the house, they would hear commercials, and, in fact, richard ellsworth remembers the lucky strike commercials and to this day still remembers the jingles. he still remembers the lsmft, "lucky strike means fine tobacco." even today he remembers that jingle. why do you think so? because they probably heard that a lot back in the day. and what did he say? he smoked luckys, his brother, david, smoked lucky strikes. clearly david ellsworth got the message. he heard something. he started smoking lucky strikes. we also know that david ellsworth smoked viceroys. we know viceroys, at one time, was a popular cigarette. we know david ellsworth smoked winstons. we know at one time winston was the leading selling cigarette. david ellsworth got the message somewhere. we know he was exposed to mass media. and you also heard, you listened to his deposition, and you saw robert heimann, this representative, this president from american tobacco company, which is now rjr. and what did robert heimann say? robert heimann said: "we spend all this money, millions of dollars on advertising our products because we want people to buy them." that is what he said. and he also said: "we spent all this money, we want people to buy cigarettes, we want them to smoke a lot of cigarettes, and we want them to rely on our advertisements. we want them to rely on our advertisements." and that is what david ellsworth did. he did everything r.j. reynolds asked him to do. he saw these ads on television. he saw these ads that were pitched by famous actors and actresses. he saw these ads that were pitched by athletes that people looked up to. he was exposed to all of this information, and he did everything that r.j. reynolds wanted him to do. he started smoking young, he smoked a lot, and he smoked for a long time. and you know what they want? you know what r.j. reynolds wants right now? they want to be able to come up here and say: ladies and gentlemen, david ellsworth did everything we wanted him to do, but he should have known we were lying. he trusted us. it is too late for that. it is too late, at this juncture, to say that to you. because at the time they were feeding him this information, they wanted him to trust in what they were saying. only now they want you to believe that david ellsworth should have known better as a kid and not believe what he saw because they were -- because the tobacco companies were lying to him. and so even when david ellsworth, at some point had to find out that cigarettes were dangerous, well, herein lies the problem. david ellsworth was addicted, david ellsworth's brain had changed, david ellsworth could not stop smoking, david ellsworth was compelled to smoke. and we know since 1980, that the tobacco industry, including r.j. reynolds, knew that the entire matter of addiction is the most potent weapon a prosecuting attorney could have in a lung cancer cigarette case. why? because they knew it then and they know it now, we cannot defend continued smoking as free choice if the person was addicted. pretty powerful in 1980. so not only did david ellsworth rely on what you saw, not only did he get the message, but by the time he might have found out the truth, he was addicted, and you cannot defend free choice when a person is addicted. he was addicted and could not trust them. so the question you have to ask is: what happens if the tables were turned? what happens if this climate of normalcy did not exist back then? what happens if cigarettes were not normal behavior when david ellsworth was a kid? what happens if the cigarette companies, like r.j. reynolds, had provided what they knew about their products back then when david ellsworth was a kid? what happens if they were honest with the public when david ellsworth was a kid? what happens if there were restrictions on smoking when david ellsworth was a kid, because it was known at that time that smoking was dangerous? what happens if parents were more vigilant because they knew about the dangers because rjr was honest back then? what would happen if teachers were more vigilant because they knew about the dangers of smoking because rjr was honest back then? the question is: if all of these things were going on back then, would this kid have started smoking, and with his intelligence? you know the answer is no. everyone says he is smart. he did not have that back then. he did not have that back then because rjr was not being honest with him. that is what reliance is. that is all you have to do is reliance. if the tables were turned and this information was out there, would the man -- would the kid have smoked? and it is the same exact thing with the conspiracy. so the first question is -- that just goes to the reliability of r.j. reynolds -- did david ellsworth reasonably rely, to his detriment, on any statement made by r.j. reynolds tobacco company, which concealed or omitted material facts not otherwise know or available to him concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes; and, if so, was such reliance a legal cause of his death? and we know in the '50s and '40s when david ellsworth was a kid, and if he was exposed to these tv ads and if he was exposed to these ads that were on the radio, with these beautiful, famous people pitching r.j. reynolds products, beautiful women and athletes pitching these products that are somehow safe and good and beneficial, and all the time making these representations about their product, you never heard them during that time say: by the way, these are going to kill you. by the way, you are going to get addicted and not stop. that is the information they were not telling him back then. so that he did rely to his detriment because he became addicted and he died. it is the same exact information with the conspiracy, except the difference is, it is not just r.j. reynolds, it is r.j. reynolds and all the other tobacco companies that joined together on december 14th, 1953, at the plaza hotel, and they decided: we are not going to tell the truth to the public, we are going to create doubt for the next 50 years so that all these consumers, like david ellsworth, will continue to smoke our products. and it is the same reliance, it is the same argument, and it is the same but-for. if only on december 14th, 1953, the cigarette companies had decided, it might hurt our business, but we have to be truthful with our consumers and our shareholders, it might hurt our bottom dollar, it might hurt our profit, but it might save lives, maybe we just would not be here today. that is what reliance is. so on that question on the conspiracy, yes. individually? yes. next we talk about comparative fault. who is to blame in this case? does david ellsworth have fault? does r.j. reynolds have fault? that is what we have to decide. and we are going to start with december 14 of 1953, because that is when the tobacco companies, including r.j. reynolds, got together and they made a decision what they were going to do in response to all of this negative information about cigarettes, about this health scare, as they call it. you heard dr. proctor talk about this, this was the frank statement to smokers, january of 1954 -- can everyone see that? and this was what they shared with the public in every major newspaper in the country, and they made promises to the public what they were going to do in response to this health scare that were alarming people, because at this time, cigarette sales were dropping. people, all of a sudden, were not buying cigarettes with the same frequency they were before this health scare, because there was information out in the public about the dangers of cigarettes. and, perhaps, if the cigarette companies, including r.j. reynolds, had acted differently, enough people would have known early on instead of the '70s and '80s and '90s when it was too late. and so what were some of the promises that r.j. reynolds made with the other tobacco companies? well, one was that we accept an interest in people's health as a basic responsibility paramount to every other consideration in our business. that was a big promise they made to a lot of people. that due to this health scare, we are very interested in your health, and we are going to do everything we can to make sure we get to the bottom of this problem. that was a promise they made publicly. now, at that time, we did not have the benefit of their internal confidential documents, no one did except for them. those confidential documents were secret and no one knew then, no one knew in the '60s, no one knew in the '70s, no one knew in the '80s, no one knew until the '90s what exactly they did, what exactly the tobacco companies knew. so let us just see how this they accepted an interest in people's health from 1953 on. in 1953, december, there was a forwarding memo that resulted from this meeting, and what do we know from that forwarding memo? that the tobacco companies, including r.j. reynolds, knew that their products were dangerous, and they knew that they were addictive, because the research directors made comments that were recorded. and what were these comments? fortunate for us -- not sadly, fortunate -- fortunate for us, cigarettes are a habit they cannot break. they accepted an interest in people's health. they know that their products are addictive, that cigarettes are a habit they cannot break. boy, would not it be wonderful if our company was the first to produce a cancer-free cigarette? not only in '53 did they know that their product caused cancer, that it was addictive, but they were happy about it. and how were they going to show an interest in people's health when they knew this information? by not telling anybody, by keeping it to themselves. that was in 1953. we move on to 1964 when the surgeon general's report came out, when the surgeon general's report was going to come out and the tobacco companies had wind of it, what did philip morris do? all their concern was for the public's health was: we have got to give smokers a psychological crutch to continue smoking cigarettes. that was the interest they had in people's health. in 1972, claude teague, the roper proposal -- this was a tobacco institute memo, not claude teague -- this is almost 20 years after they began this campaign of doubt, promising they accepted an interest in people's health. what did they say? their strategy was brilliantly conceived and executed, and what did it consist of? creating doubt about the health charge. that was the interest that they promised that they were going to take in people's health. but there is more. we move on. they promised: we accept an interest in people's health. and yet they knew, in 1972, that their product was just a dosage of nicotine. they were in the business of selling nicotine. and they accepted that and they knew that. and their accepting an interest in people's health consisted in the fact that they not only knew that their product was addictive, they not only knew it but rjr was happy, they were downright happy that their product was habituating and unique. and they were happy because they were going to get a lot of smokers who were not going to be able to quit smoking their product and would be smoking their product for a long time; and when they die, they would be replaced by younger smokers. that is the interest they showed in the public. so they knew in 1972, 20 years after this conspiracy on which they entered that their product was addictive, they accepted an interest in people's health, according to their credo, and they did not tell a soul. they accepted an interest in people's health, and in 1982, they realized many but not most of those who would like to stop smoking are unable to do so. most people they knew could not stop smoking, could not stop smoking. and they also said, if people started to be able to quit, they would go out of business, because people smoke cigarettes for nicotine. and they were worried because they were all of a sudden getting wind that there was development of these new techniques to help people stop smoking their products. and what did they say? if somehow this happens, what can happen? we might go out of business, because people smoke for nicotine, despite what the defense expert on addiction said. and what else? they would have to find a way to eliminate the desire for smokers to stop smoking. they want smokers to keep smoking their product. they accepted an interest in people's health in 1953, and this is what they were saying in 1982. and robert heimann. you saw robert heimann during his video deposition from december 19th of 1986. and what did he say: congress is wrong in requiring these warnings. is that correct? we do not think they are justified. now this is the president, chief executive of american tobacco company, which became r.j. reynolds tobacco company, and to show they are accepting an interest in people's health, when he is asked about the warnings on the cigarettes, he says they are not justified. that is how much they had an interest in people's health. secondly, the promise that they made, are the credo statement that we included in the frank statement was: "we believe the products we make are not injurious to health." they were telling the public, have no fear, we do not think our products are dangerous. you could rely on us. well, was that the truth? we know that is not. 1953, before this meeting at the plaza hotel, claude teague, the research chemist at rjr, did a survey of all this cancer research, and what did he conclude in his paper? studies of clinical data tend to confirm the relationship between heavy and prolonged tobacco smoke and incidence. and they knew it. and yet, what did they say to the public? we believe the products we make are not injurious to health. they lied. here is the forwarding memo again. not only were they aware that this was bad, that it could cause cancer, but they were joking, would not it be -- boy, would not it be wonderful if we made a cancer-free cigarette? of course we are not going to tell the public right now. and they did not. it is fortunate for us, cigarettes are a habit they cannot break. and here's something else in the forwarding memo, knowing full well the dangers of their product, and denying that their products were not -- that do not cause health problems, what they wanted to do, most important, how to free millions of americans from the guilty fear that is going to arise deep in their biological depths regardless of any pooh-poohing logic every time they light a cigarette. so their interest was not on health, their interest was not on safety, their interest was to how to convince the public to do not fear any health consequences from smoking our product. and they also acknowledged, in 1963, internally, secretly, confidentially that they know their product is addictive, and they know they are in the business of selling nicotine, and that is why they made cigarettes, and that is why cigarettes were popular. and that is why we know they were lying to the public when they said we believe the products we make are not injurious to health. and we talk about fault here. you get the impression that this is not david ellsworth's fault. this is not the man's fault. this is r.j. reynold's conduct, and you-all promised me early on in jury selection, you would not only consider the choices that david ellsworth made, you would consider the choices that r.j. reynolds made. these are some of the choices that we are considering right now. another example, 1972. again, without nicotine, no one is going to smoke. no one has ever become a cigarette smoker by smoking cigarettes without nicotine. i mean, why on earth would someone smoke if they did not get the nicotine? they would not get the feel-good effect. they would not get the satisfaction. they would not be addicted. what do they think about their cigarettes? what did r.j. reynolds think of their cigarettes? that it was a supply of nicotine, that it was a dispenser for a dose unit of nicotine. that is all they thought. to the detriment of the public, including david ellsworth when they said: these products are not harmful, they are not harmful, folks, trust us. only now, they want you to think, david, you should not have trusted us, you knew we were lying then. very few consumers -- they knew in 1978 -- very few consumers are aware of the effects of nicotine, its addictive nature that nicotine is a poison, it is a poison and yet their public stance was: they are not injurious to health. and dr. o'brien, even he said, when he got involved in researching nicotine, it was not until late, because no one knew about it. it was in the '70s, the '80s, that is when he got involved. he was involved in heroin and cocaine abuse, but nicotine became an interest of his in the '70s and the '80s, just like the memo said, people are not aware, if they were aware, maybe they would try to quit or maybe they would not start. what else did they promise in the frank statement? we always have and always will cooperate closely with those whose task it is to safeguard the public health. i mean, how else to ensure confidence from the public by promising these things? we are going to cooperate fully with anyone whose task it is to safeguard the public health. that is a promise they made. would not the public feel comfortable with that promise? and so what does the evidence show in this case? number one, it showed in 1964, when they did not cooperate with the surgeon general's report, they ridiculed it. that was in 1964. in 1972, when the surgeon general's report was issued, they ridiculed it. now, publicly they were going to cooperate, and yet they ridiculed it. robert heimann testified: what do you think of the '64 report? you, being his company. i would use the term misguided. and if he was misguided, then i take it that your opinion is that he is wrong? talking about the surgeon general. i was simply trying to be polite about it. all right. but not being polite about it, in your opinion, is he wrong? dead wrong. that is what mr. heimann said, "dead wrong." and yet they promised the public, and david ellsworth, we are going to cooperate closely with those whose task it is to safeguard the public health. what else did they promise in the frank statement? they were going to hire the most reputable scientists, they were going to grant money, they were going to do research, they were going to hire the best and the brightest, and they were going to create this research committee called the tirc, the tobacco industry research committee. and, folks, they were going to get to the bottom of the problem. that is what they told the public in their frank statement. they were going to do research; they have got this committee that they are going to employ with the best scientists. and what did they do? we know what they did. in 1963, brown & williamson, which is rjr now, the tirc cannot, in my opinion, provide the vehicle for such research. it was conceived as a public relations gesture. it has functioned as a public relations operation. the promise they made was: we are going to get to the bottom of this with the best research scientists that we have; and, yet, they were nothing more than a public relations gimmick. 1978, 25 years later, what do we learn from the council for tobacco research meeting, which was just the same as the tobacco institute industry research committee? the tirc was set up as an industry shield in 1954. they knew it well back in '63, they knew it 25 years later, and yet they assured the public that they were going to hire all of these people to do research, all of these reputable scientists to do research. and like dr. proctor said, they did do research. there was billions of dollars spent on research, except it had nothing to do with smoking and health. and to the extent that some of these research projects did concern smoking and health, dr. proctor referred to that as nothing more than a leakage. and those institutions would not get grants anymore, those institutions would not get grants anymore, those colleges would not get grants anymore. do you remember that? that was the end of them for doing something like leaking information that might be truthful to the public. and, finally, what did they promise? this statement, this frank statement to smokers is being issued because we believe that people are entitled to know where we stand on this matter and what we intend to do about it. they wanted the people to be assured, look, we are not going to lead you astray, we are going to tell you exactly what we believe and where we stand on this matter of your safety and of your health. and what do we know? we know that they knew their product was dangerous, they knew that they were selling nicotine, we know that they were aware that consumers who were using their products were not aware of the effects of nicotine. and we also knew from robert heimann: would you blame a person for smoking two packs a day? would you? no. you would not fault it for smoking one pack or two packs; is that correct? i think so. and that is what they are going to do. they want people to know where they stand. well, we know where the american tobacco company and r.j. reynolds stood. we want people to smoke a lot of cigarettes; we want people to smoke two packs a day; we want people to smoke as much as they want to smoke, because we are not going to tell them the truth. and, finally, 1994, 1994, at a time when david ellsworth is dying of cancer representative waxman is convening hearings, and under oath, each of the major executives of the tobacco companies, including rjr, swore, no, our products do not cause cancer. no, we do not believe our products are addictive. 1994 they are still saying this. and it was not until 2000 that they finally admitted the truth. so we talk about fault. we talk about fault. where in here is david ellsworth's fault? where in here did david ellsworth do anything? i've got some examples that i want to share with you that we will talk about. let us talk about fault more, let us ask some questions, because the defendants are going to have a chance to talk to you -- mr. persons: your honor, before he moves into this next argument -- the court: i'm sorry? mr. persons: before opposing counsel moves into this next argument, i would like to make an objection. the court: okay. let us go sidebar. (thereupon, the following proceedings were held at side bar:) the court: i believe this is the chart that we talked about. mr. persons: that is right, the fault chart, and i just wanted to renew that objection and ask for a continuing objection so i do not have to keep doing this. the court: that is great. you can do that. and you started about 10 after 11, i think, so as soon as you are done, i think we should take a lunch break, and -- and you come back and you give yours, and your rebuttal closing. (thereupon, the sidebar was concluded and the following proceedings were held in open court:) mr. kaiser: so the defense is going to have an opportunity to talk to you, and i'm going to pose some questions because you are going to have to listen intently to see how they are going to respond to these questions. and you know what? they will not. they will not. you know why? they do not want to talk about their conduct. they have not in this case once, have they? they have made this case into a david ellsworth case, for one reason, because if they talk about this conduct, it is not going to be good, and they will not do it. they will not do it. mark my word. every one of these questions, wait for their response, wait for their answers, see if you get one. and if you do not get one, you know what that means? that is fault. they cannot talk about it. they cannot talk about their fault. they want to talk about mr. ellsworth. he did not quit. quit is just simple. he just did not throw his cigarette packs away. he did not throw his ashtrays away. he did not want to quit. he enjoyed smoking with coffee, he enjoyed smoking while drinking, he enjoyed smoking while eating, he enjoyed smoking doing every activity he was going to engage in because the man smoked a lot of cigarettes. when r.j. reynolds knew of the dangers of smoking in the '50s, like i've shown you, by 1953 they knew. they had a choice and the question is: why did you choose not to tell the public? why? see what they tell you when they get up here and tell you why they did not. and write in your notes when they do not tell you why they are admitting fault. now, when they did not tell david ellsworth or anybody else about the dangers of their products, when they knew it, is david ellsworth at fault? certainly not. it is like the car analogy, that car hypothetical. when the seller sells that defective car, they do not tell you about it, is it the buyer's fault? of course not. but in this case it is different, because at some point, i'm not going to deny it, david ellsworth had to have learned that the product he was smoking was dangerous, but the problem was, it was too late. the man's brain had changed. he had millions of memories in his brain by no fault of his own. we cannot hold him at fault for that. the evidence will not let you. mr. persons: objection, your honor. the court: grounds? mr. persons: objection to that argument. the court: okay. (thereupon, the following proceedings were held at side bar:) mr. persons: here what we have now is he is going beyond the realm of what the court said that it would permit him to do when we raised these arguments this morning. the court said, well, you can use that but you have got to offer some explanation, put it in context; and now he is saying that each of these, if we do not respond to them, then that is an admission of fault. that is out of bounds. that gets into the realm of calling into question the way we are defending our case, and that is impermissible. mr. kaiser: i was commenting on the evidence. they are not going to be able to respond to the evidence. the court: okay, that objection is overruled, but it is noted for the record. thank you. (thereupon, the sidebar was concluded and the following proceedings were held in open court:) mr. kaiser: question number 1. question number 2: when r.j. reynolds knew of the addictive nature of smoking in the 1950s, and we know they did, why did not they tell the public? why did they choose not to, and is that david ellsworth's fault, for their negligence? when they knew it and they did not tell him, that is their fault, not ours; and i'm telling you, we will not accept responsibility for it. david ellsworth does not accept responsibility for not having been told in the '50s, when he was a young kid, what r.j. reynolds knew. listen to how they address that question, how they answer it. i bet they will not. why did r.j. reynolds choose not to voluntarily warn the public and david ellsworth about the dangers of smoking with warnings on the packs in the 1950s? you know, those warnings on the packs, that was mandated by congress in 1966, not the cigarette companies. well, in the '50s no one was mandating anything. and you heard mr. kreiner yesterday ask his witness, every time that mr. ellsworth picked up a pack of cigarettes, he would have seen the warnings or read them. how many times? assuming the man is going to look at the warnings when he picks up a pack of cigarettes, who on earth does? well, maybe if the cigarette companies were honest in the '50s, and they voluntarily told people their product was addictive, and put warnings on the packages themselves, david ellsworth would have been in a position of maybe being able to quit then because maybe his brain was not so changed at that time. maybe he would not have started, maybe he was not a regular smoker, maybe he had the ability then, if he knew the truth, to stop with no difficulty, but he did not get that chance because they did not tell him the truth. why did r.j. reynolds choose not to voluntarily warn the public about the addictive nature of nicotine with warnings on their packs in the '50s? same question. they knew it, but the answer is clear, they thought first about profit than safety. that is clear. that is clear as can be. is that david ellsworth's fault that you had a company that was worried more and concerned more about their profit than safety? no. no. why did r.j. reynolds normalize and glamorize its cigarettes in advertising campaigns using famous actors and actresses, athletes during the '30s, '40s and '50s? what do these types of advertising campaigns appeal to? what do they appeal to? when someone looks at an athlete pitching a cigarette product, when someone looks at a beautiful actress pitching a cigarette product, when someone looks at an actor pitching a cigarette product, when someone looks at a politician pitching a cigarette product, do not you think kids might be vulnerable to that type of advertising, kids like david ellsworth whose brain has not been developed yet? and yet, why did they continue to do that, especially in the '50s when they knew their products were bad? why did they continue to pitch their products instead of saying, by the way, these are glamorous but they will kill you, too? and then the onus is on david ellsworth, but it is not now because they did not tell him, and we do not take fault or responsibility for their negligence. why did r.j. reynolds choose not to voluntarily warn the public about the dangers of their cigarettes in the early '60s before congress mandated those warnings? why did not they do it then? by the '60s, rjr will tell you, there was more information out to the general public so that everybody would have known. dr. proctor did not tell you that. remember what dr. proctor said? look, this took a long time before the public actually knew about the risk of smoking and the addictive nature of smoking. even though there was information out there, the tobacco industry responded in kind. they spent billions of dollars to advertise, they had executives talking on news shows, they had all sorts of these publications, and they had newsletters, they were reaching millions and millions of people with their strategic campaign that began in 1953. so this information might have been out there, but certainly it was overburdened by the information that was being put out there by the tobacco companies in their denialist campaign. and that is why you have got people like dr. o'brien saying, people did not know until the '70s and the '80s. and so maybe if r.j. reynolds had chosen when they knew their products were dangerous, and in the '60s when they knew even more about their products, maybe david ellsworth would have been young enough to be able to quit then, but he did not get the chance. the same thing on addiction. why did not they -- why did rjr, when they made their choice, do i tell or do i not tell the public, they chose not to warn the public about their addictive cigarettes. they did not voluntarily put warnings on their packs in the early '60s. they had that choice to make, and they did not make that choice. and perhaps if david ellsworth was given that choice back then, to either smoke then or heed the warning in the '60s, he was able to quit because his brain was not so changed yet. but he did not get that chance; and for that reason, we do not take responsibility for r.j. reynolds' behavior. why did r.j. reynolds choose to conspire with other tobacco companies and create doubt about the health risks of smoking for 50 years, despite knowing its cigarettes were deadly? why did r.j. reynolds join these other people instead of saying: you know what, our responsibility is to tell our shareholders and our consumers about our products. but they chose not to, and they chose not to for 50 years; and now they want to come in here and tell you: david ellsworth is to blame because he did not know -- he did not believe we were lying back then, he should have known, he trusted us. it is too late for that. why did r.j. reynolds choose not to reduce nicotine amounts in their cigarettes to levels that would not sustain addiction when it had that capability well before david ellsworth started smoking? why did not they do it? they had a chance to reduce nicotine so that people could smoke as many cigarettes as they wanted and they would not get addicted, so that the blame would be totally on them if they did not quit. because if they were not addicted, if there was not enough nicotine to cause addiction, they could quit at any time they want. and so knowing that formula, for a long time, before david ellsworth even started to smoke, they knew it. that is their fault. that is not ours. and you heard evidence in this case. they actually tried it later on. and it was not commercially feasible, because people did not want to smoke a non-nicotinized cigarette. well, the problem is they waited so long to do that. had they done it in the '40s, had they done it in the '50s when all of these people were starting to smoke, maybe they would not have those numbers of people starting to smoke again. therein lies the problem. and we do not take responsibility for r.j. reynolds' negligence in not reducing nicotine way back when, when cigarettes were first becoming popular. why did r.j. reynolds take this public position about cooperating with public health authorities in 1964 when they knew their products were bad and they did not share all of the information they could about what they knew with the surgeon general? why did not they do that? just think. maybe if they shared all the information they knew in '64, maybe if they shared all the information with public health officials way back when, maybe it would have been a more restrictive environment way back when, so that people could not smoke in restaurants, so that people could not smoke in public buildings, so that people could not smoke on public buses, so that people could not smoke in a movie theater, so that people could not smoke on airplanes. just think, if that had happened back in the '50s or the '60s, there would be a lot of lives that would have been saved. but that did not happen because r.j. reynolds chose, back in the '50s and the '60s, not to cooperate with public health officials. why did r.j. reynolds urge people to switch to filtered cigarettes rather than quit smoking when they knew that filters were not effective, when they knew that in the '50s? and this is another example of how david ellsworth relied on the information that was being put out there. because we know that david ellsworth smoked lucky strike cigarettes that were a nonfiltered cigarette. and at some point when he switched to winstons and viceroys, they were filtered cigarettes. and we know that the cigarette companies, including r.j. reynolds, advertised filtered cigarettes as being safer without really telling people it was safe, because they did not want to admit that they knew their products were dangerous. but they pushed filters. they pushed filters to such an extent that unfiltered cigarettes were not even part of the market anymore. maybe 3 percent of the public were smoking unfiltered cigarettes after a period of time; that is because everybody in their right mind, instead of quitting cigarettes, was buying into this advertising campaign that perhaps you should switch to a filter that takes out all these bad things. and so just think, maybe if they were honest with david ellsworth back then, and instead of pitching filtered cigarettes that they knew did not work, they would say: you would better think about quitting or smoking responsibly because nothing is going to help. so instead of encouraging people to maybe quit, they put filters on there so that these people, rather than quit, would smoke filters, thinking it was taking the bad stuff out, when r.j. reynolds knew it was not. if the tobacco industry, which was partly funded by r.j. reynolds, you have heard, if they maintained that since 1980, it cannot argue free choice when the smoker is addicted, then why does david ellsworth have any fault? remember, what the defendants want to do with this case, is harp on david ellsworth not trying hard enough to quit. they want to concentrate on his quitting behavior. you need to concentrate on his starting behavior, because if david ellsworth had been given truthful information before he ever started smoking, or even when he had started, it was early enough to where he could have quit, we would not be here today. because if he had quit back then, he would not have had enough toxins in his lungs to get lung cancer. but that did not happen. so the defendants want to harp on this quitting, his quitting behavior. it is too late to harp on it because they know they cannot argue free choice when he was addicted. and so the only possibility of david ellsworth's fault in this case, ladies and gentlemen, is: did he try hard enough to quit? and we know from his daughter kerri, he told her, he did try, and he was unsuccessful, and he was trying to suck on lollipops and could not do it. now, if he did not try 10,000 times, does that make it his fault? if this man tried twice and he was not successful, what did dr. o'brien say? he said: that is evidence to someone -- and dr. o'brien, in his mind, he said when someone knows that they have to quit for some reason and they make a concerted effort to try and quit for some reason, and they are unsuccessful in quitting, they are addicted and they could not quit. and like dr. o'brien said, "this man probably could not quit because of his addiction." so what do we do about fault? the clerk: one hour lapsed, counsel. mr. kaiser: i submit to you, ladies and gentlemen, that the fault in this case, the brunt of the fault in this case, the totality of the fault in this case, is on r.j. reynolds, because of his conduct that we have talked. about. if they had been truthful in the '50s, if they had been truthful in the '60s, perhaps david ellsworth's life would have been saved, but it was not. and for that, we do not accept responsibility. and so when you are asked to apportion fault in this case, and you are asked: please state the percentage of any fault that was a legal cause of david ellsworth's death that you charge to david ellsworth? respectfully, based on the evidence in this case, zero. zero. and r.j. reynolds, because of the evidence in this case, one hundred percent. because if they had acted earlier and responsible, we would not be here today. but they did what they wanted to do and david ellsworth bought into everything they wanted to do, and he smoked their cigarettes and he smoked them for a long time, and he smoked them hard, and he got addicted and could not quit. that is why they are responsible and david ellsworth is not. now we get to damages. there are two types of damages in this case. if you find, and we contend that david ellsworth died from adenocarcinoma and squamous carcinoma, and you find that we have met our burden, by the greater weight of the evidence, that kerri ellsworth is entitled to recover for the loss of support and services from her father. you heard the testimony of dr. raffa, and he talked about this amount of support and services. and you heard the testimony of kerri, and you heard the testimony of others, and what did dr. raffa tell you? dr. raffa computed this on a conservative basis, and he came up to this figure of $1,299,461. that is for the loss of support and services. the loss of support is not very much, because he was only able to obtain certain social security information, and david ellsworth did not have that much reportable income. that is why that number is low. the services for the period of the expected lifetime of david ellsworth, if he had not died, amounts to $1,254,376. and remember dr. raffa, the way he did it, he did it in a conservative fashion by getting the market value for the type of care that someone with cerebral palsy would need. that does not mean that you have to accept this figure. you can go higher. and the reason you can is because you can consider the relationship that -- mr. persons: objection, your honor. may we have a sidebar? the court: sure. (thereupon, the following proceedings were held at side bar:) mr. persons: on economic damages, unlike noneconomic damages, you cannot go high up. that is the number he is put out there and that is the number plaintiff is going to have to live with. mr. kaiser: well, dr. raffa testified it was a conservative estimate and because the relationship between kerri and her father is relevant, they might very well say we want to go higher. the court: okay, but i would ask you to clarify that for the jury, it has to be based on the evidence, and if they agree or accept his representation that it is conservative, then that sort of thing, but that is to be based on the evidence. mr. persons: well, based on that, i move for a mistrial. the court: based on what? mr. persons: based on that statement that he made that they must -- they can go higher. i do not know that you can cure that. the court: okay. he can and he will. but thank you. it is overruled. denied. (thereupon, the sidebar was concluded and the following proceedings were held in open court:) mr. kaiser: why do i say he can go higher? because one thing you can do here is you can consider the relationship that kerri had with her father. and remember the testimony of dr. raffa, this was a conservative approach, conservative. and who on earth would have the relationship that kerri had with her father? remember the evidence, the testimony you heard? this was the father who wanted to make sure that his daughter, despite having these infirmities from her cerebral palsy, was treated like a normal kid, like she did not have any disability. he made sure that is the way he treated her. and that is why you heard evidence that he would take her camping and he would take her fishing and he would treat her as any normal part of the family, just like any other normal kid. and he taught her how to bowl. and all of these things for his daughter that he loved, and even kerri said, that was my primary caregiver. that was my father who at a very young age cut the tips out of my shoes because those braces hurt. and that is her first memory of her caregiver, her father, cutting the toes out because it hurt her at two years old, or three years old, when she had to wear those heavy braces that were painful. that is her recollection. and she talked about all of these things that she would do with her father trying to make her normal. and she tried -- she talked about the fact that she was able to confide in him, even more so than she was with her mother. like she said, i could tell him anything. i could talk to him about anything, and she did. and so when you look at this conservative number that dr. raffa testified about, consider also, based on the evidence, the relationship aspect and you might decide that, no, dr. raffa was too conservative, we want to go higher. now, this is on damages for support and services if you find, in this case, that david ellsworth died from adenocarcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma. there is an alternative. if you have any qualms in this case, if you think, you know what, maybe he did have a bac. the inquiry does not end. there is an alternative damages here. if you are confused for a minute, if you are uncertain for a minute about his cause of death. if you think there was a bac, well do not even worry any further than that, because you are entitled then to consider the survivorship claim in this case. and that is, david ellsworth's survivors, david ellsworth's pain and suffering while he was diagnosed with squamous cell carcinoma and while he suffered with squamous cell carcinoma. and you are entitled to consider that. and you remember the evidence in this case. first of all of, there is no dispute, this is a certainty, david ellsworth had squamous cell carcinoma. it is a certainty that this was an aggressive cancer. this was in his ribs. this was in his chest wall. this is what was causing his pain that prompted him to finally go see a physician, because he was also coughing up blood. and dr. cerfolio said, "the coughing up blood was because this was an aggressive tumor that invaded his artery." now, the pathologist used that word, not me. the pathologist did not use the word enter, the pathologist said, "this cancer invaded a major artery." not like dr. okun said, "well, it did not go around, it grew inside and clotted." no. this was an invasion, like a war, it invaded an artery. dr. okun said, "one of the ways that cancer spreads from one place in the body to another is via vascular invasion, blood vessel invasion"; and that is what this was called -- even dr. okun admitted -- this was called a "vascular invasion." it invaded this major artery. it caused this man to be coughing up blood, it caused this man to have terrible pain, it caused this man to go to a doctor and he was finally diagnosed with cancer. and he was diagnosed with squamous cell cancer and he suffered. and he suffered miserably. only he knows how bad he suffered, but he did. and you heard from family members. you heard this debilitating cancer. you heard from dr. cerfolio what this does to you. it took this strapping, 180-pound man and took him down to nothing, to 140-pounds so that when his son, rickey mayou came to see him, who had not seen him in ten years, he could not believe what his father looked like. he had shrunk into nothing. this is this horrible disease process. this man could not eat, this man could not lay down, this man had to sleep sitting up in a chair. this is how he spent the last 13 months of his life, in constant pain. and you can look at the medical records and see, even the pain pills were not helping this man. he was taking different kinds of pain pills and it did not help. and dr. cerfolio explained to you, when they went in there and they took his ribs out, to try and get this cancer, that is one of the most painful operations that a person could endure. and he explained, they go in there and they take this huge tool and they chop his ribs. and they chop these ribs to take them out and he had to recover from that. and he said that is extremely painful. and his family members said he did not recover from that. and he still had to go through these other tests and having things stuck down his throat and going through radiation, which in and of itself is another problem. so you get it from the evidence, this man suffered quite a bit in 13 months. so the question then becomes: how do you quantify that? how do you put a damage amount on that amount of pain and suffering? and there is a way to do it, and i'm going to suggest a way to do it. i'm going to suggest a way to do this, and i say suggest because you can do a number of things. you can say that is a good suggestion and you might go along with it; you can say, no, we have our own method that we are going to employ; or you might do a hybrid and say you will take part of mine and you can do what you want. and my suggestion is this: we live on units of time. everything we do in our life is based on time. david ellsworth had a certain time that he lived. we sleep certain hours, seven hours, eight hours, we get up and go to work, six, seven, eight hours. everything is done on hours. sporting events are done in minutes and hours. college kids take classes 12 to 15 hours. everything we do, that is why we watch -- wear a watch -- is based on increments of time. and so one of the things that you can do is equate this suffering on a time component. what does that mean? people go to their jobs, they get paid by the hour. nurses, they go and they take care of people, they get whatever salary they make, they do their job for how many hours it is, they go home. professors, they teach kids maybe about medicine, they get paid money for doing it, they might enjoy their work. they do their eight hours, they teach for the nine months that school is in session, and then they go home for three months. expert witnesses, they testify, they do a job, they come into court, they testify, they do the best they can, they go home. they testify, they are paid by the hour. athletes, famous people, they are paid huge sums at an hourly rate. they do whatever they have to do, and they do it well and then they go home. well, it is the same thing here, basically. why do i say that? because the evidence here shows that david ellsworth was given a job. david ellsworth, because of his smoking r.j. reynolds cigarettes, was given a job, and that job was to suffer for 13 months before he died. that was his job. he did not ask for that job, he did not apply for that job, he did not want that job, but that job was given to him. would anybody want a job like that? of course not. no one in their right mind would say: sure, i will suffer for 13 months with terrible squamous cell cancer. but that was his lot in life, for 13 months, that was his job because of the cigarettes that he smoked that were manufactured by r.j. reynolds. the lucky strikes, the winstons, the viceroys, all caused his squamous cell carcinoma, and he got this job. that job is not part-time, it was full-time. that job had no vacations. that job had no early retirement. that retirement came when he died. that job had no vacation, that job was 24 hours in the day, he needs to be -- his pain and suffering, the estate needs to be compensated for that. so how do you do it? you do it the same way you do it for anybody else who has a job in this lifetime; and that is you apply a wage, an hourly wage. and what do you apply? and this is my suggestion. and i'm going to show you, there is low range, a medium range and a high range, and this is what you come out with. for the damages for his pain and suffering and mental anguish. below range, take for example what an expert witness might get paid -- mr. persons: objection, your honor. (thereupon, the following proceedings were held at side bar:) mr. persons: it is improper to do a per diem based on what an expert who has testified in the case charges. i object. the court: where are you going with this, because you did not finish your sentence? mr. kaiser: a per diem argument where i am going to suggest a wage that they could imply and that is damage figures. the court: what is the relationship though to the expert witness? mr. kaiser: no basis other than pick it out, he makes his money, does his job, well, let us take that. the court: you are not going to suggest that he should get paid the same amount as an expert witness? mr. kaiser: you know, i'm objecting to this, i gave counsel my slides at 9 o'clock. he knew it was in there, he flagged me and he waits to sandbag me when i am doing my closing argument, and i object to that. mr. persons: that is false. i did not say anything about it because he did not make any reference to expert witness. i saw raw numbers. i did not have a basis for objection. the court: overruled. thank you. (thereupon, the sidebar was concluded and the following proceedings were held in open court:) mr. kaiser: like i said before, you are free to do anything you want to this model. you can take a different amount, you can take different hours, you can do whatever you want. i am merely suggesting what i think is a good approach based on the evidence in this case. and what it shows you, ladies and gentlemen, is at a rate of $650 an hour, times 24 hours, times 395 days, which is 13 months before he died, it amounts to $6,162,000. i say 24 hours because suffering with squamous cell cancer is a 24-hour-a-day job. the median rate, $750 an hour times 24 hours in a day, times the number of days before he died, 395 days, is 7,110,000. and finally, at a higher rate, $850 an hour, times 24 hour, times 395 days, equals $8,058,000. so in total you have got your low range of 6,162,000, your midrange at 7,110,000, and your high range of $8,058,000, and that is your damages. that is compensatory damages. and, finally, before i sit down, there is one other aspect of damages; and that is, the entitlement to punitive damages. compensatory damages, you are considering the pain and suffering of david ellsworth. support and services, you are considering kerri ellsworth. punitive damages, you are not considering the plaintiff, you are considering solely the acts of the defendant. and you have to determine whether or not our evidence, by clear and convincing evidence, supports our entitlement for punitive damages so they can be punished for their actions and to deter future conduct. and i've got examples of what we have proven by clear and convincing evidence that we are entitled to punitive damages in this case. and we have already been over this, so i will be quick. when r.j. reynolds knew about the health risks of smoking and cigarettes, they chose not to tell the public. when they knew it and they made this choice, that is reprehensible. that was intentional. that was not by accident. they wanted -- r.j. reynolds -- they wanted smokers to become addicted to their cigarettes. you have seen the documents. they did not just acknowledge that their product was addictive, they were happy about it. in that claude teague document, remember, "happily for us, it is addictive." how much care did they have for the public, people like david ellsworth, in a situation like that? is that not a reckless indifference to human life when their attitude is: we are happy that it is going to addict these people, because they will be smoking our cigarettes for a long time and they will be lining our pockets with money. that is why we are entitled to punitive damages. r.j. reynolds, they marketed their cigarettes to people in general, but who else -- who else is going to be influenced by these famous people pitching their ads? young people. young people whose brains have not developed. and they know that, they know that young people are going to be impressionable to famous athletes and actors and actresses and politicians; and that is just what they did. when they engaged in a conspiracy to create doubt instead of being honest with the public and not becoming part of this conspiracy. instead, for 50 years they participated in this denialist campaign instead of telling the truth with the american public and david ellsworth. that is another example, by clear and convincing evidence, why we are entitled to punitive damages. r.j. reynolds lied to the public about the health risks of smoking. in 1994, in the waxman committee, they lied about the health risks of smoking. when they made this promise with the frank statement, they lied to the american public in 1953. that is lying when they knew full well their cigarettes were deadly and they were addictive as well. r.j. reynolds lied to the public about nicotine not being addictive. same time period. up to 1994, they did not admit it until 2000. and for that, we should be entitled to punitive damages, because david ellsworth did not have the chance to learn about this stuff from r.j. reynolds, from the people that were selling him the products back in the '50s. millions of people have been harmed from r.j. reynolds' intentional acts. just think, in the '50s, if they had given david ellsworth this information that we have talked about already, what could have happened? but it did not, because of the indifference they have to the american public, because at the expense of health and safety, they were more interested in their bottom dollar. and that is exactly the last reason. r.j. reynolds chose profits over health and safety. and you know that from 1953 forward for the next 50 years where it was more important for them to go on a 50-year public relations campaign instead of a health and safety campaign. and i'm going to wrap it up, ladies and gentlemen, and just ask you one thing: consider the evidence in this case, if you will. please consider the evidence in this case, consider the testimony in this case, and based on that testimony, based on that evidence, we have proven to you by a greater weight of the evidence that r.j. reynolds is responsible for david ellsworth's death. and r.j. reynolds, based on the evidence, needs to compensate the estate and they need to compensate kerri ellsworth. i thank you for your time. mr. kaiser: everyone ready? the panel: yes. mr. kaiser: good afternoon. i will be brief, and i want to just respond to some of the issues that were raised. number one, i want to mention a couple of things about this name you keep hearing, carole mayou. the defense likes to rely on carole mayou. you have read some of her testimony in this trial. and you may recall, carole mayou is the person who recalls listening or hearing cigarette advertisements on tv in the late 4422 '70s, when they had been banned six or seven years before from the airways. this is in her testimony when she was listening and watching a football game, remember, and she swore she saw these tv commercials, but it was about seven years after they were banned from television. so that is the credibility that ms. mayou has on which the defense relies. carole mayou was the only single person whose testimony in this case revealed that david ellsworth smoked doral cigarettes. not one word from anybody else that you heard in this courtroom or through deposition testimony that david ellsworth smoked anything other than lucky strikes, winstons and viceroy, and this woman comes up with doral and did not see him smoke anything else. the doral came up because david ellsworth worked at the doral country club. she was wrong on that. doral country club, remember that, he was a landscaper at doral country club? the next thing you know, carole mayou is saying i remember he smoked doral cigarettes, and i do not remember him smoking anything else. 4423 that is the kind of credibility we are dealing with, with ms. carole mayou. carole mayou is the ex-wife of ricky mayou. carole mayou is the ex-wife who does not remember when she was separated. carole mayou is the ex-wife who does not remember when she was divorced. carole mayou is the person who said she saw david ellsworth sporadically. that is the carole mayou that they want you to rely on. this is the woman who, when we asked her questions, said, i guess i was just assuming that david ellsworth liked smoking, because he never said it to me. that is what carole mayou is all about. let me say a couple of things on concealment. and remember, we do not have to prove this. we do not have to prove number four and five. this is a given. this has been proven. this has to be accepted once we prove class membership, which we have. defendants concealed or omitted material information. they did that. not otherwise known or available. they did that. knowing that the material was false and misleading or failed to disclose a material fact concerning 4424 the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes or both. now, this does not matter in the 1980s or the 1990s. what is relevant here, folks, is that the concealment took place in the '50s. the concealment took place when r.j. reynolds was advertising their cigarettes in the '50s, knowing full well that their products could kill people, knowing full well that their products were addictive, and when they were advertising on the airways with their beautiful celebrities and their beautiful actors and actresses and their athletes pitching products so that young people could see who they idolize and say, look, this looks good, i'm going to smoke. what was the material omission from those advertisements in the '50s? this stuff can kill you. that is pretty material. now, do you think that david ellsworth knew, in 1953, that cigarettes could kill him? is there any evidence that he knew in 1953 that cigarettes could kill him? absolutely not. that is the concealment. and the question for you, like i mentioned earlier is, if he did 4425 know cigarettes could kill him in 1953, when he was a kid, if he did know that these are addictive and if you start, you might not be able to stop and die, then maybe the shoe would be on the other foot, and maybe he would have quit. that is concealment. and what the defense wants you to see is all this information that was out there, what did i tell you? they would not talk about their conduct. so when rjr does not exist, yes, it looks like there is a lot of information out there, there is a lot of bad information about cigarettes, there is a lot of bad information about addiction. that came from dr. proctor. he told you about it. they did not call a historian. you did not hear anything about their historian. we called ours. and he told you, yeah, there was bad information, but tobacco responded. see, they do not want to talk about their response. they cannot talk about their response. now, what did dr. proctor tell you? well, why on earth would there be news coverage of these important issues in the '60s, in the 4426 '70s, in the '80s? because people did not know. that is why it is called newspapers and not old papers, because if it is covered, people do not know, and they have to learn. otherwise, there would be no use covering information. if it was so well-known, it would not be worthy of press. that is why dr. proctor said, it was not a question that this was common knowledge, because no one knew until late. if all this information was so well-known in the '50s and '60s, how come ricky mayou, in miami, florida, in junior high school, was able to smoke on school grounds? why? do you think people did not care? no, people did not know. if all this information was out there in the '50s and the '60s and the '70s, how come there were not restrictions on where people could smoke until the '80s and the '90s? because people did not know. people were not complaining. people did not know. the government did not act. it was not until the '80s and the '90s, folks, that you could not fly on an airplane and not smoke, where you could not go into a restaurant, 4427 finally, and smoke a cigarette, could not go into an office building and smoke. you could not go on public transportation and smoke, could not come into this courtroom and smoke. it took a long time, because it was not known, and that is the whole idea of concealment. and that is all i've got to say about that. addiction, mr. persons proved our addiction for us, and the way he did that was he read something from one of these leakage documents that dr. proctor talked about, and he read, "heavy cigarette smokers are true addicts." that is what he read from a long time ago. and remember what dr. o'brien said? all you need to know is how much the man smoked and how often he smoked, and that is enough, and he tried and could not quit, he is addicted, he is addicted. so that answers that question. some of the medical issues. why do they quote dr. cerfolio and not their own expert? why do they quote dr. cerfolio and not their own expert? they do not quote dr. cerfolio, they do not 4428 quote his testimony because it is going to be out of context. remember what they are saying? dr. cerfolio would not rule out a, b and c. he would not rule out. when dr. cerfolio was on the stand, remember what his answer was to every question where it was premised with, you cannot rule out, he goes, counsel, anytime it is prefaced with rule out, you are right, i cannot, i cannot rule out anything. so when you ask me those questions, the answer is always no. that is what he said. now, the defense did not quote any testimony from dr. cerfolio on these risk factors because it would be taken out of context, because simply dr. cerfolio said, squamous cell carcinoma is caused by smoking, end of story. and he did talk about these risk factors, but he said, in this case, it did not happen. the best expert in this case, dr. okun, who was called by the defense, he is the one you need to rely on for these risk factors of dust, because dr. -- oh, dr. okun did not say a word. they did not ask him any questions about dust, 4429 remember? they did not ask dr. okun, the defense, one question about dust. they did not ask dr. okun, their expert, one question about tb. why did not they ask him about that? he did not say one word, because that, ladies and gentlemen, is what is called a red herring. that is not an issue. if you want to think that david ellsworth was up to his eyeballs in dust, go right ahead and think that, because it did not have anything to do with his cancer in this case. if it did, dr. okun would have said, sure, that probably played a substantial part in this case. he was not asked, it is not an issue. tb, dr. okun was not asked, it is not an issue. and if it was an issue, what did dr. cerfolio say? it is not additive where one and one is two. when you have got tb and smoking and they are both inflammatory responses, it is one plus one equals eight. that is called synergy. the tobacco and the scarring from the tb act together, so they both can cause cancer and they both are substantial causes of cancer. 4430 but, in this case, what did dr. cerfolio say? smoking; squamous cell, smoking; squamous cell, aggressive; squamous cell, deadly; no bac; adenocarcinoma; no evolving. it is a heterogenous tumor that you are going to see bac, you are going to see adeno, you are going to see squamous. that is just the nature of the beast with lung cancer. so what the defense did not show you was the medical record, the pathology. i did. which talked about this was origin of poorly differentiated cancer, not bac. this was anything but a bac. this was two deadly cancers, an adenocarcinoma and a squamous carcinoma. and on the issue of fault, remember i said they would not respond to my questions? they cannot respond to my questions. although they want to assign one hundred percent fault to david ellsworth, they cannot respond to questions about their conduct. the only answer to that, folks, is because they are at fault one hundred percent. and so i'm going to answer the questions because mr. persons did not have enough time to 4431 do so. and so what is the answer? why, in the '50s, when rjr knew that smoking was bad, that they knew it could kill, they chose not to tell david ellsworth and the public? it is simple. because they were more interested in making money than they were in protecting people. they were more interested in their profits than health and safety. that is the reason. and that is why they cannot come up here and tell you that. because it is their fault, not david ellsworth's. and the same thing for number two. when they knew it was addictive in the '50s, why did not they tell people then? then they could say, you were warned in the '50s. we put warnings on our packs in the '50s. we told you in our advertisements, when we had these beautiful actresses pitching our products, and they said it is going to kill you. we did everything we had to do. but they did not, because they did not want to lose sales. they did not care about health and safety. that is why they did not tell the public. and 4432 that is why they did not want to answer these questions for you today, because what else can they say? why did not they warn? same reason. every one of these, it is the same answer. they were more interested in the bottom dollar. they were more interested in their profits than they were health and safety. that is why, on december 14th of 1953, when r.j. reynolds met with the other tobacco companies, it was a public relations problem to deal with and not a health and safety problem, and that was the issue. and they decided, we are not going to tell the public the truth, because we need to make money. i mean, how often is it that you get these fierce competitors in this type of industry coming together instead of fighting and competing? they joined forces in 1953 to deceive the public for 50 years. and for that, they should be praised because now they are good citizens? hogwash. because they admit their product was dangerous and deadly in 2000, six years after david ellsworth is dead, and now they are good 4433 citizens and should not be published? hogwash. and so when you look at all these questions, you know what the answer is. r.j. reynolds bears fault. r.j. reynolds made a choice. and they did not tell david ellsworth. and for that, they are at fault, and we accept none for that. they want to dwell on the issue of he could have quit at any time because he quit in 1993. why do you think he quit? this man had devastating cancer invading his body. now, do you know how he felt? does anyone know how he felt? does anyone know whether he even had the strength to inhale a cigarette at that time? and these people are telling you he quit because he wanted to because of his cancer, and he was able to quit cold turkey. he was dying, folks. he was dying a miserable, horrible death because of r.j. reynolds. and he quit in '93 and they are telling you he could have quit at any time. how does anyone know that? how does anyone know if he quit sometime in 1993, he could have quit the day before? how could someone tell you if someone quit 4434 in 1993, they could have quit a month before? how could someone tell you if someone quit in '93, they could have quit a year before? no one can tell you that. because he was fortunate enough to be able to quit when he was dying does not mean he could have quit the day before, a month before, a year before, a decade before. and no one could tell you otherwise. so, yeah, he quit. and i'm sure he wanted to quit before that, because the evidence shows he tried. he tried twice at least and could not quit, and we do not know how many more times he might have tried when he did not tell anyone and still could not quit. and so they did not tell david ellsworth this information in the '50s, and if they did, maybe he would not have been in the position he was in 1993, and maybe he would not have started, and maybe if he did, he had not been smoking long enough, so that he could have quit. but by the time this information started coming out in the '70s and '80s and '90s, it was too late, because he was already addicted. 4435 and it was already too tough for him to even stop smoking at that point because of that learned behavior, that reinforcement, those cures, that involuntary reaction to smoking that these defense attorneys are telling you he liked it. so when you consider all of these examples of the defendant's fault, you have got to consider why they did not answer these questions. and you know why, because they would have to admit they are at fault. why did not they choose to just take their nicotine out of those cigarettes in the '50s, in the '40s, in the '30s, so that people could smoke as much as they want, as long as they want, and quit when they want? because they would not be addicted. but they did not do it because they know that people smoked for nicotine, and it is going to affect their bottom dollar. that is why they did not do it. they had the wherewithal -- mr. persons: objection, your honor. may we have a sidebar? the court: sure. (discussion sidebar.) 4436 mr. persons: the basis of the objection, plaintiff's counsel says that r.j. reynolds should have admitted fault. i mean, that is tantamount to saying that r.j. reynolds should admit responsibility. that is inappropriate and, therefore, i move -- i object to it and move for a mistrial. the court: he said they did not answer these questions because they would have to admit they were at fault. so what is your answer to that? mr. kaiser: that is right. i'm not saying they need to admit fault. i'm saying the evidence is, look at all this stuff, and so they cannot respond because they would have to admit they were wrong and at fault. that is the truth. the court: objection is overruled. just be careful with your words. (sidebar concluded.) mr. kaiser: so that is why they do not respond to these questions, because it is simple. because these are tough questions to answer for r.j. reynolds. they cannot answer them truthfully without admitting fault. 4437 remember, this whole idea about filters, that is another example. why mislead people like david ellsworth? when you know your product is bad and you know filters do not help, just because they wanted to line their pockets, now they are saying the filters would take all this bad stuff out. do not quit if you are going in that direction, smoke our filters. and people did and people died. that is not david ellsworth's fault. that is their fault. david ellsworth switched from a non-filtered cigarette to a filtered. if he enjoyed smoking his luckies, what would prompt him to change all of a sudden to a filtered cigarette? what would prompt anyone to change? it was this marketing effort, where they kept inundating the people, the public, david ellsworth with this safety idea of filtered cigarettes, and that is why we have 97 percent of people smoking filters and 3 percent smoking non-filtered after a number of years, because of this advertising campaign to get people not to quit because of this health scare, but to smoke something that is going to prolong life, 4438 to not kill you, to take all this bad stuff out when they knew it was just the same as a non-filtered cigarette. it did not filter anything. like dr. proctor said, you cannot filter smoke. so that is another example, and they cannot answer that. then, finally, the answer is, even when the man knew, and at some time, he had to know, because he tried to quit, he tried to quit and could not. but the problem is, they cannot argue free choice when he was addicted, and they have known that since 1980. so that is the fault. these people are not good citizens. they were not good citizens back then, and it does not matter what they have done since 2000. it does not matter because david ellsworth died in 1994. and the whole issue of punishment is you punish the defendant for their behavior. you punish them for deterring others in the future. they are punished for what they did. and they did a lot in this case. we are entitled to punitive damages in this case based on the clear and convincing evidence. now, i just want to finish up. you have got 4439 dr. cerfolio saying something. dr. cerfolio's opinions, you have heard. you have got dr. okun making his opinion. reasonable minds can differ. what does it mean? maybe it is qualifications. maybe it is the qualifications that cause people to differ in their opinions. what do we have here? cerfolio, he specializes in oncology and lung cancer. remember he said oncology is cancer. he treats cancer. he operates on cancer. he takes care of lung cancer patients. 98 to 99 percent of the patients he treats have non-small cell lung cancer. that is why he was able to talk about that. he is the chief of thoracic surgery at the university of alabama at birmingham. he teaches high school students, medical students, residents, fellows. he is a full professor. he lectures to medical students. he is authored 150, more than that, 200 articles, almost all on lung cancer. remember he was telling you, all of his surgeries. he does studies. he writes about them. bacs, non-small lung cancer, adenocarcinomas, 4440 squamous cell, he writes. he publishes. he is written 40 to 50 book chapters on lung cancer. mostly about non-small lung cancer. he is an editor of two peer-reviewed journals. he lectures at other medical schools around the world on his specialty. remember what else he said he does. he does this robotic surgery. he is pioneered and approached this robotic surgery to where he travels all over the world to teach other surgeons how to do it, and they come to him at the university of alabama at birmingham to watch him operate using this robotic technique. he lectures at grand rounds all across the world to teach other people and to talk about lung cancer. he is performed 16,000 operations. remember he was saying sometimes he does a thousand a year. he is done more than anyone in the world. he is seen 33,000 patients. he is the endowed chair on lung cancer research. research. that is robert cerfolio. that is his credentials. what do we have for david okun? he is 4441 never published a peer-reviewed article on bac or any other lung cancer, and, yet, he is going to come up here and explain to you why this cancer was a bac. he is never served as a peer reviewer for any medical or scientific journals on articles having to do with bac or other lung cancer. he is never lectured at any medical school on lung cancer. he is never lectured to any professional societies on lung cancer. he has not published any articles in 30 years or over 30 years. he is never been a principal investigator on any clinical studies involving lung cancer. dr. cerfolio said he is a clinical -- he is been a principal investigator on hundreds of studies. he is not been invited by any other med schools around the country to participate in grand rounds involving cases dealing with lung cancer and cancer treatment, and ninety percent of the cases he treats have nothing to do with lung cancer. because 10 to 12 percent, he says, he is treated for lung cancer. that is the extent of 4442 his oncology practice. so when you weigh their credentials, who do you believe? who is the authority to be able to come in here and talk to you about non-small lung cancer and bac? and the evidence overwhelmingly supports it is robert cerfolio. same with dr. o'brien and the defense expert that they called. again, it boils down to credentials. because on the one hand, dr. o'brien comes up with an opinion that mr. ellsworth is addicted. on the other hand, the defense expert comes up with the opposite opinion. and, yet, that man says, well, that is my opinion, and that probably should be the opinion of every clinician, because i'm right. that is what he told you. and so let us look at the credentials and see who is right. and we see dr. o'brien has written 520 peer-reviewed articles, mostly about addiction, 520. that is a lot of writing. he is the editor of journals, including a journal called addiction. he lectures worldwide on addiction. he created a medical school course on addiction that is required of 4443 medical students at penn and elsewhere. he is an endowed chair in psychiatry at the university of pennsylvania. he is got a building named after him. it is the charles o'brien building at the university of pennsylvania, bestowed on him in his honor for his work in addiction. he is been elected to the institute of medicine of national academy of science for his work on addiction. he is served on drug abuse counsel for national institute of drug abuse. 40 years much research he is done, including nicotine addiction. his interest. he is been a principal investigator for hundreds of clinical studies concerning addiction and nicotine addiction, in particular. he is been invited to the white house to consult on substance abuse. he is been knighted by the french government with the chevalier award on his work on addiction. he is treated individual patients on his own since 1971 for things like addiction, including nicotine. he was the chair of the substance abuse 4444 disorder committee for the dsm-5. he is the man that helped write the criteria under which they spoke of yesterday and when he testified. he wrote it. he is written 40 to 50 book chapters on addiction. this is the man who you saw testify. this is dr. charles o'brien. roger samuel, he has never written a peer-reviewed article on nicotine addiction or substance abuse and, in total, has written three articles in his career. he has never been board-certified in addiction psychiatry. he has never been a reviewer on any peer review committee. he has never been an editor for any professional journals. he has never lectured before any professional societies on nicotine addiction. he has never done any research on nicotine addiction. he has never been on any committees for the dsm-5, 4 or 3, like dr. o'brien has. he has never written any criteria for substance abuse or tobacco use disorder. he has never served on any government committees related to substance abuse. 4445 he has never run any clinical studies on addiction. he has never taught a course solely on substance abuse or addiction. he has never written any chapters or textbooks on addiction. he has seen maybe two people in the entirety of his career solely for nicotine addiction. that is dr. samuel's credentials. and you know what else you know about dr. samuel, is that dr. samuel is paid as an expert witness, and dr. samuel, in his entire career, in deposition and trial testimony, has found a total of zero people addicted. that is the expert that they called. he never finds anyone addicted. finally, when you consider the testimony, consider how he answered questions. this is a man who conducts this workshop on cross examination. but let us see what he is learned. he answers the questions on direct examination with yes or a no and when he is asked to, he will explain. does that well. on cross examination, did he ever answer one question directly? and you know the answer to that. he wanted to just turn away and 4446 lecture you. not answering the question directly, but saying whatever he wanted to say, regardless of what the question was, so that almost every response, i had to say, okay, now, my question, i guess the answer is what, yes, no. every time. that is what he is learned in his workshop and cross examination. do not ever answer a question on cross directly. do not even answer the question. you say what you want to say to the jury to get your point across. what kind of points did he want to get across? this man had the audacity, the audacity, the unmitigated gall to sit there and tell you, their own expert agreed with me, and said the man was not addicted, he agreed with me. now, if that were true, if that was not a bald-faced lie, do not you think, when dr. o'brien was on that stand, mr. kreiner, who is the best attorney in this courtroom, would have said, now, dr. o'brien, do you recall when i took your deposition? well, let us read your deposition, because today you are saying that david ellsworth is addicted, but, in july, you 4447 said he was not; is that correct? well, it did not happen, because that was not the testimony. and, yet, their own expert is telling you that under oath. that is the kind of expert they called for addiction. and, finally, lastly, on the issue of fault. since 1963, the defendants have known this is an issue of fault. since 1963. why? that memo i keep referring to as the battelle hippo that i showed you today? what does it say? "it is difficult to assess the effect of the report on causes of action arising prior to its issuance. "logically, it would be argued the report does no more than to collate preexisting knowledge, knowledge as available to the buyer as the seller. but logic might, in the minds of a jury, yield to the emotional reaction that if this knowledge was available to the seller, it was up to him, having the means to do so, to make the product safe. "a jury might, whether instructed or not, operate on the theory of comparative negligence. true, the buyer was negligent in 4448 smoking a product he knew was dangerous, but he was lulled by the seller, and the seller's negligence was the greater in failing to make this product safe." that is exactly what the evidence has shown in this case. the seller, r.j. reynolds, knew in the '50s their product was not safe, and they did not tell david ellsworth. and in 1963, they knew, we are more at fault than david ellsworth. based on the evidence in this case, they are one hundred percent at fault, david ellsworth has none. now, with respect to damages, mr. persons talked briefly about damages and said you should not award any. well, he has not come up with a suggestion of his own for how you should. so you can take my suggestion, as i said, leave it as it is with our number, or you can take whatever number you would like. i ask that you consider the evidence, the testimony, find rjr responsible, award compensatory damages to kerri ellsworth for her loss of support and services for her father. and alternatively, for some reason, for some 4449 happenstance, you find that we have not proven that was not a bac -- that this was a bac, if you find it was, and we have not met our burden, then you look at the survivorship claim, the pain and suffering of david ellsworth. and, lastly, we ask that you find that we are entitled to punitive damages based on the evidence we have shown. thank you again.