mr. gustafson: john delbert huish. medical records say that he started smoking in 1940's when he was a teenager. the r.j. reynolds and philip morris documents tell us that they intended to sell their addictive deadly product to teenagers. they knew, the defendants knew that if you can get a teenager addicted to nicotine, you are going to enjoy a lifetime of problems off their earnings. that is exactly what they intended and it is exactly what happened with john delbert huish. he was 16 years old when he fell for it, and the defendants enjoyed almost 50 years of profits off his lungs. you see that is mr. huish's younger brother ivan, who testified on videotape said, "peer pressure gets to young people and they become involved." from the defendants' perspective, add a little marketing to children, add a little nicotine, and low and behold, eighty percent of the folks in mr. huish's age group became regular smokers, eighty percent. it would have been odd if he were not a smoker. if they come here and they tell you that he chose to become addicted in smoke for nearly 50 years, they tell you he chose that. he smoked until his fingers turned yellow, stained with nicotine. he smoked after he developed a cough. he smoked, according to the medical record, after he began coughing up blood and was told he had a tumor in his lung. people do not do that because they choose to do that; people do that from addiction. those very things, smoking after he had a health problem, smoking after he is coughing up blood, smoking to the point where his ringers were stained yellow with nicotine, are these signs of addiction in the very book that the defense expert they brought you yesterday relies on? there is no question in this case that he was addicted. their historian put a document up that said that yellow stains on the fingers are the deeper degradation and enslavement than the ball and chain. addiction, that is where the disease comes from. if they come here and they told you in opening statement, i do not know, we do not know for sure if he was addicted. that is what they stood here and told you two weeks ago. ״we do not know if he was addicted." not until yesterday. not until yesterday did they admit it. and all the while, mr. huish was addicted. all 40 to 50 years of it, r.j. reynolds and philip morris were right there in a quant of media, advertisements, public service announcements, sending out their truth squad to radio stations and tv stations, sporting events, through all their own efforts and through their industry mouthpiece, the tirc, and the tobacco institute. they did you all those things intentionally concealing what they knew to be true. statements that we know now were bold face lies. they did it intentionally. they meant to do it and it was a plan. it was a plan. the statements that these companies knew were untrue were made to keep addicted smokers like mr. huish smoking, to keep him buying cigarettes. money. that is why they did it was money. john huish's addicted to nicotine led to smoking for some 20 years before the first warning label was ever put on a pack of cigarettes. he smoked 20 years heavy. john wayne advertisement, you saw all the movie stars. it was everywhere. ubiquitous was the term that the expert used that they called it. advertisements everywhere. it was normal. eighty percent, eight out of ten in his age group were smokers. he smoked for 20 years before the first warning label went on a pack of cigarettes. by then he had well more than a million to two million doses of nicotine. if anybody had used a million to two million doses of heroin, methamphetamine or crack cocaine or regular cocaine, whatever hard addictive drug it would be, if anybody used that much of it all day, every day, there would not be any question, there would not have been any question that whatever disease process they ended up with as a result of using those drugs all those years would be due to the fact that they were addicted to that drug. no question at all. mr. huish exposed himself to the carcinogens, the dozens of carcinogens in cigarette smoke, dozens of times a day, 40 cigarettes, 60 cigarettes a day, eight or nine drags per cigarette. y'all do the math. i ain't going to sit here and do the math on that, but it is hundreds of exposures. what else does addiction do? what else does addiction do than compel the person who is addicted to keep exposing themselves to the thing that they are addicted to. now, the difference, the difference between hard drug addiction, elicit drug use, and being addicted to those, and being addicted to a product that is legal and socially acceptable, and for women made you look glamorous; for men, made you look tough. the difference is, is that it is a socially acceptable thing to do. it was socially acceptable and perfectly reasonable for mr. huish to smoke 40 to 60 cigarettes a day. perfectly acceptable. he did it for 20 years before there was ever a warning label on the pack. eighty percent of the people around him, eighty percent of the people in his age group were the ones that did it. so he dies from lung cancer in 1993, a lung cancer caused by smoking cigarettes. no question about this in this case. the evidence in this case is, he died from lung cancer that was caused by smoking cigarettes, not something else. after a 50-year campaign, 50 years of lies and deceit in the pursuit of more money, the defendants come here in this courtroom and they say that john huish's death is not one bit his responsibility. remember the defendants do not dispute that if you smoke cigarettes for a lifetime it will cause cancer. they do not dispute that. in fact, you did not hear one bit of evidence in this case to dispute the fact that mr. huish died from small cell lung cancer. not one. and you did not hear one bit of evidence in this case from the defense that his small cell lung cancer was caused by anything other than smoking cigarettes. you did not hear him bring one expert to say, this small cell lung cancer was caused by exposure to asbestos. how many witnesses did they call to try to establish that he may have been exposed to asbestos? they brought you not one expert witness to say his lung cancer was caused by an exposure to asbestos. they brought you not one expert witness to tell you that some other amorphous unnamed, undefined occupational carcinogen caused his lung cancer. nothing. they brought you nothing, yet they stood up here in opening statement, they stood up here in opening statement and said, it could have been cause by something else, we do not know. we do not know. they brought you nothing to support that statement. his lung cancer was caused by smoking cigarettes. there is no question about it in this case. it is undisputed. and there is overwhelming evidence of his addiction. they finally admitted it yesterday. yesterday. evidence that his nicotine addiction caused compulsive use of cigarettes, millions of exposures, millions of exposures to a highly addictive drug. there is no question about that. the only question now is, what are y'all going to do about it. our world today is so twisted because we tolerate lies and liars because it is just business. it is just business. our world is not going to square up until folks stand up and say, it is wrong to lie and deceive people. it is wrong to set out on a campaign of lying and deceiving. it is wrong to design a product to be addictive and lie to tne folks about the fact that it is addictive, tell people it is not. it is wrong to design a product to be addictive and market it to kids because their impressionable. and when teenagers get addicted, as philip morris' own documents state, when a teenager gets addicted, they are more strongly addicted than someone who got addicted later whose brain was already developed. it is wrong to do that so you can make more money. it is wrong. and so until your verdict speaks to that, until your verdict speaks that we are not going to let people or companies profit from concealment and misrepresentation, until your verdict makes it known that we will not let lies and deceit rob people of their health and of their life merely for a larger bag to carry the money to the bank. every tobacco company employee who testified in this courtroom through their documents, through the statements they made in their own documents, you grow up being taught that character is what you do when no one is looking. character is what you do when no one is around and no one is going to see what it was that you did. these folks never knew the statements they made in those documents would be displayed to folks who were not involved in their company. through their own documents, their own statements that they made at the time, showed you it was all intentional, it was all something they knew was false, they lied, and it was all done for money. they knew what they did was wrong. we knew what they did was wrong when they got here, and now y'all know what they did was wrong. the question is, what are y'all going to do about it. why do people smoke? y'all already know the answer to that. why do people smoke? they smoke for nicotine. philip morris knew it in 1972, ״no one has ever become a cigarette smoker by smoking cigarettes without nicotine." ״a cigarette that does not deliver nicotine cannot satisfy the habituated smoker and cannot lead to habituation, and would therefore almost certainly fail." ״one of the main reasons people smoke is to experience the physiological effects of nicotine on the human system. nicotine to the best of present knowledge does not produce cancer, hence, in theory, one could achieve the major advantage of smoking without hazard of cancer." of course y'all found out that was an impossible task, they could not remove the carcinogens but they chose to keep the nicotine. that is why people smoke. r. j. reynolds, 1976, ״without any question, the desire to smoke is based on the effect of nicotine on the body." even though they had known for decades how to take nicotine out of cigarettes, they did not do it, because nobody ever became a smoker smoking cigarettes that did not have nicotine in them. mr. huish was not smoking for that turkish blend in his camels; he was smoking for nicotine. and even though they not only decided to keep the nicotine in so addicted smokers are going to keep uses their product, they engineered cigarettes to maintain that addiction. they could deliver the exact amount of nicotine to maintain that level of addiction that smokers require. they lied about cigarettes being addictive and they lied about cigarettes causing cancer, and their lies were designed and intended to lead folks like mr. huish to believe there was not any need to quit. you got to take yourself back in time. it is a different time back then. they promised, these defendants promised if cancer causing agents exist, we are going to find them and remove them. we are going to pull our product off the shelf. y'all's health concern are paramount concern to our company. trust us, we will be the first to let you know. in the meantime, use these filters, smoke these lights. they will protect you, just do this. they knew -- they knew that this message was being received by people in the grip of addiction; not people who were being intoxicated by their addiction to a product. these are folks that still go to work, they still drive their car, they could still be around their children and do all the things that you do in life. see, that is the danger of this type of addiction, it does not cause you to wake up in an alleyway unconscious. it does not cause you to lose your job. it does not cause you to go to jail. it was socially acceptable. was their concealment and misrepresentation for everybody for john huish? of course not. john huish worked in places where one had to be squared away. john huish worked in places where one had to be squared away, responsible and trustworthy, where one had to look out for the safety of the co-workers and for the safety of yourselves. they all had to rely on one another. they did not have to like each other, but they had to trust and rely on one another to do what is right. because if you did not do what is right, you did not follow the rules, you did not look out for each other, people could die. they talked about hydrogen sulfide gas, h2s gas. it could kill you in two minutes. if you went into a place where they had too much of that stuff it would kill you in two minutes; not cause lung cancer. there was not any testimony that it caused lung cancer 50 years down the road. the testimony was, it would kill you dead like that. if someone said, it is safe to go in there, you had to trust them. you had to trust there was not h2s gas in there. if someone gave you a snifter and told you that it worked, you had to trust that it worked and you had to trust that it would do its job and tell you whether there was h2s gas in there. you had to be responsible, you had to be honorable. everybody did not have to be buddies, everybody did not have to get along, but you had to be able to trust your fellow workers. it was all about safety. it was not about being reckless, it was not about being -- my goodness, blue collar workers are all reckless and thrill seekers and irresponsible, as the defense would have you believe. that is simply an unfair thing to say about folks like john huish. you had to trust each other to be right, you had to trust each other not to smoke where there was explosive gases around, because if you break the rules, people can die. you had to trust people who were from other countries, people who have did not speak your language. john huish was a squared away, stand up, responsible american. he can be relied on and he could be trusted, and in his life he had to trust others. now, these companies knew that the multitudes of the people that were raised in mr. huish's generation were raised to trust an american company. it is different today. you really have to go back to a different time where people trusted in american companies. it would be inconceivable to a man who lived his life responsibly and honorably, than an american company like r.j. reynolds or an american company like philip morris would outright lie to people about something that could kill them. he was the perfect kind of mark. his generation, his line of work, having to trust in other people. no honorable company would do that. no reasonable company would do that. certainly no american company would do that to americans. it would be reprehensible to do that because people would die. our country spends countless resources bringing back bodies of those who died fighting. we do tnis because every life is precious. every single one. and every life is priceless to those who knew that person. r.j. reynolds and philip morris, based on their own documents that you saw here, they do not think so. they celebrated for many years the profits they made off addiction, the profits they made off concealment and misrepresentation to the public, by diminishing the lives of whose health and lives they stole by doing that. john huish was anna lou huish's best friend, 46 years together. his life cut short at 64 years old, and her life changed forever as a result of that. every christmas alone, every thanksgiving. your verdict speak to what they took from anna huish. and john huish was indeed precious. 16 years, 16 years was his life expectancy. 16 years is his life expectancy. 16 years she lost. as the plaintiff we have to prove certain things. we have to proof that mr. huish first was as member of the engle class. we have to prove that by the greater weight of the evidence. the court just read that instruction to you an you ever it in your laps. not beyond a reasonable doubt like in a criminal case, but by the greater weight of the evidence. and the greater weight of the evidence instruction tells you that it means the more persuasive and convincing force and effect of the entire evidence in the case. did we tip the scales in our favor? more likely than not are we the ones who are right? did we provide the stronger, better evidence in the case? i submit to you the evidence is clear that we did. if you go to the first question on the verdict form, was john delbert huish addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine manufactured by r.j. reynolds tobacco company and philip morris-usa, inc. and if so, was such addiction a legal cause of his death? and i emphasize the term, "legal cause of his death" because that is how the defendants are going to size him when the case is over. because they have already admitted he was a good guy. what they want to say is they want cut that line between addiction and causing his disease, as if he chose, just chose unfettered free choice to sucks dozens of carcinogens in his lungs 40 to 60 times a day. there is no reasonable person would do that, absent addiction. absent addiction, nobody would do that. pull up the class membership instruction that you got. "addiction is a legal cause of death there if it directly and in a natural and continuous sequence produced or contributed substantially to producing such death so that it can reasonably be said that but for the addiction, the death would not have occurred." and then it states -- and this is important in this case given the issue that you have, "addiction may be a legal cause of death even though it operates in combination with the act of another, some natural cause, or some other cause, if such other cause occurs at the same time as the addiction and the addiction contributes substantially to mr. huish's death." addiction need not be the only cause. it can operate in combination, be in concert with other things, such as, r. j. reynolds and philip morris' concealment of the truth for decades. operating in conjunction with r.j. reynolds and philip morris' agreement to misrepresent and conceal these things, lie to people like mr. huish. it can operate in combination with mr. huish's partial responsibility, which we have admitted here. mr. huish did have some choice, as we told you in the very beginning. addiction is not going to overwhelm everything about him. but addiction is going to -- is going to be what compels him to keep smoking cigarettes. his choice does play a role. of course there is always choice. we are not saying, did he have a lobotomy as a result of nicotine addiction. that is why we have admitted to you from the very outset here, that he bears partial responsibility in this case. from the very outset, mrs. huish has acknowledged and accepted responsibility for her husband's role in this. but neither of these defendants have taken any responsibility and that is where you come in. this jury instruction you got tells you, "the plaintiff has admitted mr. huish was negligent in his efforts to quit smoking, and that this negligence was a partial cause of his death, in combination with the acts or omissions of r.j. reynolds and philip morris. if the greater weight of the evidence shows the conduct of mr. huish and both those defendants contributed as a legal cause to mr. huish's injury, you should decide and write on the verdict form a percentage of fault contributable to each." now, this negligence was a partial cause of his death in combination with the acts and omissions of both of these defendants. that is your instruction. r.j. reynolds and philip morris deny that their acts and omissions were attributed to mr. huish's death. they just flat out denied it. all that effort, all that money we spent, all that stuff we did all those years, our brilliantly conceived and executed plan did not work. it worked on other people, just not him. compare the parties. compare them, because that is what you are asked to do here. this is a comparative negligence case, you are asked to compare the conduct of these parties. mr. huish did not lie. mr. huish did not cheat. mr. huish did not do these things in order to make more money. but r.j. reynolds and philip morris plotted and schemed and concealed the deadly truth, and then they come here and they tell you, we did nothing wrong and we are not responsible. it is all his fault. the evidence in this case is undisputed that r.j. reynolds and philip morris designed cigarettes to be as addictive as possible so they could hook smokers for a lifetime. you did not hear anything to the contrary. you heard undisputed testimony about the list of ingredients. they took nicotine out when they were processing the tobacco and they turned around and put it right back in. different levels for different cigarettes. you got the entry-level cigarettes and you got the ones for the long-term smokers that need more nicotine. they have put ammonia in the cigarettes to make the smoke easier to inhale. ana the ammonia helped to get the nicotine to the brain even faster. that is an additive. you do not find ammonia in a tobacco leaf. those additives you heard undisputed testimony about in this case. it was only to make cigarettes more addictive. how did that nicotine affect mr. huish? smoked two packs a day for 20 years before the first warning label was put on a pack of cigarettes. he smoked greater than three packs per day after he switched to marlboro lights. he smoked first thing in the morning, smoked if he woke up at night, and chain smoked according to his son, nicotine staining on his fingers, tobacco odor, smoked when he was sick, smoked after he developed a smoker's cough, smoked after he began coughing up blood. at his father's funeral, three or four hours at a time tried to go without a cigarette, and mrs. huish said he was nervous and anxious and just wanted to leave. his dad's funeral. that is not a choice; that is an addiction. greater than 90 pack years of history of smoking, diagnosed with copd, which according to the book that they brought you yesterday with their expert, smoke until you get copd is one of the most common signs of nicotine dependence. who chooses to do that to themselves? you did not hear one bit of evidence in this case that mr. huish came in and said, i like to smoke. no one ever said he ever said that. he never said, i enjoy smoking. there is no evidence he ever said anything like that. what did he say? i cannot quit. because he knew what it was like to go a few hours without a cigarette. he knew at his father's funeral what it was like. first thing he did when he left, fired up a cigarette. he knew what it was like to go places and do things where he could not smoke. and if you have that kind of experience over a couple of hours, it can be an overwhelming, hopeless kind of feeling about ever being able to stop doing this for the rest of your life if you cannot do it for a few hours. mr. huish's doctors. dr. samera. "there is no doubt about whether he is addicted. it is obvious he is addicted to nicotine." dr. auerbach. "what things lead you to believe they were addicted to cigarettes? well, i mean, they feel like they cannot stop." what did mr. huish tell you? if you feel like you cannot stop, how is that a choice? it is an addiction, because he knew what it was like to go even short periods of time without being able to smoke. we brought you dr. burns, 40 years of experience in this field, 40 years in public health, 40 years in smoking and health. pulmonologist, critical care physician, wrote the chapters on nicotine addiction. in harrison's principles of internal medicine and cecil's textbook of internal medicine, those textbooks are on every one of our doctors' shelves. every doctor going through training today is being taught about nicotine addiction, reading what dr. burns wrote. undisputed testimony in this case he was addicted. and what evidence did the defense bring. after telling you they did not know in opening statement whether he was addicted, they brought you an expert that they paid $100,000 to in tnis one case. $100,000. two months ago that expert testified he did not know mr. huish was addicted. but he came here, after two weeks ago when he said, i do not know if he was addicted, he shows here and he testifies that he was. i do not know what happened. the evidence does not tell us what happened between opening statement and yesterday. it changed his mind. one psychiatrist, one psychiatrist that they paid $100,000 to, comes here and says he does not believe the very book that he relied on for his testimony about nicotine addiction. he told you that fifty percent of smokers are addicted. the book he relied on says, 80 to ninety percent of smokers are addicted. and then he says that the guy that wrote that part -- you remember, it was just yesterday. he said, the guy that wrote that part, he recanted. ana then when you look, that guy's, i think he said it was hughes, that guy's name is not even in the book. he did not have anything to do with that chapter. he did not have anything to do with it. that expert witness, after $100,000, respectfully, cannot be believed. and then he denied the surgeon general's diagram showing how addiction meets the disease. did not believe in that. because the truth is, it did not matter if mr. huish quit or not, according to the defendants. if he quit, they said he could have quit sooner; and since he quit, he was not addicted. if he did not quit, that means he chose to smoke. heads i win; tails you lose. we all remember that game as a kid. it did not matter for purposes of this case whether he quit or not, they are going to tell you the same thing. the truth is, he was addicted many, many years before the first warning went on a pack of cigarettes. and the evidence is that addiction caused his death. as dr. burns testified and as the u.s. surgeon general's report stated, what happens is, addiction leads to heavy smoking and heavy smoking to long-term use. these folks exposed themselves to millions of doses -- or doses of nicotine and exposures to carcinogens that come with those doses of nicotine. that is why they are smoking. they are smoking for nicotine. it is in the defendants' own documents. they knew it the whole time. they celebrated, celebrated how addictive nicotine was. that is how addiction causes death. because what else does addiction do other than compel the user to keep exposing themself to the very thing they are addicted to. mr. huish began smoking as a teenager. philip morris will tell you, "the younger people are when they start smoking, the more likely they are to become strongly addicted to nicotine." not just addicted but strongly addicted to nicotine. and you heard the testimony here, with a teenager they still have a developing brain. that is why they do all those things the teenagers do, because they have not developed their brain along the way, and they do not appreciate the kinds of responsibilities and consequences that living the life brings. "the earlier they start the more strongly addicted they get, and symptoms of addiction just having strong urges to smoke, feeling anxious or irritable or having unsuccessfully trying not to smoke, any one of those things can appear in teens within weeks or only days after they become occasional smokers an mr. huish was a lot more than an occasional smokers." there is no question in this case that mr. huish's addiction caused his lung cancer and death. so when we get to question no. 1 on the verdict form, i ask you to answer that question yes, because that is what the evidence calls for. and then you will move on to the four claims. the four claims in this case are broken out -are broken out into different questions for each defendant, but i've condensed them here. the first claim is, was their negligence a legal cause of the death of mr. huish? and that will be a question for each one of the defendants on that. and the second one, was the addictive and unreasonably dangerous cigarettes placed on the market by the defendants' a legal cause in the death of mr. huish. there is unrebutted testimony in this case from dr. burns that it was the defective and unreasonably dangerous cigarettes that cause h is death. unrebutted testimony in this case. unrebutted evidence. they did not bring anybody to say otherwise. the third one, was the defendants' concealment or omission of material information about the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes both a legal cause of the death of john delbert huish. y'all know the story on that, how they celebrated and bragged to themselves about how smart and successful they were with their campaign to do exactly that. and you heard the testimony in this case that mr. huish, for a long time, not in the '80s, but in the '60s and the '70s, if they told him it was bad for you and you should not smoke, his response was, there is no proof. that is exactly the message that they put out to addicted smokers. it is exactly what they intended those smokers to believe and rely on, and it is exactly what john huish did. same thing on the agreement with others, to conceal or omit information regarding the health effects. that whole story about meeting at the plaza hotel. you know that story now. you know they all banded together and they decided they were all going to do this together. they are all going to have the same campaign, a unified voice. they were going to lie. they were going to tell people things they knew were not true, all to keep addictive smokers smoking, giving a psychological approach. if you check "no" -- go back to the verdict form question, please. if you check "no" on question 1, mrs. huish's verdict form tells you that if you check "no" there, she is loses; r.j. reynolds and philip morris win. and you will have pinned a blue ribbon on them and told them that is exactly how we want you to do business in this country. if you check "yes" on question 1, then the engle findings will apply. and these findings are all binding on the jury, on y'all, on the court and everybody else. and those findings are, nicotine is addictive, smoking cigarettes causes certain related -- smoking-related diseases including small cell lung cancer, the kind of disease mr. huish had. r.j. reynolds and philip morris were negligent in failing to exercise the degree of care that a reasonable company would exercise under like circumstances. they placed cigarettes on the market that were defective and unreasonably dangerous. and r.j. reynolds and philip morris and the council for the tobacco research and the tobacco institute, and the other companies concealed or omitted material information that was not otherwise known or available, knowing that the materials was false or misleading and failed to disclose a material fact concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes or both. and then the last finding is, those same companies entered into an agreement with each other to conceal or omit that information. this is one of those -- this is one of those stories that has only one side. there is no other side to this story. they did it; they did it on purpose; and they did it with the intent to keep folks using their product. money. they did it for money. it did not matter who died; it did not matter how many, they just wanted a larger bag to carry the money to the bank. and the positions that they took in this courtroom were impossible. they brought you an expert witness that there was no evidence that mr. huish ever saw any cigarette advertisement, when the undisputed evidence in this case was the tobacco industry spent more in one day on their message than the public health government organizations spent in an entire year. but they tell you there is no evidence he never saw any cigarette ad or public service announcement. and this message that they had, the message that they outspent the federal government on, hundreds of times to one, the message they had was carefully and methodically crafted, to keep addicted smokers smoking, to give them a psychological crutch and allow them to doubt the public health message. and after 50 years, after 50 years of doing that and bragging to themselves about how successful they were in doing it, they come here and tell you that mr. huish was unreasonable and to rely on them. got you. how can that be? ask yourselves, how can that be. on the concealment claim you need to decide whether r.j. reynolds and philip morris' concealment and misrepresentation, what they knew about cigarettes and addiction and cancer, what they knew, their concealment of that was a legal cause of mr. huish's death. you go to the concealment instruction, "to be a legal cause of mr. huish's injury, the concealed or omitted facts must have been unknown to mr. huish. moreover, if those facts were unknown, either they must have been not otherwise available to mr. huish, or mr. huish's opportunity to learn them was less then that of r.j. reynolds tobacco company and philip morris." now, they are concealment, as you know, did two things: it created doubt and misrepresentation, it created doubt so addicted smokers would keep smoking. and it kept the truth from them so that for a long time smokers, just like mr. huish, including mr. huish, would think there is not any proof. and they might suspect there might be proof, but when you are addicted to the substance and you are being told that there is not any proof, and then all these scientists say there is not to like it up, of course you are going to want to keep using the product you are addicted to. but that was the subtlety of their message. that was, truthfully, an ingenious part of their message. and that is why they bragged to themselves about how smart they were. the opportunity to learn them was less than that of r.j. reynolds and philip morris. that is undisputed in this case. the defendants' own expert admitted on the stand, r.j. reynolds and philip morris knew, at least as much as mr. huish did, about the dangers of cigarettes. now, think about that. all the stuff you have seen from the secret covers of r.j. reynolds and philip morris about what they knew about their product. it is clear they knew a heck of a lot more about those things than mr. huish did. there is not any question about that. the truth is, we all know they knew a lot more than mr. huish did. they had more knowledge than mr. huish did ever about these things. and operated in combination with, is what that jury instruction says. operated in combination with other things: his addiction, their concealment and misrepresentation was a legal cause of his death when operating in combination with his addiction and his own negligence and not trying harder to quit. and not going a few hours without a cigarette and just telling himself, i cannot do it. it all operates together. and think about it. how many people walked into this courtroom a couple weeks ago and got an eye-opening education about what really happened? how many people knew more when they walked in here than they do today. nobody. it is an eye-opening education about what really happened right under our noses in this country for years. there was a lot more information that was available to everybody today before they walked in this courtroom, than mr. huish ever had available during his lifetime. things are very, very different today, in 2011 than they were in 1993 or 4. and you folks know a lot more about this stuff, yet, r.j. reynolds and philip morris want you to find that john huish knew more about it decades ago, way back then, than anybody else then when they walked in here two weeks ago to sit on this jury. and what did the evidence show you? r.j. reynolds was targeting school kids back in the '20s. it started in this work at once, featuring an intensely interested in lining up these students for our brands both as consumers and boosters. philip morris did the same thing. they recognized, at the time that mr. huish was a young smoker, "it is increasingly important from the point of view of philip morris regular size cigarettes to do everything possible to increase the trend among young people toward philip morris." john huish was one of those school age kids when he started at 16 years old. he was one of the young people that philip morris was so pleased to be part of. because as the documents later on show, they needed to get replacement smokers. they needed to get kids, because adults are not going to engage in that behavior. they got to get them when they are young. and they got to get those kids to replace the ones that quit or die. it is undisputed, the evidence in this case, that both of these defendants targeted kids to sell their cigarettes. and there is undisputed evidence, eighty percent in his age group were regular smokers. there is undisputed evidence the defendants did all they could to capitalize on keeping those customers: engineering cigarettes to be addictive, lying about it, adding ammonia so the nicotine gets to your brain faster and it is easier to inhale. they brought you no testimony that they did not do that -- that they did not do that back in the '40s, '50s and '60s, nothing. the entire time mr. huish smoked, from the first draw he ever took off a cigarette in mid 1940's, until his last breath in 1993, they knew, the defendants knew their cigarettes were highly addictive and caused cancer, and they denied it publicly every day of his life until he died. but behind closed doors, among themselves, when it was just their club, they bragged to each other about how smart and successful they were, and they celebrated how addictive nicotine was, how it kept their customers smoking and how it kept them rich. they did not just know that cigarettes were addictive; they knew cigarettes caused cancer, too, and they never told the truth about that during his lifetime either. they concealed that, too. not even looking at the internal company documents, we know what a difference their concealment made. because during a 50-year cover up, that whole agreement with all the other companies to speak as one and lie and deceive the public about it, that whole misinformation eighty percent of his group smoked. one out of every two americans in the 1950 s smoked cigarettes. it was odd not to smoke. today r.j. reynolds and philip morris are required to tell the truth. go to their website, it tells you all this stuff now. today, one in five americans smoke; not one in two, one in five. the truth is a powerful thing. their concealment an misrepresentation made them a lot of money. it resulted in millions and millions of americans being addicted and continuing to smoke. and the result was, more than 400,000 good americans are dying from smoking-related illnesses every year. a little perspective on that, you could add up all the americans who ever died defending our country in the armed wars, from the beginning of this nation until today, it would be less than the number of people who died using the defendants' cigarettes in a two-year period. when mr. huish had been smoking for years the news media began reporting on the science and showing cigarettes may cause cancer, and the defendants took note of that. you have seen these. "studies and clinical data. the r.j. reynolds document from 1953, the book report they told you that claude teague did. studies of clinical data intend to confirm the relationship between heavy and prolonged tobacco smoking and incidents of cancer of the lung. the new york times, front page of the new york times, mr. hahn, american tobacco, who made the lucky strikes that mr. huish was smoking, characterized as a lot of loose talk. a recently published scientific report suggesting there was a link from cigarette smoking and a rising incidences of lung cancer. go to 19, a philip morris document, dr. wakem. the evidence that smoking causes lung cancer is based on two types of studies, statistical and on the animal studies. then we go to no. 20, scientific opinion in the united states of america does not now seriously doubt that it was statistical correlation in the real and reflects the cause and effect relationship. they knew. 1962, allen rogeman (phonetic), a giant in his field, i think was the testimony. obviously, the amount of evidence accumulated to indict cigarette smoke as a health hazard is overwhelming. the evidence challenging such an indictment is scant. there is no question that they knew cigarettes caused cancer. there is no question that their sales dropped with that cancer scare in the early 1950's when the life magazine report came out and they started reporting on cigarettes might be a cause of cancer. the first time their sales had dropped since the great depression, and what did they do? y'all know what they did. you know the story now. they go to the plaza hotel; not to help their customers; not to look out for the health of the folks that are buying their product. because they did not turn to doctors or to scientists or public health officials or epidemiologists. they hired a public relations firm. and that firm interviewed company executives, scientists and marketing people and they discovered that this was a business like no other. pull up no. 23, please. one of the men said, "it is fortunate for us that cigarettes are a habit they cannot break, yet they come here today, 58 years later and tell you, it was not any big deal, nicotine addiction is really low on the totem pole. cigarettes are a habit they cannot break soon enough. boy, would not it be wonderful if our company was first to produce a cancer-free cigarette, what we could do to competition." right there they are recognizing it is addictive and they know it causes cancer. and said another, "suppose everybody just smoked one cigarette with us a day, that would be maybe 40 billion a year, and again, the stock market fall was terribly. money. it is all about the money. and they came up with their game plan. pull up the frank statement please. you know what the game plan was. they concealed the truth; they reassured the public there was nothing to worry about; they promised to make customers' health paramount. as a basic responsibility, paramount to every other consideration in their business, and they promised to work with the public health officials. well, you know the truth. they did not intend to do any of that. it was all a lie. it was just the opposite of what they said. they wanted to keep smokers smoking and buying cigarettes. they could have cared less. could have cared less about their customers' health. and they were never going to work hand-in-hand with public health officials. they were the targeted enemy. and they created the tirc, and then the tobacco institute. they would speak to the industry and respond to all the research that was being done, tying cigarettes to disease, they demonized the public health community, they demonized the scientists that were establishing the causal link. they created a controversy that did not exist. there was not any controversy about this. they just wanted to keep smokers smoking, so their market then became doubt. and they tell smokers, there is no need to stop, there is no need to worry, there is no proof it is harmful. if they ever find anything bad, then we will take it out, knowing full well they did not have the capability to do that. they did that for 50 years and the whole time they knew cigarettes were dangerous, harmful, and addictive, and they knew what they were doing was wrongful. no. 25, please. they knew what they were doing was wrong. "our basic position in cigarette controversy is subject to the charge and may be subject to a finding that we are making false and misleading statements to promote the sale of cigarettes. you bet. that is exactly what they were doing and they knew it. and it continued. go to 1982, the r.j. reynolds memorandum, when they hired a new scientist, "he seemed to understand our concern but refused to accept it as a rationale for not doing what he felt we had an obligation to do as a responsible manufacturer. and he also said, "although i cannot recall his exact words, that our medical slash scientific witnesses will say whatever we want them to say. clearly implying, if not stating, that they lacked credibility and integrity." that was a memorandum from 1982 in r.j. reynolds when they woodshedded their brand new scientists on the issues that we are talking about here today in this trial. they never intended to work with the public health officials neither. let us go to the no. 28, please. in 1968, the tobacco institute attacks the surgeon general. the report of the surgeon general, by calling it a shockingly intemperate deformation of the industry that has led the way in medical research to seek answers in the cigarette controversy. there was no controversy. the answer was already there and they knew it. this is just a head fed, this is just something that is part of their game plan to keep addicted smokers smoking and doubted that what the public health officials were saying is true. 1972, no. 29. tobacco institute, in pursuing -- and this is a press conference about the federal government, public health officials putting out a report on smoking and health. "in pursuing their press conference science, some governmental officials maintained that cigarette smoking is the number one public health problem." we believe that the number one problem is the extent to which these officials knowingly mislead the american public. that is is rich with irony, given their game plan, them to accuse public health of being knowingly misleading the american public when that was their whole game plan, the cigarette industry. go to 1980. "the tobacco institute attacks the surgeon general, bragging about how, for the first time in the history of the cigarette controversy the secretary for health, education and welfare had to share the spotlight. in fact, we won top billing that night on all networks." how was this program working out for them? they tell us. go to 31. they brag to each other about how smart and successful they are, "for nearly 20 years this industry has employed a single strategy to defend itself on major fronts, politics and public opinion, while the strategy was brilliantly conceived and executed over the years helping us win important battles. it is only fair to say that it is not or was intended to be a vehicle for victory. it is a holding pattern. look what their holding pattern is. what is their plan? "creating doubt about the health charge, advocating the smoker's right to smoke, and encouraging objective scientific research as the only way to resolve the question to the health effect." doubt was what they were selling to addicted smokers. brilliantly conceived and executed. and then they ran these public service announcements by project truth on television. (a video clip was played and transcribed by court reporter to the best of her ability as ows:) "here in washington a lot goes on that you never hear about. take the controversy about cigarettes. in a 91st congress, a house committee heard testimony from leading experts on smoking and health. the record shows that many of the country's most respected doctors openly challenged anti-cigarettes plans. on channel 20 doctors said, "as a scientist, i find no persuasive evidence that cigarette smoking causes lung cancer." a new york doctor told congress, "declaring there is now a sufficient scientific evidence to establish that cigarette smoking causes disease, it is in my opinion unjustified." there is another side to the cigarette diversity. it is all here in this white paper. (the clip was stopped.) their program was extremely successful, as their own documents tell us. pull up no. 33, please. between 1945 and 1948, if you add these numbers up, for lucky strike cigarettes alone, $24 million was spent advertising that brand in 1940's dollars, $24 million just to advertise that brand. can we go to no. 34. in 1955, r.j. reynolds spent $114 million on cigarette advertising. in 1965, they spent $446 million, and philip morris spent $241 million. in 1980, r.j. reynolds spent $719 million, and philip morris spent $781 million advertising cigarettes. how did that work out? well in 1967, the federal trade commission report tells us that cigarette advertising reached virtually all americans who can either read or understand the spoken word, so pervasive is cigarette advertising, that it is virtually impossible for americans at almost any age to avoid cigarette advertising. and you go to their conclusion. no. 36, please, "the warning label on cigarette packages has not succeeded in overcoming the prevalent attitude toward cigarette smoking, created and maintained by the cigarette companies through their advertising, particularly, the barrage of commercials on television which portray smoking as a harmless and enjoyable social activity that is not habit-forming and involves no hazards to health." just how far reaching were those. go to the 1981 federal trade commission report. they lay it right out, "cigarettes are the most heavily advertised product in america. the six major cigarette companies spent a billion dollars in 1980 to sell a product. we figure it is several hundred times greater than the amount a government spends on public service announcements on smoking hazards. and the national commission on smoking and public policy reported in 1978 that the tobacco industry spent more on advertising cigarettes in one day than the national clearing house on smoking and health spent in one year." and it is working out great. that is how it is working out. and nicotine was a secret to their success and they knew it. go to 38, please. "the physiological requirements of the smoker with respect to nicotine can be met by the application by the optimum amount of nicotine to the extracted tobacco." they put it right back in, the optimum amount to maintain addiction, then they tell you addiction does not have anything to do with it. go to 39. 1963, brown & williamson, now r.j. reynolds. "nicotine is addictive. we are in the business of selling nicotine, an addictive drug effective in the release of stress mechanisms." but then they recognize that cigarettes cause cancer and contribute to cardiovascular disorders and things like that. and then we go to 1972, mr. teague, again -or dr. teague from r.j. reynolds, "in a sense, the tobacco industry may be thought of as being a specialized highly ritualized and stylized segment in the pharmaceutical industry. tobacco products uniquely contain and deliver nicotine, a potent drug with a variety of physiological effects." after all that celebration of the effectiveness of nicotine in planning their future around it, 22 years later, 22 years later -- no. 42 -- they go to congress and take an oath to tell the truth in 1994 and they all lie to the u.s. congress and say that nicotine is not addictive, 22 years after the last document i just showed you. they lied his whole life, and they want you to come here and put a stamp of approval on that. you know why they lie. you know why. pull up 43, please. in 1980, the tobacco institute was recognizing that, "the entire matter of addiction is the most potent weapon a prosecuting attorney could have in a lung cancer cigarette case. we cannot defend continued smoking as free choice if the person was addicted." but that is exactly what they are doing here today, and that is exactly why in their argument, that addiction does not cause disease, must fail. and that is exactly why you have to answer yes to question no. 1. they are admitting it right here. you cannot defend a case on free choice if the person was addicted because it is not a free choice. you have some choice, but it is not an unfettered choice, it is not free choice because you are addicted. and what did they tell you -- when they got here two weeks ago, what did they tell you about his lung cancer, whether it was caused by smoking? pull up 44, please. they tell you, "the first issue is whether mr. huish died from a disease caused by smoking, in other words, whether his lung cancer was caused by smoking. the short answer is, we really does not know." that is what they told you in opening statement. they did not bring you anything to support that. nothing. nothing. go to no. 45, please. what did they tell you when this case began about whether he was addicted? "the evidence only allows me to tell you that we do not know for sure whether he was addicted. so was he addicted? i do not know." go to no. 46. what did they tell you when they got here about whether mr. huish even had a smoking-related disease? "even if he had a smoking-related disease, which again, we do not know for sure, the only evidence in this case is that he died from a smoking-related disease, small cell lung cancer, caused by smoking cigarettes." they brought you nothing to support that statement. it is a familiar thing. go to 47, please. (a video clip was played and transcribed by court reporter to the best of her ability as ows:) "cigarette smoking may be hazardous to your health; it may not be, we just do not know." "i do not know. frankly, i think that smoking may be hazardous; it may not be." "smoking may be hazardous; it may not be. no one, including tv 7, knows for certain." "it may be or it may not be, we do not know." "i do not know if cigarettes are bad or not bad." "we do not know the causes, the elements that have been affiliated to cigarette smoking." "i am saying that the science to date and the over under playing powers of our industry indicates that there is no causal link." "i'm not denying the fact that cigarette smoking could be a risk factor involved with some people." we do not know. we do not know for sure. they are going to ask you to put a stamp of approval on that type of comment, and it is not going to end until y'all put a stop to it. the defendants spent billions of dollars advertising for cigarettes, and they want to say mr. huish never saw any of it. the evidence says he did, and the evidence says that he would tell mrs. huish, there is no proof, when she tried to get onto him about quitting because cigarettes were bad for him. the evidence tells us that is exactly what their message was. that is exactly the response they were trying to get out of addicted smokers. and here they are today, after pioneering passed marketing, after spending billions of dollars on advertising cigarettes, and agreeing to hide the truth and lie about what they knew, they come here and tell you that advertising, something that has been proven to work to increase consumption of every product, somehow miraculously fails to work for cigarettes. and the numbers say otherwise. what was their motivation to mislead and conceal all those 50 years? money. money. but conspiracy is an agreement between two or more parties to do something unlawful, the jury instruction tells you. when you find mr. huish was an engle class member by checking "yes" on question 1, then the defendants have been found to have agreed to conceal all of these things and to act as one and mislead people like mr. huish. and that is why we have shown you documents from companies other than philip morris and r.j. reynolds, because they were all in this agreement to conceal and mislead. the verdict form that you are going to get looks like this. we are going to ask you to answer yes to question no. 1. when you get to -once you get to question no. 1 and answer yes, then the engle findings apply. and the engle findings tell you the defendants were negligent, tell you the defendants were negligent. you know, from the undisputed testimony in this case, is that mr. huish died as a result of their products. that he relied on the things they said, just like millions of other addicted smokers do. was r.j. reynolds tobacco company's negligence a legal cause of john delbert huish's death? i'm going to tell you, you should answer yes to that question. when you get to question no. 3, the same question regarding philip morris. yes. you get to question no. 4 on the verdict form, "were the defective and unreasonably dangerous cigarettes placed on the market of r.j. reynolds a legal cause of mr. huish's death? and no. 5 is the same question for philip morris. the undisputed, unrebutted testimony in this case came from dr. burns, that mr. huish died as a result of smoking their defective and unreasonably dangerous cigarettes. there is no other answer to that question but yes. question no. 6 and 7 has to do with the defendants' concealment or omission of material information about the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes or both was a legal cause of mr. huish's death. we are asking you to answer yes to both of those questions because the evidence has been clear on that issue. the very responsive gate that there is no proof tells you, it is the very message that they were peddling for 50 years. no. 8 and 9 has to do with r.j. reynolds and philip morris' agreement with others to conceal or omit information regarding the health effects of cigarettes or their addictive nature and whether that was a legal cause. same answer on that. they lied. they spent billions of dollars on peddling the lie. they celebrated and bragged to one another about how successful that program was, and then they come here and they tell you it did not have any effect on mr. huish. y'all are the only ones that can evaluate that. these are my suggestions to you as mrs. huish's lawyer, that all these questions should be answered yes. and then you get to question no. 10, which is really what this trial is all about. question no. 10, how do you apportion up a fault here? mr. huish did not try to quit. but keep in mind this. they played and read a lot of deposition testimony here about when people -- they would ask people, did mr. huish ever tell you he wanted to quit? did mr. huish ever tell you he tried to quit? did mr. huish ever tell you he liked to smoke? did he ever tell you he enjoyed to smoke. all the answers to those questions are no. because the undisputed testimony in this case was that mr. huish was a big, quiet man and he was private, and he did not talk about those kinds of things. he did not walk around talking about how he is struggling to not smoke cigarettes. he did not walk around talking about other thing either that, you know, i do not want to stop. he did not say those things. so you cannot read anything into the fact, given the type of personality he had, being a very quiet and private man, that his failure to speak on those things somehow meant what the defendants think it meant. it is not fair and you should not do that. you should evaluate in the context of where he lived and how he lived. he is a responsible, honorable person. he did everything his wife ever asked of him. he supported her. he loved her. he was a good father. until the day he died he held his hand walking her to the car and held the door open for her. but the one thing he could not do for her was stop smoking cigarettes. and he did not respond to her and say, i do not care, i'm going to smoke because i want to smoke. he did not respond to her and say, i like smoking, i enjoy smoking. what did he say? i cannot quit. he said, i cannot quit, because he remembered how it felt every time that he went two or three or four hours in whatever situation it was where he could not smoke. and that created a habit, a hopeless habit. should he try to get passed that? you are darn right he should of. and that is why we came here saying we bear some responsibility. but it is not all his. it is not fair -- it is not fair for them to even suggest to you that you should put one hundred percent on mr. huish. that is not fair. he did exactly what they intended for him to do. and then they come in near, got you. none of it worked. he was going to do what he wanted to do no matter what. it is not fair, it is not right, and it is not even consistent with the evidence about mr. huish and about what they did. so this is really the question. we should have tried this case in three days. this is the question that you need to answer. that is really -- because all the other questions are guesses. this is the one that is up for grabs. and here's what we are going to say. what percentage was attributable to mr. huish's conduct; what percentage was r.j. reynolds' and what percentage was philip morris? mrs. huish acknowledges her husband's responsibility. she wants you to put a number next to his name. we are not suggesting you put a zero. that is not what we are suggesting. we are asking you to evaluate this case based on the evidence you have seen, if it is truly a personal choice, if it was truly a personal choice of mr. huish to smoke 40, 60 cigarettes a day for 46 years. why do not the defendants take the nicotine out? why do not they make cigarettes that do not have nicotine in them? they can do it. they have engineered. you saw unrebutted testimony they have patented ways to do it. they have engineered how to grow tobacco plants that do not have nicotine in them. why do not they take the nicotine out. nobody is going to smoke if you do not have nicotine in the cigarette. they ain't smoking for the flavor; they are smoking for the nicotine. they are smoking because they are addicted. make it a fair fight, take the nicotine out. all the rationale reasons that their expert gave you yesterday for smoking are all based on the addictive physiological properties of nicotine, every single one of them. i'm suggesting to you that you should put twenty percent next to mr. huish, and you should put forty percent next to philip morris, and forty percent next to r.j. reynolds, because he smoked their products for about half the time -- about half the time. half the time of his smoking career he is smoking r.j. reynolds' stuff, and half the time he is smoking philip morris' stuff. that is why we are asking you to split up that responsibility between the two equally. but the undisputed evidence in this case is that john delbert huish did not lie and he did not cheat. he lived -- he worked hard, he provided for his family, he was an honorable man who lived an honorable life. but they lied and cheated and did all this stuff on purpose. their responsibility should be much more than his responsibility. and then you get to the next question which is, what is the total amount of damages sustained by anna louise huish caused by the death of her husband, john delbert huish. these are always difficult questions to answer. now, the jury and the judge has given you an instruction that tells you how you should evaluate that. mr. and mrs. huish met when they were 18 years old. mrs. huish, when she was two years old, her parents gave her to the neighbor to raise her, because it was in the middle of the depression. she was raised by someone who was not her dad, and she rarely ever saw her parents again. the day she met mr. huish, they recognized that he needed her and she needed him. the very day they met, he asked her to marry him and she said yes. that is sounds -- in today's world, you do not hear about stuff like that too much. but they spent 46 years together. they embraced the world together. he provided for her, he protected her. they went around the world three times. what a wonderful life they lived and they get to their retirement and it is cut short. they have got these years where they can do all these things together, when they have the time to. 64 years old he passes away. 16.1 years is what she lost. he was her best friend. and as you heard yesterday, he was all of these things. he was honest, he was trusting, he was honorable, he was devoted, conscientious, respectful. they were enjoying their retirement. but he was quiet and private, and he was a loving husband and father. sixteen years of losing a husband that you ve spent your entire adult life with. i m going to suggest to you that you award $5 million. now, the instruction on the verdict form and the judge's instruction tells you you are not to reduce that number by the amount of the percentages that you put on mr. huish up top. the last questions that you are going to be asked are 12 and 13. under the circumstances of this case, state whether punitive damages are warranted against each of the defendants. this is not a situation where they did not know what they were doing. this is not a situation where they were trying their best. this is not a situation where they even intended to try their best. these defendants in this case did everything they could but lie and conceive and mislead people. they did it for money. they did it for money. they knew people would die and they did not care. that is the worst kind of conduct that corporate american has to offer. that is the worse kind of conduct any person could commit. we are asking you to the only reasonable response here is to answer yes to both of these questions. these decisions are yours and yours alone. i'm recommending percentages to you. i'm recommending amounts to you. these decisions are yours and yours alone. i'm not going to speak any more today. i hope i have not missed anything. i hope i have answered the questions that you have. it is hard for a lawyer to sit down at this point, because if you have got a question i did not answer and i do not know what it is, i do not get to get up again. what you do here matters. what you do here matters. y'all know it. thank you.