18 mr. boyce: thank you, your honor. good morning. jurors: good morning. mr. boyce: may it please the court. counsel. ladies and gentlemen, i want to start by thanking you for your time and your patience and, most importantly, your attention in this united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 case. you have been a remarkably professional and attentive jury, and that is one thing everybody here agrees on. so before i get started with my review of the evidence, i want to make sure that you understand on behalf of myself, miss amadi, and mr. harrison, we appreciate your willingness to serve in this case. what i want to do today is go through the evidence. and as you may recall in opening statements, i used this board that i entitled four key issues. sorry, can you see it down there? the court: do you want the easel, counsel? mr. boyce: no, i'll be okay. i want to use it for a second. i want to use this as a roadmap to help us go through the evidence, try to point out the evidence that i think will help you decide the questions that you have to decide now that we have a verdict form. but i want to spend a moment at the outset to remind you as we talked about in opening statements, there are really four key united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 issues. the first thing we will talk about is evidence in this case that shows mr. moyer is not a member of the engle class. the second issue is the evidence that proves that mr. moyer at age 83 passed away from skin cancer unrelated to smoking 13 years after he decided to stop smoking. the third main topic is the evidence that prevents plaintiffs from ever being able to close that drawbridge that we talked about; the evidence that prevents plaintiff from being able to connect any of the stuff that mr. schlesinger spent so much time talking about yesterday to mr. moyer in a direct, continuous and substantial way. and lastly, we will talk about the evidence you saw that shows that mr. moyer is 100 percent responsible for the consequences of his smoking-related decisions. in my opening statements, i tried to make it clear that this case was about dale moyer and dale moyer alone. it is not about tobacco. it is not about whether cigarettes should be banned. it is not united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 about cigarette advertising. it is not about other smokers and what may or may not have happened to them. it is a case exclusively about mr. moyer, the reasons he smoked, and what happened in his life. and the verdict form, as you will see when we go through it, each and every question on that verdict form is about mr. moyer. there is one question at the end, punitive damages, and that is where mr. schlesinger would have you start. but there is a whole host of questions before then, and each and every one of them relates exclusively to mr. moyer and the decisions he made about smoking throughout his life. what we saw from the evidence time and time again, as we talked about in opening statements, is that mr. moyer was a smart, willing and informed smoker. from the time he very first started smoking at age nine, he knew to hide it from his parents, he knew to hide it from his father's congregation. he knew that it was united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 inappropriate and something that he should not be doing. in the early '50s, when he was in college and in his early 20s, he starts to believe that smoking is linked with a variety of health problems. and as we saw, by 1964, 1965, he believes that smoking causes lung cancer, and that belief never changes once for his entire life. he never even heard of the agencies that mr. schlesinger talked about yesterday. mr. moyer never heard of tirc or ctr or ti, and we have the video clip for you. can you get it for me, cliff? 16 17 follows:) q. have you ever heard of an entity called tobacco industry research committee or tirc? a. no. q. have you ever heard of an entity called council for tobacco research or ctr? a. no. q. have you ever heard of an entity called tobacco institute or ti? united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 a. no. (video clip concluded.) mr. boyce: he never even heard of the organizations. mr. moyer's beliefs about smoking never changed based on anything the tobacco companies ever said or did not say. and when we go through the instructions, you will see how time and time again you are told to focus on that connection. did plaintiffs prove a connection between mr. moyer and the conduct? and with all due respect, the instructions are not mumbo jumbo. they are long, and it is a complicated case, but that is the law that you have to follow here. it is the law of the case. they are easy to understand if you take your time and go through them. but they are not mumbo jumbo. they are very important, because they are the law that you have to apply to the facts. secondly, we asked mr. moyer if he had ever even spoke to an employee of a tobacco company. and you can see at the bottom that she united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 said: you have never spoken to any agent or employee of any of the other co-defendants in this case. and he said no. he never spoke to anybody at reynolds, he never heard of ti, he never heard of ctr, he never heard of the tirc. we saw also from the facts that the first time in his life that mr. moyer put in a concerted and continuous and serious effort to stop smoking, he did. and never smoked again. he was in control of his smoking. the first time he went more than a day or so without smoking, he stopped smoking permanently and never started again. and we saw time and time again how mr. moyer was a willing smoker, smoked because he liked it and enjoyed it. smoked because he wanted to. he was the one that led the jokes and wrote the cheers. mr. hammer described him as a ball of fire at the party. that is who he was. he was a man who enjoyed smoking, he was a man who enjoyed having fun, restaurants, vacations every summer, and as mr. hammer put united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 it, he is the ball of fire at the party. but most importantly, he was a ball of fire who passed away at 83 from skin cancer; not from smoking. and when he passed away at 83, it was 13 years after he stopped smoking. and he stopped smoking by following through on a program that lasted one week. there was another piece of evidence in here that i think was very important, and it showed just how willing and happy mr. moyer was with his smoking behavior. and that is the story that ms. rodd told us about the visits to the r.j. reynolds tobacco plant sometime in the mid '70s. in the mid 1970s, mr. moyer is in his mid 50s, and he decides to take his family on a tour of a tobacco plant. that evidence shows that mr. moyer was not a smoker tortured by an inability to quit smoking. somebody smoking against his will because he could not stop. it shows that it is somebody who is very comfortable with his smoking, very comfortable with the smoking decisions he made. you heard her describe it as important to him. it was a big deal. he wanted to go and united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 look at how cigarettes were made. but it shows his attitude about smoking as of that time. an alcoholic trying to stop would not tour a jack daniels factory. mr. hammer: objection. the court: overruled. this is argument. ladies and gentlemen, this is just counsel's take on the facts in evidence. proceed. mr. boyce: it underscores that for the vast majority of his life, as he put it, when it hit the fan, he was happy smoking, in control of his own behavior and smoking because he wanted to. and those are the two fundamental reasons why mr. moyer is not a member of the engle class. he knew everything he needed to know about smoking from a very early age, he was in control of his smoking and smoking willingly because he wanted to. the only legal cause, a direct and continuous and substantial cause of his smoking, was mr. moyer. that is why he is not an engle class member. there are engle class members. there are united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 people that maybe heard of ti or ctr, or ctr or tirc? mr. hammer: objection. the court: sustained. mr. boyce: people who have difficulty stopping and are tortured over a long period of time by an inability to put it down. that was not mr. moyer. we also saw a variety of evidence that when mr. moyer wanted to control his smoking, he had no problem doing that. we talked about his early jobs at the department stores, the clothing stores. we talked about how in church and when he was at a nonsmoking restaurant or a nonsmoking hotel, he did not smoke cigarettes. he told you, and his brother echoed this, that after he stopped working in the stores, he became a traveling salesman. one of the things he liked about being a traveling salesman was that he set his own schedule, that he was his own boss, and he was in charge of his own day. and larry moyer explained to you that smoking was part of that lifestyle. united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 but what appealed to mr. moyer was being in control. he was always in control of every aspect of his life. it was life well led; it was a long life; and it was one that at every turn, mr. moyer did what he wanted to do on his own terms. i want to point out brooks brothers quickly. he started working at brooks brothers in 1986. in 1986, mr. moyer is about 57 years old. 56 or 57 years old. plaintiffs would have you believe that he is 30 or 40 years into an addiction that is controlling his own hands in a way he cannot stop. but he decides to go and work at brooks brothers. we know there is no smoking at brooks brothers. there is no stepping outside every ten minutes to have a cigarette. he takes a job where he knows he is not going to be able to smoke for big portions of the day, and he does it in the mid '80s. we have heard time and time again in this case if you can go a day, you can go a week. if you can go a week, you can go a lifetime united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 without quitting -- without smoking. on the other side of the coin, we saw time and time again that mr. moyer enjoyed smoking. picture after picture shows him living a happy and full life of which smoking was a part, not a life that was controlled by and led by an addiction to cigarettes. here he is at the beach, with his golfing friends, winning a box of balls with a friend, singing at the piano table, singing with ms. hedberg, in the barbershop quartet. and importantly, it was not just cigarettes. you heard from his brother that he smoked a pipe in the late '50s and '60s. you heard from ms. hedberg he smoked a pipe in the '80s. it is not just cigarettes. there are a variety of smoking that appealed to mr. moyer. but it was not just cigarettes. you have heard the concept of legal cause needs to be direct, continuous and substantial. but another way to look at that is if you take it out, if you take the cause away, would it have made anything different? and when you think about whether united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 addiction is the legal cause of mr. moyer's smoking, remember the pipe smoking, remember that he smoked other forms of tobacco, and that it was not just cigarettes. and remember the pictures that show him time and time again enjoying himself in a variety of settings, of which smoking was a part. contrast that with the very limited evidence that you saw that mr. moyer ever missed out on any activities or spent time alone because of his smoking. smoking did not control mr. moyer. now, addiction does not change it. talk about how mr. moyer is in control of his own behavior, but addiction does not change it. plaintiffs want you to believe that addiction takes away choice, that it takes away control. but every single doctor in this case said the opposite. dr. seidman, dr. mascarenhas, dr. proctor, dr. wolek, dr. civantos and dr. policzer. all agreed that every smoker can quit. they all have the ability to stop if they are properly motivated. dr. wolek, i thought, put it pretty good. united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 the idea that mr. moyer was too addicted to stop is right here from dr. wolek. he says: certainly mr. moyer would be a good example of that. he, at the end of his addiction, was at three and a half packs a day, according to his testimony, you know, up to four packs a day and he was able to quit. so there is proof right there. that is plaintiff's expert witness, dr. wolek, telling you that mr. moyer himself is proof that every smoker can quit when they are properly motivated. you saw this from the surgeon general. studies suggesting that everyone can quit smoking. and smokers quit by the millions over the years, between 1955 and 1965, almost 18 million people quit smoking. they are smoking the same cigarettes as mr. moyer. smoking cigarettes in the same amount of mr. moyer. thirty million people quit between 1964 and 1979, and by 2014, there is 60 million former smokers in this country. that is the largest change in any one health behavior in this country's history. period. there are not 60 million people who united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 did not jog and now jog. there are not 60 million people who have lost weight or stopped drinking or stopped drinking coffee or anything else. this is by far the largest change in any one health behavior in the history of this nation. there is nothing about the cigarette that stops this. those people smoked the same cigarettes as mr. moyer. mr. moyer himself quit smoking the same cigarettes he smoked from sometime in the late 1970s. a couple points about the cigarette, and i'll get back to mr. moyer. you heard that nicotine occurs naturally in the tobacco plant. dr. proctor explained that the defendants do not add extra nicotine to tobacco. they process it, but they do not add extra nicotine to tobacco. dr. seidman told you pretty clearly there is nothing magic about a cigarette; it has no power other than what the smoker gives to it. but there is nothing magic in it. dr. seidman explained that after two or three days, all the nicotine is out of your united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 body after you stop, and in two or three days, all the nicotine is gone. in a couple weeks, the brain begins to rewire itself. the brain rewires itself within a couple of weeks. the idea that there is a permanent change is just not supported by the evidence. but most importantly for mr. moyer, none of this mattered on day 8 in 2000. he used zyban for seven days. there is no nicotine in zyban. zyban is an antidepressant. it is called wellbutrin. and wellbutrin was around for a long time. but it is not nicotine replacement therapy. that means the first day he went without smoking, there is no nicotine in his body. he uses the zyban for seven days. on the eighth day, none of this is in any way powerful enough to make mr. moyer pick up a cigarette or make mr. moyer want to smoke or make mr. moyer go back to smoking, and he stays that way for the last 13 years of his life. there is no such thing as a subset of hyper addicted smokers. and we talked about this with dr. proctor. united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 the national cancer institute wrote monograph 15. this document is in evidence. you can review it yourselves. we have a quote from page 24. as you recall, i talked about it with dr. proctor, and what they looked at was people that were still smoking, and they tried to figure out are these people still smoking more addicted than the 60 million that have put it down. and they found no. they said there is little evidence to suggest there is an increasing level of addiction in the residual smoking population as measured either by the number of cigarettes you smoke each day, or how quickly you smoke when you wake up. no evidence. when i asked dr. proctor about it, he said: that is what the national cancer institute set out to study. they were looking at whether there was a group of super addicted residual smokers who will never give it up, and they said they did not find any support for that hypothesis. but dr. proctor went on. i asked him: you do not dispute that the fundamental united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 conclusion of monograph 15 is that there is no support for this hardening hypothesis? and he said: oh, for sure. that is a mythology. there is no body of smokers who absolutely cannot quit. that is why the level is continuing to fall right through that mythical layer. and the level he is talking about is the number of people who smoke in this country. they set out to see if there was some way to explain why people kept smoking. and he said: look, the level of people who quit continues to fall right through it. it is a myth, from plaintiff's own expert. it is a myth to suggest that there is a group of smokers who are so addicted they cannot stop. and the same thing goes for mr. moyer. dr. wolek told you he is proof of this. the national cancer institute and monograph 15 and dr. wolek are saying the same thing. if you look at what it takes to stop smoking, you see the same thing. dr. seidman described mr. moyer as an emotion-triggered smoker. his advice for those smokers is that wanting a cigarette will not hurt you. united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 there is a saying: do not just do something, sit there and let the feeling pass. that is what he is up against if he tries to quit smoking. and that is why motivation is the key. there is nothing in withdrawal that overwhelms a smoker who is serious about stopping. if you could switch me to the elmo, please. technician: sure. mr. boyce: you can see it at the bottom from dr. seidman's chart. without a cigarette, mr. moyer was nervous, irritated, angry, edgy and upset. on day 8 when he stopped in 2000, he is experiencing those feelings. but since when did those feelings become a legitimate reason not to do something that you wanted to do? if being irritated was an excuse for not doing something you were committed to do, would any of us have graduated high school or been able to park in the garage -- mr. hammer: objection. golden rule. the court: objection noted. overruled. mr. boyce: you would not make it to work united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 if being irritated or a little upset was a reason not to follow through. not to put in a little continuous effort to stop smoking, none of us would be here. you can switch me back, please. thank you. dr. seidman also had mr. moyer as the scared to quit smoker. this is the smoker who has no end of reasons and excuses to put off smoking. if you can quit for a day, you can quit every day. but it is the smoker that says, no, not today, i'm too busy, too stressed. they have no end of excuses. that is what plaintiff's own addiction expert classified mr. moyer as. dr. seidman went on to say that even if hardcore smokers, if you just go a day, they are surprised by how easy that first day of nonsmoking really is. now, dr. mascarenhas i thought was a very important witness in this case. he is not just mr. moyer's longest term treating physician. i think he knew him for more than 20 years. he also knew him personally. he knows him personally, he knows him professionally. united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 he also is the only doctor in the whole case who ever met mr. moyer when mr. moyer was a smoker. so he knows him personally and professionally, but he is the only person in this case, the only doctor, that knew mr. moyer when he was a smoker. and dr. mascarenhas said quite clearly: quitting smoking is a function of willpower. do you agree that mr. moyer, during any period of smoking, that he could have quit? i believe he could have quit if he had been motivated. he always had that capability to be motivated? correct. and it was not until 2000 that he found the actual motivation and actually quit. that is dr. mascarenhas. that is important, because the only difference between 2000 when mr. moyer quit permanently and all the other times that he thought about quitting or threw cigarettes out the window until he got to the next town, that is not a quit attempt. throwing your cigarettes out the window while you are driving down the road and buying a united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 pack in the next town is not a serious effort to quit. it is a passing thought at best. but dr. mascarenhas says it quite clearly. he always had this ability, always had this power. did not choose to exercise it until 2000. now, in 2000 mr. moyer was properly motivated, and he told you why in his own words. i want to look at four key dates to see why it is the defendants' position that throughout mr. moyer's life until 2000 he is smoking because he wants to, not because of an addiction. the first is 1964, '65. this is when mr. moyer starts to believe that smoking causes lung cancer. that is a belief that never waivers. what else does he need to know? he believes that it causes lung cancer, emphysema, way back in the '60s. the ingredients, stuff that people find on the websites. if you understand that it causes lung cancer, that is all you need to know. there was no evidence of a motivated, united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 serious, continuous effort to stop smoking in 1964. in 1979, he turned 50 years old. this is when he gets separated from mrs. moyer, and in 1984 he retires. you saw the photo where mrs. moyer kept working until 1996, but mr. moyer actually retired full time in 1984, except for the job at brooks brothers for a period there in 1986. so he turns 50 years old. at a time when millions of americans are making choices about their health. if they are interested in what is going to happen to them at the end of their lives, they are making different choices. and mr. moyer separated from his wife and spent the next 20 years, actually from about 1979 to 2003, golfing every day, traveling internationally, traveling around the united states, playing cards with his friends at the club in the afternoon, going out to dinner each night, and having a couple martinis. mrs. hedberg described him as the dean martin type, the drink in one hand and the cigarettes in the other. but for that period of time, 24 or 25 united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 years, he is not trying to stop. he is doing what he wants to do. it is not until he gets motivated that anything changes. nothing changed in the cigarettes, and do not forget there is no nicotine in zyban. zyban is not nicotine replacement. in 1985 is when the warning labels start to say smoking causes cancer. mr. moyer told you he stopped reading it. he believed the warnings, and we will get to that in a minute. but he stopped reading them. more importantly, 1985 is when his uncle tommy passed away from emphysema. larry moyer told you how repeatedly he explained to mr. moyer, this is what is going to happen to you. but you did not see any evidence of a quit attempt, something serious, motivated, continuous, a couple days in a row connected in any way to what happened with uncle tommy or the warning labels in 1985. 1984 is when dr. mascarenhas tells him you have got to quit smoking. it is the first time we see copd in a medical record and united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 dr. mascarenhas tells him: you need to stop. dr. civantos explained to you that these dates are important. because '64, '79, '85, if he stopped smoking then, we are not here. but dr. civantos also said if he had stopped in 1994, he had a pretty good chance of avoiding the injury that the daughters are suing for today. but from 1994 to 2000, mr. moyer kept smoking. and there is no evidence that he ever put in a continuous and sustained and serious effort to stop for those six years. we talked about the patch. look at the medical records. in these five boxes that mr. schlesinger was pointing to yesterday, you will not find one record, ever, where the reason for the visit was smoking cessation assistance. his cardiologist tells him to stop smoking in 1994. never asked mascarenhas for help. never asks any doctor for help. not one record where the reason for visit is patient is here to quit smoking. never goes to a cessation clinic. never sees a psychiatrist or psychologist. never asks anyone for help. has friends who are united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 former smokers, does not reach out to them, hey, how did you do it? do you have any tips? hey, doc, i'm struggling with this, can you give me a hand? we have two patch records from 1992. one is from february and it says 30 patches. if mr. moyer was serious, there would be another one from march. the next one is december 31st of 1992. no evidence he ever filled that prescription. in mr. moyer's own words, he used the patch one time. we were talking about the patch you said you took. do you remember what time frame it was? he said: i think i tried it just once. the reference to the patch is two years later. we have february of '92, december of '92. two years later. it says: offer patches asap. no evidence that prescription was ever filled, and certainly no evidence that from '92 at any point in time he put in a serious, continuous effort to stop. same thing with the gum. united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 how long did you use the gum? he said: it tasted awful. i did not finish what i bought. chews the gum one time. does not finish what he buys. but this period between '94 and 2000 is the one that i think underscores it. the only difference between what happened in the past and what happened in 2000 is mr. moyer. because there is no evidence of that continuous, sustained effort for a period of six years after he is told quite clearly from his long-time friend, long-time cardiologist, you have got to put them down. no follow-up for help, no request for assistance. in those six years, all we have are two patch records, a year apart, and then two years later on, the patch. when he finally quits, nobody knows. his daughters told you they did not know that he quit. this is dr. civantos. i read this quickly. he says: i think there was a reasonable chance if he had stopped in '94, we would not be here today. when you stop smoking, united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 your body starts to heal itself immediately. your risk of getting diseases from smoking goes down every day that you go without smoking, so after a long enough period of time you are basically down at the same level of somebody who never smoked. you may not decline as quickly. may take a longer period of time. but if you quit smoking, the benefits start immediately, and they get better every day you go without cigarettes. that is what dr. civantos is saying, and you can see that in the surgeon general report for yourself if you want to review them. we asked his daughters, what did he do to quit in 2000. miss irimi said: i was busy at the time. i had a one-year-old child. miss rodd said: i was not there at that time. and miss mumtaz explained: i do not know how long it took him to quit. i do not know what he used. i asked her: were you surprised when you learned sometime later that he stopped? and she said: i never really had a thought about it. united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 the significance of that testimony is that it shows that mr. moyer was not fighting a 50-year battle against addiction and losing. think about it the other way. think if you had a family member that was trying to fight an addiction, and they finally beat. that would be the talk of the family. mr. hammer: objection, judge, golden rule. the court: thank you. overruled. mr. boyce: if you had an alcoholic in your family and they drank against their will for 50 years and they put down alcohol, that would be all you would talk about. that would be everything. mr. hammer: judge, again, objection, golden rule violation. the court: thank you. why do not you come sidebar. mr. boyce: i'll move on, your honor. the court: thank you. mr. boyce: thank you, sir. one of the daughters mentioned that she saw him with a patch on one time and never mentioned it to him. united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 in the '90s. sees him with a patch. does not even mention it. hey, dad, what are you doing? keep it up. way to go. nothing. no conversations about the health risks of smoking with their father, no conversations about cessation from smoking with their father. the only possible explanation for that is outside this courtroom they accepted that mr. moyer, and mr. moyer alone, was in control of his smoking. we have seen the clip before. this is what mr. moyer said he did. he followed the instructions. he took the pills and quit. took about a week. never smoked after that. and we asked him why. you can fast-forward. i do not want to play the clip. thanks. you can fast-forward to the first medical chart, please. when we asked mr. moyer why he quit in 2000 -- you are all familiar with the clip -- he said that it hit the fan for him. that was it. told him he had emphysema. it was different. for the first time in his life, he was motivated to stop. he was on zyban for one week, and after united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 that the only person standing between mr. moyer and resuming smoking was mr. moyer. that is the only thing for 13 years, and he never smoked another cigarette. and you heard him say in this case that he never wanted to. if you can flip to the elmo, please. technician: push the button on the side, the white button. mr. boyce: thanks. that is the evidence that shows that addiction is not a direct and continuous substantial cause of mr. moyer's smoke. he knows what he is doing. he is doing it willingly. he is touring tobacco plants with his family. and no evidence of a continuous, sustained effort to stop until 2000, and that is when he stops. and that is why whatever you want to call his smoking -- mr. hammer is right, you can call it addiction, you can call it habit, you can call it behavior. whatever you want to call mr. moyer's smoking, that is up to you guys. the second part of this question: and if united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 so, was addiction a legal cause of the copd, emphysema and heart disease? right? first part is, was he addicted. that is entirely up to you. whatever definition you want to apply. he might need it, he might not. what is really important for class membership is the second part. was addiction a legal cause? to be a legal cause, it has to be direct, continuous and substantial. and here, because mr. moyer knew what he was doing and smoked willingly and did not put in the continuous effort to stop, the only direct and continuous substantial cause of his smoking is himself. and that is why he is not an engle class member. that is why your answer to this question -- and i know i skipped ahead a little bit -- has to be no. mr. moyer is in control of his smoking, not an addiction. regardless of what you call it, even if you call it addiction, it is not a direct continuous cause of mr. moyer's smoking. there is only one of those in this case, and it is mr. moyer. now i want to switch gears a little bit. united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 if you could flip it back over, please. technician: sure. mr. boyce: you got it. technician: the first medical record? mr. boyce: yes. 7 8 follows:) voice: what was it that -- (video clip concluded.) mr. boyce: we will start right there. the actual first question -- you can go ahead and put it up. the actual first question on the verdict form, and rather than switching back to the elmo, i'll read it for you. was smoking cigarettes a legal cause of mr. moyer's heart disease. there is two introductory questions on there. one about heart disease and one about when mr. moyer got copd. if you answer those questions no, the case is over. you would come back in, and the case would be over. we talked about the timing of mr. moyer's copd, and you see the evidence on both sides. united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 one thing that is important to consider as you look at that question is that mr. moyer never saw a lung doctor until 2003. the first time he goes to see a pulmonologist, the guys that treat lungs, is 2003. and that is the first time he had the formal test, the pulmonary function test, that diagnosed his copd and emphysema. i do not want you to think that because they are separate on the verdict form, there is any difference. emphysema is a form of copd. they are listed separately. but emphysema is a form of copd. with respect to the heart disease, with respect to whether it was a legal cause, the answer has to be no. we asked dr. mascarenhas. as part of your care and treatment of mr. moyer, did you determine what caused his coronary artery disease? dr. mascarenhas said: nobody can tell you. all i can tell you is he was a coronary profile. if you look at all of the things in his coronary profile, looking at all of mr. moyer's united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 risk factors, he had multiple risk factors. dr. mascarenhas said he had five out of the seven. smoking is one of them. family history, obesity, high cholesterol, hypertension. he is got five of the seven. alcohol is also a risk factor, and you have seen the alcohol records in this case. but we asked dr. mascarenhas, can you look at those and say that one of these is a legal cause, that one of these is more likely -- mr. schlesinger: excuse me, your honor, i object. that is not what it says. the court: thank you. ladies and gentlemen, you are to rely on your own recollection of the evidence. the testimony of dr. mascarenhas is on the screen as well. proceed. mr. boyce: they asked him, could you look at those risk factors and say that one was more likely a cause than the others? he said: no. asked him again: you said no? and he said: that is correct. united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 that is dr. mascarenhas telling you he is got a list of risk factors, and i cannot tell you which one of these risk factors caused the disease. in that situation, that is a gentleman that if you take smoking out of the picture is going to get heart disease anyway. that is but-for causation. if you take smoking out of the picture, because of the other risk factors, he gets heart disease anyway. that should be an easy "no" for you on the verdict form for heart disease. that is mr. moyer's own cardiologist telling you that it is not a legal cause. dr. mascarenhas says that, you know, his heart never even gave him a problem. having it written in the medical records does not mean that it is manifested or that it is causing you problems such that you could recover for it in a court of law. this is his cardiologist saying, fortunately, his heart never gave him a problem. and we heard this from mr. moyer himself: you have had heart problems? united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 not really. when you say not really, it lends me to believe -- well, he had been told he had a heart problem, but it never showed up as being one. that should be an easy no for you on the first question there with respect to heart disease. i want to talk quickly about the lung cancer. mr. moyer was lucky when he went in for his hip. they found the mass in his lung on a chest x-ray. they found it in october of 2003. he had surgery november 12, 2003. never had another treatment for lung cancer after november. in fact, in 2008 he tells dr. alvarez that he is not going to follow up any longer. he will not do any diagnostic studies and will accept whatever happens. mr. moyer did have a variety of health problems that were unrelated to smoking, but i want to spend a couple minutes talking about his lung condition. and then we will talk about the next question on the verdict form, which is whether united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 he had parotid cancer, and if so, did the parotid cancer cause his death or was it smoking-related diseases that caused his death. first, i want to talk a little bit about mr. moyer's pulmonary condition. first, let me say he obviously had copd and emphysema. but the one thing i think that is clear from the record in this case is that he did not die from copd or emphysema, and that he did not suffer debilitating symptoms from copd or emphysema every day from sometime in the '90s until 2013. and the evidence there starts with mr. moyer himself. in 2003, he said: 16 17 follows:) q. do you think the hip surgery had more of an impact on preventing you from playing golf or the copd? a. oh, the hip surgery. the copd was not really evident yet, as far as slowing me down. i was in great shape up till then, i thought. q. up until 2003? a. yeah. united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 (video clip concluded.) mr. boyce: so that is mr. moyer himself saying up until 2003, the copd did not slow him down. i also want to make a point there is no evidence, no testimony in this case that mr. moyer's smoking has anything to do with his hip trouble. you can see in the medical records his hip gives out after a lifetime of golfing. it is not related to smoking, not a smoking-related disease. but it continues. the first time he sees a pulmonologist is in '03. the first time he has a pft is in '03. you have seen this record from february of 2003 where he is still golfing without any shortness of breath unless he is on a hilly course. mr. moyer was 74 years old in 2003. he is a 74-year-old man golfing, walking without any shortness of breath unless he is on a hilly course. that is in 2003. it continues. you saw the pictures. that is mr. moyer in 2006 with united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 his daughters and mrs. moyer. he is not wearing oxygen. he is out of the house, part of family events, doing things he wants to do. in 2008, mr. moyer was 79 years old. that is his youngest grandson, who is seven or eight years old -- excuse me, about six years old in this photo. i think he was born in 2002. again, mr. moyer, not on oxygen, part of the family, living a life. he is 79 years old at that point. that is eight years after he stopped smoking. and the pictures tell you what you need to know about this. he also had other problems like his weight and his sleep apnea. problems with his spine that further exacerbated the breathing problems that he did have. when he gets to see dr. civantos in 2011, he is not on oxygen, and dr. civantos's first thought is that his lung condition may not be as severe as we were worried. but you think golfing in 2003, no oxygen in '06, no oxygen in '08, does not wear the oxygen at least all the time because he did not take it with him to see dr. civantos. and united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 that is june of 2011. june of 2011, he had just turned 82 years old. the reason he went to see dr. civantos is he had the mass on his neck, and this is what ultimately caused mr. moyer's death. and it is the only cause of mr. moyer's death. mr. moyer had a mass on his neck. he went to see dr. civantos. dr. civantos told you that his first thought was it was squamous cell carcinoma. and here is a brief summary of the history of all the squamous cell carcinomas that mr. moyer had on his skin from 1999 to 2012, 13 years. squamous in '99, '01, '05, '07, '09, and '11. and there was a big one in 2008 on his left cheek. and it spread. this is what dr. civantos told you. he said that when he came in, he was worried about the fact that what happened in his neck had come from his cheek, and he wanted to get a core biopsy. but first we have a biopsy from what they took out of his cheek in 2008. this is what dr. rosic was talking about. these are the slides from what they took united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 out of mr. moyer's cheek in 2008, and these are the slides that show that they did not get it all. that is a cancer cell. you can see dr. rosic, who is the only pathologist in the whole case -- in fact, the only witness in the entire case that does not agree that the squamous cell carcinoma that he had here, here and here and here over 12 years is not the same cancer that he had behind his ear in 2011 is dr. policzer, a guy who saw him four times in 2013, never looked at any pathology, looked at one inch of medical records that he got from mr. gdanski. dr. policzer is the guy who sat in that chair and said: people did not know about sunscreen until the '80s. mr. harrison asked him: where did you get that? he said: i was guessing. just guessing. dr. policzer is the only doctor in this case who does not acknowledge that what happened on his cheek spread to his ear. but that is the cancer cells in the 2008 united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 cancer. that is what dr. rosic explained is the lymphatic system, the way cancer spreads, it gets into your lymph system or your blood vessels. that is a cancer cell in mr. moyer's lymph symptom in 2008. these are cancer cells in mr. moyer's bloodstream in 2008. he was out and about. that is where dr. civantos stands right on this. when dr. civantos sees him in 2011, he said: i was suspicious because of the history of this patient, and i wanted to know myself. so i took a core biopsy. the core biopsy is cutting the skin off first, going in and getting a core. not just a needle. you want to make sure it does not come from the skin. cut the skin off and go get a core. he said: look, i want to make sure i know what i'm dealing with. when the report came back, dr. civantos said it was spread out squamous cell carcinoma. dr. arguelles, mr. moyer's cancer doctor said: this is a periparotid metastatic tumor. united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 periparotid means it is around the parotid. when we go back to the elmo, i'll show you what these questions are. periparotid means it is not in the parotid, and it is around it. and finally, dr. arguelles says: judging by the history of the large skin cancer resected from the left cheek, this may well represent a relapse of cancer, of which mr. moyer is aware. he told him this on the ground. only policzer came in and second-guessed any of this. there is policzer, the primary parotid tumor. the only guy in the whole case that had that opinion. dr. civantos puts it another way. mr. moyer has squamous cell carcinoma. correct? started on his skin, correct, and metastasized to his parotid? correct. that is dr. civantos. there is a question on the verdict form that says -- maybe if you could switch me to the elmo. united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 these are the questions on the verdict form that relate to the parotid cancer. the first is: did mr. moyer have a primary parotid cancer? if you think that dr. civantos and dr. arguelles and dr. rosic are right and what happened was that the cancer on his cheek spread and got into the area of his parotid gland, your answer on this one has to be no. but what is important, if you answer no for number 4, you skip number 5. as you can see from the directions -- or certainly you will be able to see from the directions a little bit better in the jury room, if your answer is no for mr. moyer on primary parotid, then the cancer on his ear, the cancer in his neck, the cancer that caused his death is not related to smoking. the only theory -- everybody acknowledges smoking does not cause skin cancer. the only theory linking smoking with the cancer is dr. policzer saying, well, it started in the parotid gland. if it came from the skin, this one has to be no. but when you answer it no, which is united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 in, i think, all honesty, the only fair interpretation of the evidence in this case, that means it is not a smoking-related disease and you skip question number 5. now, you can switch me back, please. there is a couple reasons that we know it is not primary parotid cancer. the first is dr. rosic took a look at his parotid. that is his parotid gland right there. those are actually normal gland cells. there is no cancer in the parotid gland. dr. policzer, who never looked at the pathology, did not know that. there is no cancer in the parotid gland. that is why arguelles is right. there is no cancer in the parotid. it is behind his ear and around the neck. finally, dr. rosic explained to you the neck mass. those are the things called horn pearls that are characteristics of skin cancer spreading. we have cancer getting in the bloodstream in 2008. we have the same cancer, the same cell type coming back in 2011. and when they look in his parotid to see if there is anything, policzer says there is no united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 cancer. there is also no evidence that smoking causes parotid cancer. you can look through these books, the surgeon general reports, not in there. not an engle disease, but that is a different matter. the real reasons are, civantos told you this is a metastatic skin cancer. had nothing to do with smoking, and these pathology slides prove it. that means that the only way that plaintiffs can link smoking to mr. moyer's death is to say, well, he could have had surgery if he did not have copd. we talked about his pulmonary condition, we talked how dr. civantos when he first saw him thought he could have the surgery. we know the surgery did not go forward. one of the problems here is they cannot connect copd to mr. moyer's death in a direct and continuous and substantial way because there is no guarantee with the surgery. dr. policzer even said it: we do not know what would have happened if he had undergone the surgery. united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 i want you to remember this was not surgery or radiation. dr. civantos's original plan was surgery followed by radiation. but this surgery was far from a magic bullet. far from a cure. he told you it was six to eight hours. he had to flip the ear up and work around the bony structure. the nerve was going to be sacrificed. the paralysis was never going away. all of these problems were not related to smoking. that is what happened. skin cancer is a nasty disease. cancer is tough on any patient, regardless of whether they have copd or not. but this six- to eight-hour surgery where the ear gets flipped up and muscle gets reworked and all the bony structures, it is a very tough surgery at any age. and do not forget, mr. moyer is 82 years old at this time. dr. civantos said the surgery would have given him a fighting chance, and it was 60 percent shot at success. not 60 to 70, not 70. he begrudgingly said 60. it is an either-or proposition. he has a fighting chance if he united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 does both. it is not just surgery. the idea that there was a quick fix surgery that copd stopped is just not supported by the evidence. we also know what happens. dr. civantos reports there is a rare possibility mr. moyer could end up on a ventilator after the surgery. and in his addendum, he indicates that mr. moyer was scared of that. he did not want to take a risk of surgery. and he did not want to end up on the ventilator. and that the family, after consulting with dr. alvarez, made a plan to proceed with radiation outside the university of miami. he goes and starts the radiation. so he is scared to go on a ventilator. he goes and has it. but you have to understand that the surgery was at best a fighting chance proposition. his age, his other health problems, the fact that this was metastatic cancer that had been coming back since 1999, all that stuff plays into his decision. he decides to go with radiotherapy, and the doctors tell him, this is a good choice. united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 this is where dr. policzer told you: i know what doctors mean when you say try and eradicate, you do not mean eradicate. eradicate means eradicate. you get to decide for yourselves what is credible and what is not. this record says chemotherapy is a good choice in trying to get rid of this patient's cancer. dr. policzer explained to you, though, this type of radiation to the head and neck certainly for an 82-year-old man is tough treatment. a nasty disease and tough treatment for people that never smoked cigarettes ever. radiation on itself can make people walk away from treatment, whether they have copd or not. it is not the copd that stops mr. moyer from having the radiation. dr. civantos said this pretty clearly. we asked him. is it the copd that stopped mr. moyer from continuing with the radiation? and he said: no. i do not think i could say it as strongly as that. reasonable degree of medical probability, you are not getting that far? and he said: i do not know. united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 dr. civantos is telling you the copd is not a direct, continuous, substantial cause of why mr. moyer had trouble with the radiation. surgery is a fighting chance, but it was always going to be combined with radiation, and this is dr. civantos telling you pretty clearly that the copd did not prevent him from continuing the radiation. he starts the radiation, he gets past the worst of it. i think he is past the nadir. he decides to discontinue the radiation. and these are the letters where his doctors at the time say: look, you are past the worst of it. please come back and finish your treatment. by not completing it, you might compromise the final outcome. we recommend you resume as soon as possible. he discontinued treatment in october of 2001. this is dr. arguelles and dr. tache. they say at the bottom: he tolerated the treatments reasonably well with the expected skin reaction and mild to moderate mucositis. the parotid tumor did appear to be showing good response at the time of the last exam. so he tolerates it well. it is working. united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 it is shrinking the tumor. dr. policzer says the cancer was responding to the treatment. dr. civantos says the tumor was responding to the radiation treatment. dr. civantos said: look, if he was my patient, i would have recommended that he complete the radiation, and his chances of survival would have been better if he completed the treatment. now, you know that mr. moyer did not complete the treatment, but you have seen that copd is not the legal cause of that. he is 82 years old. there is a variety of things going on. the plaintiff's own witnesses, plaintiff's own doctors told you quite clearly copd is not the reason he could not complete the radiation. he cannot complete the radiation, which is part of civantos's original plan to give him a fighting chance, and they cannot link copd or any smoking-related disease to the cause of death. the cause of death is skin cancer. copd did not stop anybody from saving mr. moyer's life. he was 82 years old. it had spread and united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 come back half a dozen times. it is a tough disease. your answer on those questions: did he have a primary parotid? did the parotid cause his death? they have to be no. it is not a smoking-related disease. and because they cannot link copd to his death, your answer on whether the smoking caused mr. moyer's death has to be "no" as well. now, dr. policzer told you that after mr. moyer stopped the radiation treatment is the first time that he ends up in hospice. it is the fall of 2011 when mr. moyer decides to stop the radiation treatment, and you saw the evidence after 2011, 2012, mr. moyer's living by himself, got the roommate from -- the snowbird roommate from canada. excuse me. he is got the snowbird roommate from canada, but he is living on his own. he is driving himself around town. cooking for himself. he is shopping for himself. paying his own bills. you saw him driving away in january of 2013, about six weeks before he passed away. united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 but in 2011, 2012, mr. moyer is living by himself. it is not until april of 2012 that we see the first hospice record. but in april of 2012, he is getting home care. i think ms. irimi said they had a girl taking care of him. that woman's name was alicia lord. she spent time with mr. moyer starting in april. but policzer said there was no reason for mr. moyer to come to hospice without the cancer. before mr. moyer had cancer, a cancer not related to smoking. before mr. moyer had a nonsmoking-related cancer, he was never being recommended to hospice? that is correct. it is after he stops the radiation therapy for the nonsmoking-related cancer that we start seeing the hospice records? dr. policzer says: correct. they start in april, but it is not until the next year of 2013 that he is actually in the facility. so he gets admitted in the hospice, and the primary diagnosis is end-stage head and neck cancer, specifically parotid gland cancer. that is the skin cancer. the united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 nonsmoking-related cancer. the records continue. these are dr. policzer's own records. he is got metastatic cancer, metastatic cancer, metastatic cancer, metastatic cancer, metastatic cancer. always, every time in hospice, the number one diagnosis is metastatic cancer. you can see that respiratory distress shows up number three, number two, and then it is off the chart all the time. that is what i mean by direct and continuous. when you see respiratory distress come and go, that is acute symptoms. that is not chronic. that means he is having trouble breathing this day, but not the next day. nothing on the 15th. number two on the 16th. number two on the 17th. nothing on the 20th. nothing on the 21st. the one thing that stays constant throughout his time in hospice is the cancer, the nonsmoking-related cancer. disseminated cancer. this record comes from march 1st, which is six days before mr. moyer passes away. the primary diagnosis united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 is still cancer of the head and neck. end-stage head and neck carcinoma. the patient is stable with shortness of breath. he is got the end-stage copd. seems to be comfortable with his breathing. the number one diagnosis is always metastatic cancer, unrelated to smoking. whether it is in hospice, whether it is from dr. civantos, whether it is the medical record. that is the direct, continuous and substantial cause of mr. moyer's death, a metastatic skin cancer. he had copd. he died from skin cancer. they cannot connect any of the smoking-related diseases to his death. he had copd, but he died of skin cancer. and that is where we come to the death certificate. frankly, i do not know why we had such a hullabaloo about the death certificate in this case. you guys get to decide why it was important to mr. moyer's daughters that copd be on the death certificate. that is a call for you to make. what is important is you are going to get united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 an instruction that says death certificates do not decide the issue of what caused somebody's death. they show the date, the time, the age, give you some other background information, but in here, in this court, the death certificate you will read in the instructions, it does not decide the issue. you decide the issue. and when you decide the issue, remember civantos. remember the skin cancer here and dr. civantos telling you that is what this was, the skin cancer got out. i could have maybe given him a fighting chance, but i cannot tell you that the copd stopped him from having the treatment that i would have given him. that should be all you need to know about the wrongful death issues in this case. now, your answer is no, we want to talk about pain and suffering. the wrongful death damages, that is the reason that we ask. i think i asked it first and mr. batista, and i think by the end mr. hammer was asking. that is why the ages of the daughters are important. when you talk about a wrongful death, one of the things you are supposed to united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 keep in mind is how long was the life. mr. moyer got to see his daughters grow into middle age. he saw his grandkids grow to be teenagers. it was a full life, full of vacations every summer, restaurants every weekend, country clubs, new houses, new rugs, new skates, new cars, fun and exciting things, heat games, dolphins games. it was a full life. he lived to be 83 years old. and when he died, he died of metastatic skin cancer 13 years after he decided to quit smoking cigarettes. he is not an engle class member, and smoking did not cause his death. now, i want to switch gears a little bit. there is four questions on the verdict form. and thank you for your patience, i know it is a lot of talking. i have about a half hour left, and then we will hear from ms. ruiz and mr. woods. i want to switch gears and talk a little bit about questions 8, 9, and 10 on the verdict form. i lost the sheet of paper here. there it is. united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 if you would switch me to the elmo, please. while i'm here, this is: did mr. moyer have primary parotid? there is not even cancer in that parotid gland. when you talk about the legal cause for number 12, were any of mr. moyer's smoking-related diseases a legal cause of his death? that answer is no as well. it is the skin cancer, and the copd did not stop it. question number 8. there is four of these. they ask whether, as to each defendant, mr. moyer reasonably relied to his detriment on a statement or omission made by a defendant after may 5 of 1982. there is two of these questions that asked if he relied on a statement from one of the defendants, and then there is two of these questions that ask whether he relied on a statement as part of the conspiracy. the date 1982 is important. you have the questions for before, but when you read the instructions, it makes it perfectly clear that the important issue here is whether plaintiffs had proved mr. moyer relied on a statement united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 after 1982. but the first thing -- and keith, you can switch me back over, please. the first -- this is the jury instruction on what reasonable reliance means. may 5, 1982, will be in the instructions for you. and i'll get to it in a second. i know it is just a weird technical date. but on these reliance questions, 1, 2, 3, 4, the real issue is whether plaintiffs have showed you he relied on anything after may of 1982. but in order to rely on something, there is a very important limitation. the jury instructions say quite clearly that mr. moyer cannot be found to have relied on a statement or omission if he knew it was false or its falsity was obvious to him, or if the fact allegedly concealed was already known to him. put in simple terms, you cannot hide something from someone if they already know it is true. and that is the biggest reason your answer for all of these reliance questions from united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 mr. moyer has to be "no." mr. moyer knew everything he needed to know about smoking, from at least the '50s, the '50s and '60s. every single fact that they talk about with ti and ctr and tirc, the organizations he never heard of, every single one of those facts was known to him for decades before they were even made. he cannot rely on something -- even if that statement is not true, he cannot rely on it if he knows the truth. and he did. this is the drawbridge. it is not a castle. it is the 17th street causeway. we have all been stuck there more times than we can probably remember. but that is the problem. they cannot connect anything that went on with conspiracy that dr. proctor talked about to mr. moyer. the drawbridge stayed open through the whole case. it is not just the lack of him seeing it or knowing about it or hearing about it. the fundamental reason is you cannot conceal something from someone if they already know the truth. let us just go quickly through all the united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 stuff that mr. moyer learned about smoking in his life. these are the articles from detroit in the '50s, linking lung cancer to smoking. they are not just articles that we picked. these are from the newspapers that were in mr. moyer's own home. witness after witness told you he was a smart man, stayed up on current events, knew what he was doing. reader's digest in the '50s. how harmful are cigarettes. cancer by the carton. instructions on quitting. it is not just linking smoking with cancer, heart disease, emphysema. going this far back. when you look through the evidence, you will see that these articles have advice on how to stop. this is a magazine in mr. moyer's house way back in the '50s. you have seen this one where in 1957 the surgeon general said there had been excellent coverage, and the head of the national cancer institute indicated that the media and the newspapers, radio had done a terrific job covering this and informing the united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 public. 1964, the surgeon general's report comes out. mr. moyer remembered himself, remembered the coverage, remembers edward r. murrow a year later. this is the cover from the fort lauderdale sun-sentinel. want to quit smoking? read on. men who know best cure is not easy. that is from the fort lauderdale papers. this is mr. moyer talking about edward r. murrow and the impression it made on him. 13 14 follows:) q. do you remember seeing anti-smoking advertisements? a. yeah, i remember several instances of people who -- i remember specifically the edward r. murrow, when he sat and talked about dying of lung cancer. i think it was after he was already dead. there was a commercial that they had, that he was telling you to quit, and it made a very big impression on me. so big that i quit about 30 years later. q. did you believe what he was saying? a. i believed it. united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 (video clip concluded.) mr. boyce: he believed it. '64, 1965. he believes that edward r. murrow died from lung cancer from smoking. mr. schlesinger: judge, may i approach, please. the court: sure. (the following discussion was held at sidebar:) mr. schlesinger: sounds to me like he cut that man's answer off right in the middle of the answer. i'm not sure. but i have a feeling the man seemed like he was still talking. i do not think that was the man's full answer. the court: but i do not know what his complete answer is. mr. schlesinger: page and line and just stopped. the court: what is his full answer? mr. hammer: his full answer was: i believe he had lung cancer. the court: let me see it. mr. boyce: judge, on their representation, i'll add it. it does not united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 matter. the court: thank you. (sidebar discussion concluded, and the following was held in open court:) mr. boyce: the video clip got cut off a little bit there. the rest of his answer is that, i believed mr. murrow had lung cancer. and i think what he added was: he had no reason to lie. believes edward r. murrow. believes the psa. believes that edward r. murrow gets smoking (sic) from lung cancer. and the last part of it is, he knows that murrow has no reason to lie. huge impression on him. heard that from seidman, heard that from larry moyer, heard that from mr. moyer himself. that edward r. murrow clip made a very, very big impression on mr. moyer. that is 1965. remember, there is no quit attempt attached to that. that is willing smoking. that is why addiction is not a legal cause of this man's behavior. you hear about something like that. it makes an impression on you. you do not respond by trying to stop. you united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 are responsible for it. addiction is not the reason. 1966, the warning labels go on the pack. smoking may be hazardous to your help. congress has acted. the next step is yours. mr. moyer, we asked him: did you believe the warning? i think i did, for the most part, you know. i would say yes. believes the warning back in 1966. it is on every pack of cigarettes afterwards. on every pack of salem cigarettes he ever smoked. you can skip this one. 1970 warning label, surgeon general has determined that cigarette smoking is dangerous to your health. again, mr. moyer turns 40 in 1970. and again, no quit attempt connected to that one. this is uncle tommy. we talked about this a little early on. again, no quit attempts. larry moyer is telling him this is going to happen to you. this is the disease that mr. moyer ended up with, emphysema. 1985. uncle tommy's condition went on for ten years, united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 and it was general knowledge among the family. no quit attempt attached to that. that kind of awareness prevents mr. moyer from relying on anything that ti or ctr or tirc says. somebody takes you to see your uncle and tells you he is got emphysema from smoking, and this is going to happen to you, you cannot conceal that fact as a matter of law from that person anymore. lung cancer, emphysema, heart disease. he knew everything he needed to know throughout his smoking career. the '85 warning labels, smoking causes lung cancer, heart disease, emphysema. smoking by pregnant women results in fetal injury and premature birth. smoking contains carbon monoxide. and the same one that dr. civantos talked about, the reason the four key dates of '64 and '75 and '85 and '94 are so important: quitting smoking now greatly reduces serious risks to your health. those go on in 1985. and mr. moyer stops reading them. united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 this shows how he already knows what is going on. nothing shows you know it more when you stop reading them. he believes them in '66. by the time we get to the '80s, i did not read them. you just stopped reading what was on the package? and he says: right. you cannot conceal a fact from someone if they already know it is the case. i want to talk now fundamentally, that reason applies to all defendants. you will see on the verdict form -- and if you could switch me back over to the elmo -- actually, never mind, keith. thank you. when you go through the questions on reliance, and these are 8, 9, 10, 11 on the verdict form, you will see that they list out each defendant. and because of what we just talked about and the jury instruction, how you cannot conceal something from someone that they already know, your answer should be "no" for each defendant for each one of those questions. but in particular, this is where the date united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 of 1982 comes in. and i want to talk about reynolds a little bit specifically. plaintiffs played the clip of mr. moyer saying he thought salem lights were a step in the right direction. they are going to suggest to you in rebuttal that you should answer these questions yes. the first and fundamental reason is the jury instruction. you cannot rely if you know the truth. but there is a second reason for it. one, mr. moyer told you, in his own words, that by the time he switched to salem, he was aware that smoking caused lung cancer. i would have to say yes. and were you also aware before you ever smoked a salem that it could cause breathing difficulties? yes. we asked him: why did you go to menthol? you can skip this one. what did you like about salem? he said: i got to where i liked the taste of menthol, rather than non-menthol, which was not the case when i first started. i always united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 liked menthol and wondered why they did not make ten-packs instead of twenty for people who did not want to smoke menthol all the time. the last two i think are very important when you consider reynolds on the reliance questions. i would have wound up with menthol anyway. mr. moyer's own words. not necessarily with salem? no. we asked him -- you can skip these videos, thank you. do you remember why you picked salem? first he said: you know, i liked menthol. i probably would have ended up with it anyway. and it is possible -- says it is a distinct possibility, down at the bottom, that he started smoking salems because irma becker was smoking salem, and he gradually began to smoke some of hers. he said: i cannot honestly answer that, i do not recall, but it is a distinct possibility. he is not quite sure if it was irma or his like for menthol. there is one thing that is perfectly sure about it. reynolds united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 advertisements had nothing to do with it. can you say with any certainty that salem lights ads affected your decision to smoke salem lights? no. clear as can be. when you get to reliance, remember when he knew, remember this testimony. no. can you say with any certainty that salem ads affected your decision to smoke salems? i cannot say that the ads did. no. remember what mr. moyer knows and remember this testimony when you look at reynolds on that verdict form for those reliance questions. lastly is the timing -- well, first, i do not want anybody to think that mr. moyer thought lights were safe. we heard about diet coke and salad dressing and low calories and that kind of stuff. not clear where that came from from mr. moyer. certainly did not come from reynolds advertisements. his testimony is unequivocal on that point. we said: you did not think it was safe, united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 did you? he said: no. you did not think it was going to eliminate your risk? no. and you did not think it was completely -- mr. moyer steps in and says: no, i did not. final point on the timing. one thing we know about in this case is that mr. moyer switched to salem and salem lights before may of 1982. miss rodd took the stand and told you that she remembered pretty clearly that she had come home from college in her junior year. she started 1979, graduated in 1983. she said she distinctly remembers coming home sometime in her junior year, going to lunch with her father and seeing him with salem lights. if may of '82 is the end of her junior year, he is obviously made the switch to salem well before may 5 of 1982. if he is got salem lights out with his daughter sometime in the school year of 1982, united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 he is made that switch to salem lights well before may 5 of 1982. you have got the reliance point for all the defendants. but the reynolds on salem, would have ended up with menthol anyway. there is a good chance he got them from miss becker. and lastly, we know, according to the testimony of his own daughter, that for whatever reason he switched to salem lights before may 5 of 1982. now, the good news is that gets us through three of the key issues. thank you for your patience, and i've got one more topic and i want to turn to that now. this is where plaintiffs would have you start. it is with punitive damages. mr. schlesinger said a couple times that dale moyer is a conduit to punitive damages. he is not a conduit. he is not a fish either. he is a person who lived 83 years, making his own decisions on his own terms. but he is not just a conduit to punitive damages. in this case, all of the damages -- well, in this case we have been talking about the compensatory issue. united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 the punitive damages are different. punitive damages are above and beyond what you may or may not award to mr. moyer's daughters because of the smoking. and all of the money that you do or do not award would go to the daughters -- mr. hammer: objection, judge. it is not an issue of money. it is an issue of entitlement to punitive damages. the court: thank you. objection noted. sustained. mr. boyce: punitive damages are different here. they are different, and they have a different purpose. we are going to talk about how in order to award punitive damages, they have to connect something to mr. moyer. but first, i want to tell you about the burden of proof of punitive damages. this is dr. proctor here -- and let me just get to this point real quick. all of the stuff that dr. proctor talked about, he admitted in this slide he could not connect to mr. moyer. he said right here: i did not do anything to prepare for this case. i do not know united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 anything about his biography. do you know what newspapers he read? no. is it really important to your opinion as to how far the tobacco companies affected people? it is not relevant at all what his particular life was for my expertise. that is dr. proctor. it is not relevant at all what mr. moyer's life was. no relevance at all. this, i think, is a good example of just how wide the drawbridge is. plaintiffs talked a lot about youth marketing. you are going to hear more about it in mr. schlesinger's rebuttal. this is the last time i get to talk to you. so i want to give you a couple things to think about as you hear from mr. schlesinger in rebuttal. but this chart, more than any other one, shows just how far removed the real life that mr. moyer led is from mr. schlesinger's attack on the tobacco industry. underneath the blue, it says: defendants' united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 marketing practices at time dale was a youth. the first one is from 1927, just a year and a half before mr. moyer was even born. the second one is from 1928, which is from a full year before mr. moyer is even born. dr. proctor told you he had looked, and that those were very rare documents. he searched for more, he could not find them. but we have got two on the left from before he is even born. we have got one from 1973, when mr. moyer was 44 years old, and one from 1984, when mr. moyer is 55 years old. he is 44 and 55 years old. it is not about other smokers. this is the burden of proof. it has to be evidence for punitive damages that is precise and explicit, lacking in confusion and produces a firm belief. it is a much higher burden. we have preponderance of the evidence on the other issues. we have a much higher burden for punitive damages, because they are different. they are different damages. here, the judge is going to explain to you perfectly clear, you cannot use the engle findings to decide whether punitive damages united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 should be awarded in this case. you cannot use harm to others. and this is the objection i've made throughout this case, and this is the instruction as it is going to be in your pamphlets: in deciding whether punitive damages are warranted, you may not seek to punish a defendant for any harms suffered by individuals other than mr. moyer. this is the drawbridge. this is where they have to connect something that dr. proctor talked about, something from a document to mr. moyer, and they just cannot do it. they never came close. it is not just his knowledge; it is that there is no connection. so much of the stuff we saw in this case, all of the philip morris documents. he never smoked a philip morris brand. all the tv shows he never saw, the flintstones, the hillbillies. once it goes to saturday morning, reynolds pulls the sponsorship. once the kids start watching, they pull the sponsorship. that is the stuff you hear on cross. you do not hear that on direct. you never united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 heard any direct connection. never heard of ti and ctr, never heard of tirc. never saw any of the ads, all the philip morris ads and statements, none of that stuff with any connection with mr. moyer at all. this case is not about other smokers, it is only about mr. moyer. and that is why here on the facts of his life, punitive damages are not warranted. you also get to consider mitigating evidence. in determining whether punitive damages are warranted, you can consider mitigating evidence, which shows that there is no need to do it. i'll go through this quickly. we talked about quite a bit of mitigating evidence here. quite a bit. with dr. proctor and his presentation that he is given 50 times, that is extraordinarily one-sided on direct. you saw on cross, that i have to show the other side of the coin, but you also saw how he sees those documents coming. he knows the other side. he is been through this drill 50 united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 times and made more than $2 million. he knows the documents i'm going to show him before time. but he does not give them to you. but this evidence you get to consider. the first is all the publications from ctr, nobel prize winners trying to figure out what causes cancer, 7,000 articles published, 600 of them cited in the surgeon general's reports. you heard about the green monster, where brown & williamson and american published a compendium on all the published literature on smoking and health. gave it to the surgeon general's report. the committee writing the report in '64. you heard about dr. rodgman from reynolds publishing his findings, giving speeches to the american cancer society, sharing that information with the public health community. you heard how there are no secrets. this is one of dr. teague's everything stamped secret and confidential. these companies were competitors. this is business, saying this is a confidential company document. but no secret on the substance. united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 1942. tobacco is a means of administering nicotine. dr. teague, tobacco products a vehicle to deliver nicotine. i want to talk about filters just quickly. plaintiffs made it seem like yesterday for every minute of every time there was a filter on a cigarette, it was an intentional effort on the part of the tobacco industry to addict and kill smokers. and the truth could not be farther away from that allegation. starting way back in the '50s and '60s, the public health community and tobacco companies started looking at ways to make cigarettes better. and filters was one of the things they came up with. you can see in 1979, a document that is in evidence, which is on page xii. the average tar and nicotine deliveries have continued to decline. this was encouraged by a series of government actions beginning in '66. they are talking about using filters to reduce the amount of tar and nicotine that smokers get. united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 in 1996, the national cancer institute in monograph 7, again a document in evidence, says: today's filter-tipped and lower-tar cigarettes produce lower rates of lung cancer than in the higher tar and nicotine predecessors. the more recent case-control evidence remains consistent with the first component of this conclusion. that is 1996. mr. schlesinger read you 2013, and what the surgeon general says today. this is where presentism works against plaintiffs. you cannot go back and judge the guys that were trying to make cigarettes safer based on what they write in 2014. in the '60s and '70s, the public health community was encouraging tobacco companies to develop lower-tar cigarettes, to put filters on them. the bad stuff comes from burning tobacco. if you can get that out of there, you would solve a lot of these problems. but it was a joint effort. the 2014 sgr does not change the united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 legitimacy of the effort to make cigarettes better. this is the document we talked about where the head of r.j. reynolds in 1968 to the head of reynolds science department said: if there is a safer cigarette, let us continue and increase our efforts in this program. please prepare a plan to carry this out. the document that dr. proctor has seen dozens of times does not show it to you on direct examination. let us get a plan in place. this is dr. rodgman. you heard about how he worked with the national cancer institute. national cancer institute writes him a letter and says thank you. i would like to express my thanks and appreciation at the national cancer institute for your substantial contributions to this committee. that is 1972. now, the national cancer institute closed down the tobacco working group. but reynolds kept going. you heard this from dr. proctor. reynolds developed premier and later eclipse. that is the monograph they published showing all their research about it. that united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 document is in evidence. dr. proctor told you that premier and eclipse reduced the carcinogens in smoke. premier went on the market in 1988. dr. proctor told you -- i asked him: would you agree that reynolds made a concerted effort through premier to address the concept of bad things in smoke coming from the burning? yeah, i agree. he said: the flaw is that they did not remove the other cigarettes. he wants to ban cigarettes. but with respect to mitigating evidence, you have no connection to mr. moyer. so you have got the other side of the coin. the other side of the coin is a legitimate effort from the folks at reynolds and elsewhere to try to reduce the risks of smoking, and eclipse is a big part of that. and dr. proctor told you that was a concerted effort. the instructions also explain to you that one of the reasons you might consider awarding punitive damages is to deter future conduct. and i want to take a little bit of time to talk about how we are in a different world united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 today. the first reason we are in a different world you have heard repeatedly, there have been a variety of settlements over the years. all the general conduct that you heard that is not connected to mr. moyer. that is what is behind those settlements, that debt has been paid. you can see this in the surgeon general's report. mr. schlesinger: objection, judge. the court: sustained. mr. schlesinger: move to strike the comment about that. the court: thank you. jury is to disregard. proceed, counsel. mr. boyce: we will go through the documents. now there is no more ti, no more ctr, no more tirc. the advertising is restricted, and the fda controls the manufacture, design, nicotine level, ingredients and advertising of cigarettes. period. this comes from the documents in evidence. united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 2012 surgeon general reports says that the 1998 master settlement agreement resulted in taking down billboard advertising, transit advertising, as well as advertising that targeted underage youth. it also created the american legacy foundation, which implemented a nationwide anti-smoking campaign targeting youth. it worked. due in part to these changes, there was a decrease in tobacco use among adults and among youth following the master settlement agreement, which is documented in this report. the master settlement agreement is from 1998. in 2009, the fda was given authority over the manufacturing, marketing, distribution, design of tobacco products. it restricts where they can be sold and how they can be advertised. the fda could establish product standards for nicotine yields, take out any ingredients, do anything they want to do. but today in this country, it is the fda that decides what goes in cigarettes. it decides how they are made, it decides how much united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 nicotine is in them. they are in control of all of this. dr. proctor disagrees, because the fda has not done anything yet. but they are in control of all of this. there is nothing to deter. the fda controls the way cigarettes are made, designed, and how much nicotine is in them. they have not made any changes. okay? they have not made any changes since 2009. they have not taken nicotine out. you have heard repeatedly they have not said: take this ingredient out. and the simple fact of that is there is no such thing as a safe cigarette. when you burn tobacco, you get bad things in there. but the mitigating evidence shows that there was a legitimate effort to make cigarettes better. and this stuff, from the fda being in charge, shows you there is nothing to deter. there is no need in this case for punitive damages. no connection between what united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 mr. schlesinger talks about and mr. moyer, mitigating evidence that dr. proctor did not show you. finally, no need to deter it because the fda controls the way they are designed, the way they are made, what goes in them, the way they are sold and the way they are advertised. last topic. thank you again for your attention. i know i've been talking for a long time. i really do appreciate it. i know it is hard to sit there and listen to charts and go quickly. you guys are remarkable. you always pay attention. every time i look around, everybody is right there, engaged, and that is something when this is over, that you all should be proud of. you all should be proud of the way you performed as jurors in this case. the last topic i want to talk about is who is responsible for this. this is question number 7 on the verdict form. you are going to be instructed. it says: state the percentage of any responsibility for any of dale moyer's smoking-related diseases. united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 you are going to be instructed, because mr. moyer admits that he has some responsibility in this case, that you have to put down a number for mr. moyer. you cannot put zero. but i want to make another point about this. the only way these percentages come into play is if you answer no on the reliance questions. if you answer yes on the reliance questions, you will be eliminating any responsibility you think mr. moyer should bear for his smoking. you will see it in the instructions. it is actually on page 29. and it tells you that the court will enter a judgment based on your verdict, and unless you found for plaintiff on her fraudulent concealment or conspiracy claims, the court in entering the judgment will reduce the total amount of damages by the percentage of negligence which you find attributable to mr. moyer. so your first instruction, that you have united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 to put something down because mr. moyer admits that he has some responsibility here. but i want you to understand that on those reliance questions, those fraud and fraud concealment questions where reliance is a part of that. if you answer yes on that, you are finding that the defendants are one hundred percent responsible for everything mr. moyer did on the smoking. mr. schlesinger: objection, judge, move to strike. that is -- just -- the court: thank you. objection sustained. mr. boyce: it is on page 29. it says: unless you find for plaintiff on her fraudulent concealment and conspiracy claims, the court will reduce the total amount of damages. you can figure out for yourself the flip side of that when you review the instructions. but i want to start -- excuse me, i want to finish sort of where we started. that is the concept of personal responsibility. the idea that smoking is a choice. the idea that people make a decision whether to smoke cigarettes, and they most importantly united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 make their own decisions about when to stop and how to do it. we know that it takes continuous effort. we know that it takes motivation. but i want to talk a little bit about personal responsibility. when mr. hammer filled out the chart of responsibility, he had forty percent for reynolds, forty percent for lorillard, 15 percent for liggett and 5 percent for mr. moyer. 5 percent out of 100. i will leave this to your sound discretion. but what mr. hammer is basically suggesting is when mr. moyer got up in the morning, looked at himself in the mirror, only 5 percent of mr. moyer is there, that 95 percent of the mirror, the person looking back at him, as he decided what to do with his life and his day, whether he was going to smoke or drink or gamble or eat or exercise or golf or play cards, the person looking back in the mirror, according to plaintiffs, is 95 percent tobacco companies. i leave it to your sound discretion. you united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 do not leave your common sense at the door. is that the way we lead our lives? is that the way we lead our lives in this country? when you look in the mirror at the beginning of your day, there is only one person looking back at you, and it is you. a person with free will. it is not a fish. addiction does not change this. in this case, addiction means he smoked a lot. he smoked in the morning. if you took it away from him, he was irritable. it is not a legal cause. you look in the mirror, there is one face looking back at you. not 5 percent of a face. one hundred percent of a face, a man, a life. the thing plaintiffs want you to skip right over, ignore the drawbridge and use him as a conduit for punitive damages. that is not what this case is about. that is not the way life is led. it is not what personal responsibility means in this country. we saw it throughout this case. did i go too fast? united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 2 follows:) voice: in my opinion, people should be warned of the dangers, and they are being warned. what they then want to do, whether they wish to smoke or not, is their own business. (video clip concluded.) mr. boyce: that is dr. hammond way back in 1955. this is harry reasoner in 1964 making the same point. 14 15 follows:) voice: in this kind of a country, it comes down to you, whether you like it or not. no one is going to forbid an adult to smoke. and it is now quite clear that no one is going to tell him it is good for him either. the decision is his. the decision and the health that may depend on it. (video clip concluded.) mr. boyce: it is the same thing dr. seidman told you when we looked at his app united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 that he sells to smokers to help them quit smoking. 4 5 follows:) voice: urges and cravings to smoke are not choices. however, the action you take in response to the urges and cravings is a choice. the cigarette has no magical power, except which you give it. when not acted on, urges to smoke, no matter how powerful, occur less often and become easier to ignore. by not acting on the urge to smoke, you choose voluntarily to protect your body and your health. you choose not to act on the urge to smoke because you truly believe this will make life better. (video clip concluded.) mr. boyce: that is a choice. that is plaintiff's addiction expert in the app he sells to smokers saying quite clearly, wanting to smoke, feeling an urge, that may not be a choice. but what you do, that person in the mirror, what you do in response to it is a united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 choice. because it is a choice, you are responsible for it. this is the same attitude mr. moyer took when he decided to buy a nightclub and sell cigarettes himself. it is the same attitude the mumtazes had when they sold cigarettes at a chain of convenience stores. mr. hammer: objection, judge. the court: thank you. sustained. that is not the issue. mr. boyce: and it is the same attitude mr. moyer had for his smoking and his life. if there is one piece of evidence i would encourage you to keep in your mind when mr. schlesinger gets back up here, mr. moyer quit smoking the first time he put a continuous effort to stop, and that mr. moyer passed away at age 83, after a life full of fun and enjoyment. smoking never made him miss anything. he saw his daughters grow to middle age. his grandkids grow to 16. most importantly, when he passed away, it was 13 years after he decided to stop smoking, and he died from a metastatic skin cancer. i want to thank you again for your time and united reporting, inc. 954.525.2221 attention. i hope you have enjoyed your time as jurors half as much as i've enjoyed the opportunity to present reynolds' case to you. i look forward to your verdict. but again, on behalf of miss amadi, mr. harrison, mr. gentile on the computer there, thank you for your time and attention. ms. ruiz: thank you, your honor. may it please the court. good morning, everyone. jurors: good morning. ms. ruiz: you will be glad to hear that, as you have seen during this trial, i'm going to try not to repeat what you have already heard. it is been a pleasure to be before you in judge murphy's court, and i also want to thank you on my behalf, on ms. manseur's behalf, on liggett's behalf, for the careful attention that you have paid to this case. when this trial began, i gave a brief opening statement, where i told you a little bit about my client and what the evidence was going to show about mr. moyer. now we are at the end of this trial, and mr. boyce did an excellent job of explaining to you why plaintiff failed to meet her burden on all of her claims against all defendants, but it is plaintiff's burden to prove her case against each defendant, so i need to cover what the evidence was with respect to my client, liggett. we all have sympathy for the moyer family. that does not mean that liggett is responsible because mr. moyer chose to smoke its cigarettes for such a short period of time. when you consider the evidence in this case, please use your natural reason and your common sense. you did not check that at the door when you got here, and i ask that you please rely on that when you return to the jury room to deliberate and evaluate the testimony of the various people who came here to talk to you during this trial. so, with that in mind, what did the evidence show? this case is about two things: first, of course, it is about mr. moyer and the way he lived his life; and, second, it is whether liggett, or any of the other defendants, did anything or said anything that influenced mr. moyer or his decisions. nothing that liggett did influenced mr. moyer's decisions or his behavior. mr. moyer talked to you about that first cigarette that he smoked. it was a lucky strike. that is not a liggett brand. in fact, the only liggett brand you heard throughout this trial was chesterfield. mr. moyer did not decide to smoke that first lucky strike cigarette because of any liggett advertising. mr. moyer did not mention a liggett ad once in the hours of testimony that you saw from him. after that first cigarette, mr. moyer told you that he smoked occasionally with his friends. and, again, those cigarettes were also lucky strikes. after that, for about a 14-year period, mr. moyer smoked three brands: lucky strike, old gold, and chesterfield. at first, he was smoking two cigarettes a week; then he worked himself up to a cigarette a day; and then later, towards the end of that period, he was smoking a pack to a pack and a half a day. now, dr. seidman, plaintiff's expert, came here and showed you that chart of all the brands that he thought that mr. moyer smoked. he tried to convince you that the only brand mr. moyer smoked while he was in the army was chesterfield. as you saw on cross-examination, he had to agree that was an oversight on someone's part, because mr. moyer told you that chesterfield was his least favorite of these three brands, and that he smoked them, at most, 12-and-a-half percent of the time during that early period. so we know from his testimony that mr. moyer smoked very little liggett cigarettes. he was, predominantly, a lucky strike smoker. to avoid doing the math, let us just assume that mr. moyer was smoking a pack a day during that 14-year period of time. we know that is more than what he was smoking, because he started out smoking only two cigarettes a week, and it was not towards the end that he worked himself up to a pack to a pack and a half a day. but just to make it easy, let us be generous and say he was smoking a pack a day for the entire period. that would give him 1.75 pack-years of liggett smoking. that is less than two pack-years, compared to the over 100 pack-years that drs. seidman and wolek told you that he smoked. as you heard, he switched to kent in the 1950s. he did not smoke a liggett brand after that. now, as i said, plaintiff has the burden of proving that liggett cigarettes caused mr. moyer's illnesses. she must prove causation as to each defendant by the greater weight of the evidence. here's the jury instruction. it is a mouthful. plaintiff, essentially, has to prove that, but for mr. moyer's smoking of liggett cigarettes, he would not have gotten sick. so, ask yourself, did his use of chesterfield cigarettes make a difference in mr. moyer's outcome? as one of plaintiff's own treating physicians told you, the answer to that question is no. here's what dr. wolek said. he was asked: if mr. moyer had smoked five pack-years less than what he did smoke, do you think he still would have developed copd? his answer: i have no idea. i do not think anybody can answer that question, but would assume that the amount that he smoked, it would not have made a difference. plaintiff did not present any evidence to you to establish that, but for mr. moyer's smoking of chesterfield cigarettes, he would not have gotten sick. and because she did not meet her burden on this point, if you get this far along in the verdict form, you should check "no" next to liggett for question 6. beyond that issue, there was not any evidence that liggett did or said or failed to do or say anything that affected mr. moyer and his smoking decisions in any way. you heard a lot of arguments about tobacco companies, and what they did or did not do. i would like to talk about liggett, and what did liggett do. the evidence showed that liggett was a responsible tobacco company, took its own path. we saw evidence that, in the 1950s, and culminating with the 1964 surgeon general's report, there was emerging scientific evidence about the risks of cigarette smoking. one of the most widely publicized studies was that wynder/graham mouse skin painting study in 1953. what does liggett do in response to that study? liggett did not attend the plaza hotel meeting, for example. mr. schlesinger did not mention that when he talked to you about the plaza hotel meeting in his closing. liggett did not have anything to do with the frank statement. when he showed the frank statement to you, he did not tell you that liggett was not a part of that frank statement. liggett did not join the tirc. instead, liggett responded to that new information coming out by taking an independent path. remember this 1958 document that plaintiff put into evidence? this is plaintiff's exhibit 3289. it is authored by british scientists who visited the united states, they visited liggett, and here's what they report about liggett: liggett felt that the problem was sufficiently serious to justify large-scale investment by the company directly in experimental research on smoking and cancer. they go on to report: we were told that liggett has already invested considerably more in this work than the combined donations of the rest of the industry to the tirc. that is at page 5 of that document. liggett invested enormous resources in a biological testing program with its consultant, arthur d. little. adl was a preeminent scientific consulting firm of its time. and, together, liggett and adl set out to do two things: they wanted to see if the mouse skin painting test results could be replicated, and they wanted to see if there was anything in cigarette smoke that was causing the problems. this was an ongoing process, and both liggett and adl shared their research with the public, ultimately turning all of it over to the surgeon general's committee in april of 1963. you might remember that stack of paper that i had when i was talking to dr. proctor. it is in these boxes. it is liggett exhibit 231. liggett provided almost 10 years of research to the committee in that submission. it covered a lot of ground. the members of the advisory committee repeatedly praised liggett and adl for the quality of the work and the amount of ground that they covered in that research. here's the assistant surgeon general, writing to dr. kensler at adl. this is liggett exhibit 219. the assistant surgeon general writes to liggett: we feel that simple acknowledgment of the receipt of the nine volumes which you submitted to us is not sufficient. please accept, on behalf of liggett and adl, our special gratitude for the tremendous time, effort, and expense in the production of this material for our use, and that they were grateful for the oral presentation made. here, in liggett 2398, these are minutes from a 1963 meeting of the surgeon general's committee. and they report, in those minutes, they cannot possibly record the massive amount of data in these reports. the committee thanked drs. kensler and hainer on behalf of the committee for their comprehensive and well-organized presentation, as well as the documents that had been prepared, and those still to come. here again, in a memo from the u.s. department of agriculture -- this is liggett 6965 -- the chief of the tobacco laboratory for the government said this about the submission: the report contains a wealth of information, especially with regard to the biological responses of animal systems to cigarette smoke. he goes on to report: in view of the voluminous amount of material contained in the report, it would be impossible to record here the many findings obtained in the 10-year period of productive collaboration. now, dr. proctor shared with you this document: l&m: a perspective review. it is plaintiff's exhibit 2138. and he told you that liggett did not share that there are biologically active materials present in cigarette smoke that are cancer-causing, cancer-promoting, poisonous, stimulating, pleasurable, and flavorful. he told you that liggett did not share these top conclusions with the surgeon general. i invite you to look at the submission. again, it is 231. i think you will see that dr. proctor just did not know what was in there. there is a lot of information in there. it is 700-plus pages. i'm not going to go through the whole thing. just to give you a general idea of what is in there, i'll just highlight a couple of them with you. this is volume 1 at page 3. you will see that liggett's researchers concluded, there is an association between cigarette smoking and overall death rates. they go on to say that the effect increases with the amount smoked. liggett also reported its finding with regard to filters. liggett never said that filters were safe. instead, liggett told public health officials -- this is liggett 2398 -- that condensate from filtered smoke is just as or almost as carcinogenic as that from unfiltered smoke. here, in the submission -- this is volume 3, table of contents -- materials which have been suggested as possible carcinogens for the human lung. it lists arsenic in there. we heard a lot of talk about arsenic. liggett also presented the results of its own mouse skin painting studies, showing that it produced carcinomas. liggett discusses nicotine in the report. here, in the submission, volume 3, appendix a, liggett reports: the action of nicotine on the central nervous system is complex. it varies with the dose administered. there is little doubt that nicotine is a potent central nervous system stimulant, reporting here that it works on the brain. the submission goes on to say, in volume 4: nicotine is a highly active pharmacologic agent in tobacco. the pleasurable effects of nicotine are the reasons why people smoke. nicotine is a potent stimulant of various chemoreceptors, and one of the most potent central nervous system arousal agents known. clearly, this information was not concealed by liggett from the public health officials whose job it was to protect the health of the country. even with this information, public -- the public health community did not change the definition of "addiction," or did not find that nicotine was addictive until 1988. that is when they changed the definition of "addiction," so that cigarettes would fall within the -- within that definition. so, you see, contrary to what dr. proctor tells you, liggett's researchers showed the committee that -- that -- that painting tar on mouse skin backs causes tumors, that they identified components of cigarette smoke that are poisonous, they talked about how nicotine is the reason that people smoke, they talked about it being flavorful, stimulating, pleasurable, and habit-forming. liggett was not hiding the ball here. now, switching gears a little bit, you heard a little bit about industry organizations. you heard that liggett was not a member of the tobacco industry research committee. liggett did belong to the council for tobacco research, from march 1964 to march -- to january 1968. the evidence showed that liggett was a minor player, at best, with these organizations, contributing .3 percent to one of them. ask yourself, what documents did you see from any liggett personnel, directing any of these organizations to do anything. not a single one. no evidence of liggett hiding the ball here. not a single document shows liggett keeping secrets. so when you go back to the jury room and you evaluate liggett's conduct, along with the conduct of some of these other companies, ask yourself, is there any evidence of liggett's involvement in concealing information? the answer to that is no. of course, there is a crucial test for evaluating these claims. did any of the statements by any tobacco company, including liggett, play any role in mr. moyer's decision to start and continue smoking. the short answer is no. we know that, from 1966 on, there were warning labels on the packs. they did not make a difference to mr. moyer. as you heard, he simply ignored them. ask yourself, what statement, what advertising, what conduct whatsoever would have made a difference. he never identified anything that he saw from liggett. there is nothing liggett could have done, that he would have relied upon, that would have changed his mind. and despite this information, dr. proctor came here and he talked to you about advertising in movies. it is up to you to decide whether dr. proctor had his own agenda. as mr. boyce told you, he is been paid handsomely to come here and tell you that advertising drives market share. think about how much dr. proctor's been paid to come and tell you that, and please consider that when weighing his credibility. he is an advocate. he advocates for the abolition of cigarettes. that is his choice, but it is something you get to consider in weighing his credibility. obviously, the goal of advertising is to sell a product. this was not unique to the tobacco companies. all companies do it. liggett was allowed to advertise its products. that is not evidence of wrongdoing. you heard a lot from plaintiff's counsel about marketing to youth. and, on that point, i would just highlight, there is not a single document from liggett, showing any marketing to youth. so please remember that when you are considering that issue. because plaintiff did not meet her burden of proving that mr. moyer relied on any liggett statements or omissions, if you get this far along in the verdict form, you should also check "no" next to liggett for questions 8 and 9. one of the last things i want to touch upon with you is punitive damages. mr. boyce touched on it. as you have heard, punitive damages are intended to punish a defendant. they must be based on liggett's conduct and how liggett's conduct impacted mr. moyer. the burden here is on the plaintiff to prove by clear and convincing evidence that she is entitled to punitive damages. we do not think there is a basis for awarding punitive damages, and we do not think you should even get there; but, if you do, you need to decide whether there is any evidence that any of the alleged wrongful conduct by liggett caused any damage to mr. moyer, and whether it is necessary to punish liggett, or send a message to liggett, for the way it is currently doing business. based on everything i've just told you, punitive damages are not warranted here. you have heard about liggett's research in the '50s. dr. proctor told you that this was an honest response to the mouse skin painting studies when they came out. after warnings were on the packs, liggett continued doing research. it was the first cigarette company to put voluntary warnings on its cigarette packs. i think the plaintiff elicited that information from dr. proctor on direct. and today, of course, liggett is the smallest of the tobacco companies. it has about two percent of the market. there is no need to punish or deter liggett here. so i ask you, again, to please use your intelligence, your common sense, looking at the evidence in this case, and when you do that, you will find that there is no support for plaintiff's claim for money damages or punishment against liggett. thank you. mr. woods: thank you, your honor. may it please the court. good afternoon. jurors: good afternoon. mr. woods: again, my name is david woods. and on behalf of mr. batista and lorillard tobacco company, i also want to thank you for the time that you have put in, the attention that you have paid so far, and for the work that you will do in deliberations. we really do appreciate it. now, if you will excuse me for a second, i do need to grab one thing over here. you will remember, during opening statements, i told you that this case, when you -- when you really strip it down, when you look at it fundamentally, that it is about two things: control and responsibility. mr. moyer was the only person in control of his smoking decisions. he was the person who was in control of when he was going to try to quit, how long he was going to try to quit, the effort he was going to put into trying to quit. because he was the only person in control of his smoking decisions -- and other decisions in his life that he made, that came with risk -- he is the one who is ultimately responsible for the decisions that he made. now, i think the evidence has shown that his family understood that throughout the entire time that he was smoking. they respected his choices. now, no doubt, they did not like his smoking. they thought it smelled bad, they thought it was disgusting, it stained the walls. but when it came down to asking him to quit, helping him to quit, i think the evidence was clear that they respected his decisions and understood that it was his decision, and his decision alone, to smoke, or to quit, or when to quit. now, mr. moyer was not a man who could be forced to change course in his life. he made decisions. he made decisions about a lot of aspects of his life: whether to smoke, whether to drink, whether to lose weight, take care of himself, and in other aspects of his life. and he understood that those choices came with risks. health risks, other risks. and we saw his perspective on risk, which is understandable. there is a risk in everything. you take the risk. and i want to be clear here. i'm not criticizing, and nobody from the defense is criticizing, any of the decisions that mr. moyer made throughout his entire life. what we are saying is that he is one hundred percent responsible for the decisions that he made. now, i'm not going to repeat everything, thankfully, everything that mr. boyce said, or that ms. ruiz said. they spent a lot of time talking to you, and so i do not want to go back and replow that same ground. although, i did want to show question number 3, because this is important. this is a key component to the class membership question. let me get out of the way here. and you really see this is a two-part question. the first part is: was dale moyer addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine? was he addicted? that is the first question. and, on that, plaintiff's counsel is right, there is no definition. there is no definition in the jury instructions. that is up to you. and we will respect your decision on that. where i want to focus on is the second part, the second part of the question, which is: if so, even if he was addicted, was his addiction a legal cause of his smoking-related illnesses? and, again, the concept of legal cause is not necessarily the same as medical cause. and i used an example in opening statement of a person who walks across the street and gets hit by a truck. well, spending a little more time, seeing the water, seeing the beach, i have another example to help illustrate legal cause and how it is different from and can be different from medical cause. if somebody goes down to the beach, goes down las olas boulevard, goes down to the beach, and they decide to go swimming, and they see that the red flag is up and they see that there is surf, but they have gone into that surf all their life, swam all the time, every day -- first time they went in, they swam, they did not get -- they did not get pulled out in a rip current, they did not drown. they hear about other people drowning, they hear about people that go and get pulled out in rip tides, but it is never happened to them. they do not think it is going to happen to them; it happens to other people. and, so, time after time, they go in and they swim, despite the red flag, despite the current; and then, one time, an unfortunate thing happens and it does happen to them. they do get pulled out in the rip current and, unfortunately, they drown and they die. the medical cause -- the medical cause of that person's death, no doubt, it is drowning; but what is the legal cause? what is the legal cause of that death? the legal cause is going in the water to swim. even if you do not think it is going to happen to you, going in the water to swim, despite the red flags, despite maybe people telling you, hey, you should not go in the water because there are rip currents. not believing that it is going to happen to you does not absolve you from the consequences of the choices that you make. and, again, i'm not going to go through all the evidence on addiction, i'm not going to go through all of the evidence on mr. moyer's attempts to quit, what he said and -- what he said about how hard he tried to quit, because we all know that he did quit. he quit in 2000. he quit in 2000, when, as he said, it hit the fan for him. and, so, there is no doubt that he could quit. there is no doubt that he could quit when he was motivated. and motivation comes from within. when he was finally motivated, he quit smoking. he quit smoking for good. he never relapsed, day after day, week after week, month after month, for 13 years. never smoked a single cigarette again. now, as you heard from dr. civantos, that is important. and, interestingly, it was actually in response to one of your own questions. when dr. civantos was asked: if he would have quit, if mr. moyer would have quit in 1993 or 1994, when plaintiff's counsel said he was first diagnosed with copd, could he have avoided his injury? and dr. civantos said: probably, yes, things would have been different for mr. moyer if he would have quit at that point. legal cause. now, i want to talk a little bit about mr. moyer and his awareness of the health risks of smoking. and it is clear that he was aware of the health risks of smoking for a long, long time; back into the 1950s, at least. you know, when i first started off, i thanked you. i also want to apologize. i've been over there, coughing. since the first day of trial, i've had a cold. and so if i've annoyed you with my coughing, i apologize. but, fortunately, the trial's about over. but, anyway, here's why -- and you have seen this -- and i'm not going to belabor it, but you have seen why awareness is important, because it comes down to the issue of reasonable reliance. and mr. boyce showed you the instruction that -- and i will not show it to you again -- but, in essence, it said: if you -- if you know that smoking causes lung cancer, if you believe that smoking causes lung cancer and emphysema and disease, you cannot have relied on any statement to the contrary. and that is -- that, frankly, goes back to 1965. mr. moyer said -- and this is -- frankly, i put this up here because i did not want there to be any concern whatsoever that mr. boyce or any of us would somehow cut off an answer or leave a misleading impression. so i want to put up what -- what the entire question and answer was, which i think mr. boyce intended to read, but we have been having technical difficulties all day. but, again, here it is. you can see it. at the time you saw edward r. murrow's commercial, you believed it? yeah. he had no reason to lie about it. and, again, that was in 1965. so, as of 1965 -- and you saw these questions. and there are, i think, maybe four of them, on the verdict form. they go to reasonable reliance. and in order for the defense to be liable for any alleged concealment, any conspiracy, anything like that, mr. moyer has to have relied on a statement by that defendant, for that defendant to be liable, after 1982. there are questions that relate to before 1982. i think, on the evidence, given what mr. moyer believed himself in 1965, the answers to all these questions about reasonable reliance, whether before may 5, 1982, or after may 5, 1982, it is all no. but, again, i want to walk through particularly -- and for most -- for most of my time, i want to focus on lorillard and what the evidence was about lorillard, but -- i want to talk about lorillard and the evidence you saw; but, before i say that, i want you to think about this: the -- all of the documents that mr. schlesinger went through in his closing argument, everything that he flashed up, other than some kent advertisements which i'll talk about in a minute, everything that he flashed up was not a lorillard document. i think, with dr. proctor, i counted over 80 documents total that were used on direct examination with mr. gdanski. of those, i think i counted about five or so lorillard documents. and we will talk about some of those today. again, not including ads, but i'll get to those in a second. but, again, all of those documents, not from lorillard. but i would submit to you, even if you took all those documents -- if you took every document -- company document over here, you boxed it up, and if you gave it to mr. moyer years and years ago, it would not have made a difference to him in his smoking decisions, because he knew smoking could cause lung cancer, emphysema, other diseases. and he knew it as far back as 1965, so -- and there is no surprise why. as you have seen -- rather than show you a bunch of them, i wanted to do it this way; but you have seen, there are -- and they are all in evidence. you have seen newspaper articles, magazine articles, on the tv, the health risks of smoking were something that were talked about in the '40s, '50s, '60s, a long time ago. a long time ago. now, mr. moyer said that he switched to smoking -- or switched to kent, sorry, in 1955. he smoked kent from 1955 to 1975. i think mr. schlesinger said 25 years in his closing, but i think he misspoke. twenty years, 1955 to 1975. so, you will remember the advertisements, the kent advertisements that plaintiff's counsel showed to dr. proctor. bob cousy -- bob cousy was a great basketball player; not so much of an actor. but you had bob cousy, you had more scientists and educators smoked kent; but what you also saw, on cross-examination, those kent advertisements ran in 1960, one year, 1960, five years after -- five years after mr. moyer says that he switched to kent. so he did not rely on more scientists and educators, or bob cousy, or those advertisements in his decision to smoke kent. and, again, 1960 is 22 years before -- 22 years before 1982. 1955, when he switched to kent, 27 years before 1982. and to be clear, in case there is any doubt, mr. moyer said the last kent advertisements that he -- that he recalls seeing were from the 1950s and the 1960s, years before that 1982 cutoff. it is not even close on the issue of reasonable reliance on a lorillard statement. the connection between lorillard and mr. moyer in this case is the kent brand of cigarettes. the kent -- a brand that he stopped smoking in 1975. clearly, no reliance on anything lorillard said after 1982. now, i want to talk to you -- i want to switch gears and i want to talk a little bit about punitive damages and comparative fault, because plaintiff's counsel spent, frankly, more time talking about punitive damages than they did talking about dale moyer. you have seen the instructions on punitive damages, and i'm not going to go over them with you again; but, again, it is a higher burden of proof on the plaintiff to prove punitive damages. you can only punish for harm to dale moyer, not for any number of smokers out there. it is harm to dale moyer. and the standard for punitive damages has to be based on intentional misconduct. intentional misconduct. and you are instructed, i think, on negligence, and those types of things. negligence is like -- and the judge has instructed you, but negligence is like when you get in your car and if you are texting or you are not paying attention, or you are fiddling with the radio, or you speed and you hit somebody. that is negligence. recklessness -- which is not even enough -- recklessness would be if you got in your car, drunk, and hit somebody -- mr. hammer: objection. mr. woods: -- and caused an injury. the court: thank you. ladies and gentlemen, this is just argument. it is not an instruction on the law. proceed. mr. woods: thank you. intentional misconduct would be driving your car and intending to hit somebody. that is not what we have here. now, i want to walk through some of the evidence about lorillard, i want to walk through some of the evidence about lorillard's effort in the past to understand what was in cigarettes, to try to reduce the hazards of cigarettes. and you saw this evidence when i cross-examined dr. proctor. but before i talk about that, i want to talk a little bit about youth marketing. and, again, documents that you may have seen, either with dr. proctor or by mr. schlesinger in his closing argument, none of those documents were from lorillard. frankly, you saw a lot of documents about philip morris, who mr. moyer never smoked their products. and one piece of evidence you heard was this idea of product placement, that philip morris may have paid money to put marlboro in the superman movie, so that if somebody was watching superman, they would see marlboro in the background. well, what you heard from dr. proctor is that lorillard not only did not do that, but had a policy not to do that, at least as far back as the 1970s, for at least 40 years, and up through today, not to do product placement. but i want to talk to you about lorillard's efforts to try to understand what is in cigarettes and to try to reduce the hazards of cigarettes. you heard a lot about dr. wynder. dr. wynder -- wynder, graham, and croninger, you remember they were the ones that did the big mouse skin painting study back in 1953. they were the ones who plaintiff's counsel said caused all the companies to go to the hotel and to have a big meeting to -- to put out the frank statement. but when dr. wynder, and graham, and croninger did their study in 1953, the mouse skin painting study, lorillard did not say, oh my goodness, dr. wynder's come up -- he is going to find out the truth. we have got to shut this down. we cannot have him doing this. no. what lorillard did was, they said, he is doing good research. we are going to send him cigarettes so that he can continue doing his research. in fact, we are going to work with him for the next 15 or so years, looking at things like phenols. you remember the phenols. those were the -- that was the compound in cigarette smoke that scientists thought might interfere with the clearance mechanisms to get -- help get the tar and the gunk out of the lungs after you smoke. lorillard was doing that research, doing it with dr. wynder, who you remember dr. proctor called a giant, a big deal, a huge scientist at the time. also dr. hoffmann, who was one of -- a public health scientist who was an expert on cigarette design and cigarette chemistry. lorillard actually patented filters to remove phenols from cigarette smoke, put them on its brands, actually published the results of its research on phenols. and you may recall during the cross -- or the redirect examination -- i think you have seen that where -- when the plaintiff calls a witness -- because they have the burden of proof, they go first. then we go, and then they get the last word. and, frankly, we cannot respond. and it will happen again today. and that is the way the rules are, and that is fine. but understand that when mr. schlesinger gets up, there is no way for us to stand up and rebut anything that he says. it is the same way with witnesses. it was the same way with dr. proctor. and, so, after i was done, i sat down. mr. gdanski, at the very end of his redirect examination of dr. proctor, he showed a document that suggested that dr. spears of lorillard was told by his boss, you cannot publish your phenols research. and you may recall, i jumped up and said, judge, one question, just one question on recross. dr. proctor knew exactly where i was going, because -- mr. hammer: objection, judge. the court: sustained. mr. woods: -- we had actually discussed -- we had actually discussed the publication of the phenols, the same one at issue in that document, during the -- during my cross-examination of dr. proctor. it was the quantitative determination of phenols in cigarette smoke. dr. proctor said, without me having to stand up, yes, that was actually published. and, so, lorillard published its research on phenols. it continued its work with wynder and hoffmann for years. you heard about liggett's submission to the surgeon general's advisory committee. you also saw, with dr. proctor, lorillard had a submission to the surgeon general's advisory committee, identified various compounds in smoke. among them, benzo(a)pyrene, which lorillard identified as a potential carcinogen, as well as phenols. lorillard gave its research on phenols to the surgeon general's advisory committee, and the surgeon general's advisory committee also thanked lorillard. lorillard's research continued. you remember the research on pmo -- i think it is phenylmethyl oxidase, pmo -- that lorillard was looking into as a potential way to counteract the effect of phenols again. they actually made a presentation to the national cancer institute on that. lorillard developed a highly sophisticated smoking machine to help scientists do research on smoking and cancer, to better do animal research. to better do animal research. they made this machine available to other researchers and to other labs. now, you saw a bunch of documents with dr. proctor, and you saw a bunch of documents in mr. schlesinger's closing argument, that talked about nicotine. people smoke for nicotine. you know, addiction, sine qua non, all those documents. well, first of all, of the documents that you saw with dr. proctor on nicotine and addiction, and that type of thing, i think there were two lorillard documents, which i'm going to talk about. during -- all of the documents that you saw with mr. schlesinger during closing argument, none of those were lorillard documents. like i said when i stood up in opening statement, i'm not going to try to defend what -- what every -- what people may have said in documents years ago. some of them may be taken out of context; other of them may be just stupid things that people said. but the key is, the plaintiff has to connect that to mr. moyer, and he just simply has not done it. so -- but in terms of lorillard and lorillard's nicotine research, when you look into the evidence, you will see no documents -- you will see no documents from lorillard, saying, we think smoking is addictive, we are trying to manipulate nicotine to addict smokers. you will not see it. what you will see is, you will see documents like this: lorillard's nicotine augmentation project. now, you see something like "nicotine augmentation project," and you think, that does not sound good. that sounds like lorillard is manipulating nicotine in an effort to hook smokers. as you heard from dr. proctor on the stand during my cross-examination, that is what -- not what this was about at all. that was about recommendations from health-oriented agencies. you remember, it was a -- the idea of the low tar, medium nicotine, that people were smoking lower and lower tar and nicotine products. and the thought was, well, if they are smoking for nicotine, if they are compensating and smoking more to get more nicotine, then why do not we try to have a lower-tar cigarette, but raise the level of nicotine so that people will not compensate, so that they will not smoke more, so that they will not get more of the tar; because, again, the tar is the bad stuff. the tar is what causes cancer, what causes disease. nicotine does not cause cancer. just -- just inhaling nicotine does not cause cancer. so, again, the idea behind this nicotine augmentation project was not an effort to hook smokers or addict smokers; it was trying to be responsive to what the public health community was telling lorillard and the other companies to do: try out this idea of a low-tar, medium-nicotine cigarette. and, again, it was not just lorillard's idea. sir richard doll -- the "sir" in front of his name, he was actually knighted -- he was -- he was involved in some of the earliest statistical epidemiological research on smoking and lung cancer back in the day, back in the 1950s. and he continued his research for years. he was actually knighted for that. he thought the idea of low-tar, medium-nicotine cigarettes were a good idea. dr. russell, i spoke about him with dr. proctor. he was an expert in nicotine, a pharmacologist. he also thought this idea had potential, was a good idea. consumer reports -- it was not just the scientists who were talking about these issues; it was also in the public arena, whether this was a good idea, whether this could be a way to help reduce the health risks of smoking. the 1981 surgeon general's report, as well, also talked about the potential for low-tar, medium-nicotine cigarettes. now, plaintiff's counsel talked to you about the fact that the companies control the amount of nicotine in cigarettes. and that is true. there is no doubt about that, and there is no secret to that. anybody who is ever been a smoker knows that some cigarettes, unfiltered cigarettes, for example, higher tar and nicotine, have a -- they are much stronger than maybe a light cigarette or something that has very little tar and nicotine. the companies, if you have a light, you always want it to be light. if you have a full-flavored, or an unfiltered, you always want it to taste like a full-flavored or an unfiltered. if you were selling kent, like lorillard, you would want to make sure that every pack of kent had about the same amount of tar and about the same amount of nicotine. now, kent, you have different levels, you have higher-tar and lower-tar kents; but if you are smoking kent, you do not want to go to your kents one day and find one pack is super strong and your next pack is super weak. you want product consistency. the tobacco companies make sure that they have a consistent amount of tar and nicotine in every cigarette, in the same way that starbuck's makes sure that it blends its beans to have the same amount, roughly, of caffeine, or the same strength. likewise, with the coca-cola company, when they put together coca-cola, same amount of caffeine, same amount of sugar in every bottle. it is a matter of product consistency. for years, the amount of tar and nicotine were measured by -- by the ftc; and, so, whatever amounts of tar were in there, and whatever amounts of nicotine were in there, were reported for years. so this idea that the companies super-engineered cigarettes to make them, i think, what dr. proctor calls one of the most highly engineered small products in history, i just have one word to say about that: iphone. a cigarette compared to an iphone. it is not even close. but i digress. i want to move on -- now, when you get to issues of comparative fault -- the same things i've been talking about, when you get to the issues of comparative fault, think about that. think about the lack of evidence against lorillard in this case. think about dr. wynder. think about nap. think about the research that lorillard was doing. if you get there -- and i do not think you should get there, and i do not think you will get there -- but if you do get there, think about that when you are thinking about a number to put down for lorillard. and i think, as mr. boyce said, the amount that needs to go for the plaintiff, there needs to be something there. there does not need to be any other number for any of the defendants, because mr. moyer, while he was alive, admitted that he was partially responsible for his health-related problems. the last thing i want to talk to you about is damages. mr. boyce, i thought, did a good job of walking through the medical issues in the case. i do not want to -- i do not want to repeat any of that, but i did want to say this: when you retire back to the jury room, i do not think you will get to damages, but i'm not doing my job if i do not talk about it. if you get back there, i would suggest to you, based on this record, based on mr. moyer's other health problems, i would suggest -- plaintiff's counsel, i think, asked for $7.5 million and $10 million. i would suggest to you that an appropriate number in this case would be not in the millions, it would be in the thousands side. and, so, that is within your discretion, and i am -- before somebody stands up and accuses me of saying that these three ladies did not love their father, that is not what i'm saying at all. please understand, that is not what i'm saying at all. but i'm just trying to give you a perspective on damages for -- if you get there back in the jury room. again, it is been -- it is been a long time, and so i really appreciate the time that you have -- that you have spent. i appreciate the attention you have given to all of us. i know we appreciate that. when it comes down to it, though, the case really is about mr. moyer and the fact that he was in control of his decisions, the fact that he was in control of his decisions whether to try to quit and how hard to try to quit. he quit for good in 2000. if he would have quit 10 years earlier, six years earlier, from what dr. civantos said, things would have been different. legal cause. so, again, thank you so much for your time. mr. schlesinger is going to get up next. i think yesterday he talked about unleashing the demon, unleashing the demon of nicotine. and, so, when he unleashes the demon against the defense, just think to yourselves -- because we cannot respond -- what would the defense say? what would the defense say to that? and so, again, thank you very much. that is all i have. the court: counsel, thank you. ladies and gentlemen of the jury, we have the rebuttal argument to continue with. i know it is about our lunchtime. i would like to, if it is all right -- i do not know if any of you are -- feel famished and you need to take a break. if you do, we will break. otherwise, i would like to just finish it. mr. schlesinger is going to go on for about a half hour. is it all right if we continue? yes? yes? all right. counsel, thank you.