9 mr. hammer: thank you, judge. may it please the court. good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. jurors: good afternoon. mr. hammer: it is been a long road to get here, and it is been a long time since dale first felt that first shortness of breath when he was up there in north carolina. he climbed that hill in north carolina, felt shortness of breath, came home, went to his doctor, dr. mascarenhas. we heard from him, read from his deposition. and dr. mascarenhas, along with several other doctors, determined that dale had copd and determined that dale had copd caused from his smoking. for the doctors, you saw them testify, all the doctors, all the records reflect, there was really a no-brainer for the doctors. he had copd, it was caused by his smoking. all the doctors that testified in this case all determined that he was addicted, too. it was really a no-brainer for them. well, back 20 years ago, dale had a smoking-related disease, he was a smoker for a long period of time. and by virtue of those facts alone, he was basically considered part of the engle class. mr. boyce: objection. the court: excuse me. again, ladies and gentlemen, this is closing argument. this is plaintiff's counsel's take on the evidence. thank you. objection noted. overruled. mr. hammer: thank you, judge. as the engle case wound its way through the courts, it was tried and went up to the supreme court. you heard the judge describe that. the supreme court said: we are going to keep the findings. you guys have all heard the findings, and we are going to talk a lot about the findings. the individual smokers that are part of the class get to file their own individual suits. so dale moyer did that. he followed the instructions of the supreme court, and here we are. his own individual suit. now, dale was hoping to be around long enough to meet the jury that was going to hear his case. we were fortunate enough to hear from dale. you heard his testimony. it was played over the course of several hours, and i'm going to talk about that a lot. but, unfortunately, dale did not make it. so instead, his daughters heather and lisa and dawn, they are here, they took over his case, and they proudly stand before you, as do their lawyers, and we are making this argument to you. now, dale basically waited 20 years to get into this class. 1994 is when he was diagnosed. now it is your opportunity to put him where he belongs. that is all we are asking you to do. there are a couple simple questions that are going to be asked with regard to that, and that is, as the judge read to you: was smoking cigarettes a legal cause of dale moyer's heart disease? did dale moyer's copd or emphysema first manifest on or before november 21, 1996? and was dale moyer addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine? and if so, was such addiction a legal cause of his copd or emphysema or heart disease? now, dale smoked cigarettes for a long time. started out smoking these, lucky strikes. and he developed disease as a result. now, these cigarettes, unfiltered, as were the old gold, as were the chesterfield that he smoked. he smoked those for the first parts of his life. started smoking when he was nine years old. nine years old. now, i'm going to talk to you for a little while about what the evidence showed, and then scott schlesinger is going to stand up and talk to you a lot about some of the conduct that the tobacco companies displayed in this case. but i want to focus on dale. there is been a lot of talk in this case about choice, a lot of talk about fault, a lot of talk about failures to quit, a lot of talk about the ability to quit. but those are not really questions that go to addiction. those are questions that might go to the level of addiction. but the question of whether or not dale was addicted, that is a pretty basic question. and a lot of us, there is not going to be -- and you heard -- the judge gave you all the instructions, and you have got the packet there. you can look through that. i think there is 32 pages. you are not going to see one definition of addiction. so addiction is what you all say it is. now, you have heard dr. seidman. we brought in dr. seidman, he is an addiction specialist. works up there in columbia, teaches about addiction, teaches all the doctors, he is an expert. and he told you that based on his analysis of the evidence in this case, based upon his review of the documents in the case, based upon his conversation with dale -- he got an opportunity to speak to dale -- he determined that dale was one of the most severe nicotine addicts he is ever dealt with. and that is what is in these packages. nicotine. now, nicotine, as you learn, it naturally occurs in the tobacco plant. but the problem is, the plant itself contains a certain amount of nicotine, but the problem is that the tobacco companies, they control the amount of nicotine that goes in each one of these things. and that is what is important. because what they do is they control it to such an extent that it keeps smokers addicted. gets them addicted and keeps them addicted. now, dale started smoking at nine years old. remember the story he told? it was in his deposition how when he was nine, he and a group of friends snuck a couple of lucky strikes from his friend's dad's cigarette stash, ran out to this makeshift fort. it is ironic, their makeshift fort was a coffin crate that they built the fort up. and that is, unfortunately, where dale ended up as a result of that first cigarette. it led him on the path of addiction. that is what these defendant companies count on. they count on people like dale, nine years old, trying their first cigarette. some people try it, they do not like it. some people cough, they say oh, that stuff is disgusting, i never want to do it again, but some people continue doing it. there is all sorts of reasons why people smoke, initially at least. they want to fit if, it is peer pressure. it is cool. the ads make it look cool. at least they did back then. the movie stars, sports stars. you have seen the ads. you will see a lot during your closing argument. they make it look great. they make it look fun. alive with pleasure, lots of fun. there is nothing pleasurable about what dale experienced at the end of his life as a result of these things, and that is the harsh reality of the cigarette. it kills people. it is a product, it is a legal product, but it kills people, and they know it. and they have known it for a long time. and that is the problem here. and that is why we are here before you. now, like i said, people smoke for enjoyment, a whole lot of reasons. but they put the nicotine in here for one reason and one reason only. it is to keep people hooked. now, the choice of these defendants to market tobacco known to be both addictive and cancer causing -- we know that now. we did not know it back in the '30s and '40s. dale sure did not know it as a nine-year-old boy. it raises the question of fault. which there is a section on the verdict form where you determine the percentages of fault. but, when it comes to that question -- and mr. schlesinger is going to address a lot about that, he will go into great detail about the fault of the tobacco companies. but right now, you want to talk more about dale. the choice of a child like dale to start smoking these things, to try it and become a regular smoker, buying packs of cigarettes by age 14, that should not be considered by you as far as fault, but why he started smoking in the first place. because of what was out there. but why are not i talking about choices? the choice he made when he was 14 to buy his first pack. it is because the tobacco companies want to pretend that dale was not addicted. they want to pretend he was not addicted at all; that his choices is what drove him. if he was addicted, it was his choice to continue to smoke long enough to get sick. that is what they want to argue to you. but that is ridiculous. there was not one piece of evidence that was presented to you by either side that dale moyer's addiction was his choice. nobody chooses addiction. quite simply, nobody chooses addiction. nobody wants to be addicted. it is often a terrible side effect of the choice to smoke. and just like the addiction some people get from prescription pain relievers, medicine, they get addicted. but it frequently happens as an unintended consequence of the use of the drug, and the drug in this case is nicotine. lawful but dangerous drugs can have awful side effects, side effects like addiction. and that is why people say, if you are taking that medication, if you are smoking, be careful, you might get hooked. why do people say that? because addiction is just exactly that. it is like a fish getting hooked. the fish chooses to strike the bait. and then gets caught by the hidden hook. the hook starts to pull the fish along. the fish starts fighting the hook and tries to get off. some fish that were only, say, hooked through the lip, they wiggle their way out of the hook. they are fortunate. but the ones that are hooked all the way through, those fish are goners. that is what it is all about. fishermen know that. that is why they use the hook. that is why they use the bait. it covers the hook. that is exactly what the tobacco companies did. no fisherman would ever say that the fish was caught because the fish chose to get hooked. of course not. the fish died because they did not see the hook in the first place. and dale moyer at nine years old and 14 and all those years, he did not see the hook. dale was diagnosed with copd, as i said, in 1994, and he died a horrible death at age 84. march 7th, 2013. and it was not until six years after dale was diagnosed with copd, in 2000s, that the tobacco companies finally acknowledged, by virtue of putting it up on their website, that cigarettes are addictive and it causes disease. that was their first true acknowledgment. certainly it was on the packs. but you know what? there was never a warning about addiction on any of the cigarette packs that dale moyer smoked. never. and there was not a warning about it being harmful until 1966. and that was not even a warning, that was a caution. remember, we saw the different warnings over the years. caution: cigarettes may be hazardous to your health. by that time dale was 37 years old, he was already hooked. he was already gone. he was already addicted. but the interesting thing is, he did try to get away many times over the years. and you heard about that. but he was hooked. and it eventually killed him. and that is the sad thing about this. now, the tobacco companies, they want to tell you that being hooked had nothing to do with dale's death, had nothing to do with his disease, nothing at all. that is absurd. that is crazy. dale moyer chose to start smoking cigarettes at nine years old. that was his choice. a fatal choice in the end. but you know what? nobody thinks when they first try a cigarette when they are a kid, nine, nine years old, ten years old, whatever it may be, that they are going to be smoking for the next 30, 40, 50, 60 years of their life. everybody thinks it is no big deal, i'll put it down when i want. some people cannot do that. dale could not, and we heard how many times he tried. you know, maybe you think dale should have tried harder. maybe. but you heard how many times he tried. but that goes to fault. not to addiction. so the first question in this case, the threshold question we talked about, talks about was smoking cigarettes a legal cause of dale moyer's heart disease? we heard doctors talk about the heart disease. it is really a no-brainer. cigarette is the number one cause of heart disease in this country. and dale had it. did dale's copd or emphysema manifest itself before november 1996? well, of course. it manifested itself when he was walking up that hill and became short of breath. so those questions should easily be answered by you. and was dale addicted to the cigarettes containing nicotine? and if so, was such addiction a legal cause of his copd or heart disease? yeah. and those questions themselves are answered yes, and they put him as a class member, which is where he belongs. it is as simple as that. let us go to slide 149, please. this is the question you are going to be asked on the verdict form. and it should absolutely be checked off yes. you are going to get a verdict form in this case, and that is the main question: is dale moyer a class member? absolutely. and we have to prove that to you by a greater weight of the evidence. slide 3, please. so we start out even. we start out balanced. and then civil case law says we have to prove it by the greater weight of the evidence. we have to tip the scales. now, in this case we believe we have presented evidence of addiction, evidence of cause of death, evidence of his disease, evidence of his heart disease, copd, the emphysema, his cancer, linking all of it to smoking cigarettes. we believe we have presented evidence that tips these scales quite a bit. but really all we need to do is tip it ever so slightly. 51 percent. mr. boyce: objection, your honor, misstates the burden of proof. the court: objection noted. overruled. this is just argument. the instructions on the law that i gave you are controlling. this is counsel's thoughts and comments about it to persuade you to reach a verdict in this case. proceed. mr. hammer: thank you, judge. now, in a case like this, you are the jurors of the facts. and we do not know what you need to hear from us. we present the evidence as much as we possibly can and hope that we give you enough evidence to convince you. and so we do not know how much to give you, how little to give you, and we present a lot of evidence. slide number 4, please. there is some facts that are undisputed in this case, and the judge read them to you, and clearly a lot of this evidence we presented might have been repetitious, and we apologize for that. a lot of the evidence you say, well, we already heard that, why are we hearing this again. and again i say, because we do not know what you were expecting to hear from us. we want to make sure we give you all the evidence you need to make a proper decision in this case, and i apologize to you if we did get repetitive. now, in the next hour or so, scott and i, we are going to go through the evidence, but before i do that, i want to -- i actually want to talk about a very important legal principle, and that is addiction as a legal cause. because the judge read to you that, and it is in your packet quite a bit. you know, generally, as i said, you get a definition of everything, but you do not get a definition of addiction. so you all use your judgment about what addiction is and whether or not dale moyer was addicted to the nicotine in cigarettes. it really should be a no-brainer, and all the witnesses say he was. and if you think about -- if you think, you know somebody that smokes a pack or two or three packs of cigarettes a day for 60 years, if you think that in and of itself is enough for addiction and that meets your definition, that is enough. if you think you need more, that is fine too. but, you know, a person does not smoke three packs a day for 60 years because they like the taste. they do not smoke three packs a day because they want to hang out with their friends smoking. they smoke three packs a day because they are addicted to the nicotine. they need the nicotine. and you heard how dale described how much he needed it. slide 16, please. slide 16 talks about addiction being a legal cause of injury if it directly in a natural and continuous sequence produces or contributes substantially to produce the injury so that it can reasonably be said that but for the addiction to the cigarettes containing that nicotine, the injury would not have occurred. so what that is saying is, did the addiction, his continued smoking, his dependence on the nicotine, did it contribute substantially to producing his injuries? of course it did. that is a question you will have to answer, but i think we presented enough evidence for you to answer yes. and you are also told in the packet, it talks about in order for it to be regarded as a legal cause of injury, addiction need not be the only cause. and so we -- i do not want you to get confused that -- when we talk about cause of injury, it could be in combination with other things, and that is what is explained to you in the packet. it is a legal cause. one of the causes. and so you are given an instruction also on intervening cause. and i would ask you to go back there in the jury room, look at those instructions, because it is important. because it says it may also be a legal cause of heart disease or copd or emphysema or cancer, even though it operates in combination with some other natural cause or some other cause occurring after the addiction to the cigarettes containing nicotine in combination with it. and contributes substantially. that means did the addiction to nicotine play an important role. that is really what that means. did it play an important role in contributing to him getting those diseases? of course. of course it did. because that is what caused him to continue smoking. if he was not addicted, he would not have continued to smoke those cigarettes. those cigarettes contained the toxins, bathed his lungs every day, caused lung damage, copd and emphysema, caused lung cancer, and caused heart disease. and also, we allege, parotid cancer. now, addiction must be a factor that comes into play. his choices to smoke, and maybe you think, you know, well, part of it was his choice. and that is fine. but part of it was his addiction that drove him to smoke. part of it might have been his failure to quit, had he quit earlier. but part of it also was driving his addiction. so it could be part and parcel of why he continued to smoke. but addiction certainly was the substantial reason why he continued. and that is what the legal cause means. it can get confusing, because it is a bunch of pages in there. a bunch of legal mumbo jumbo. it gets confusing. in fact, there is one paragraph that is about 12 lines long, and it does not even have a period. it is all run-on sentence, and a grammar teacher would probably give us an f for that. the fact of the matter is, it does get confusing. but i'm trying to simplify it for you. the question is, as we have down there: if he was not addicted to nicotine, would he have smoked two or three packs a day every day for 60 years? that is where you have to use your common sense. the common sense would tell you that it was the nicotine that drove him to do that. there might have been other things too, but it was definitely the nicotine that was a substantial factor. now, i want to talk a little bit about dale. and as i said, scott is going to talk about the tobacco companies and their conduct. i want to talk about dale. because this case is about dale moyer and his family, and what he meant to them. i want to put up photo number 102, please. you know, we all heard how much dale loved life. the guy, he was always the ball of fire at the parties, at the family gatherings, at the occasions. they loved him down at the merchandise mart. this is dale when he was just a little kid. he was born in 1929, he grew up in pennsylvania. his father was a minister. and through his dad, through that family background, he instilled a lot of values in dale. and dale instilled those values in dawn and lisa and heather. you know? that is important. that is an important consideration. we are going to be asking you to give us money for their pain and suffering. for dale's pain and suffering. number 104. here is a picture of dale right about the time -- he was probably about six or seven, eight. just shortly after this, he tried his first cigarette. nine years old. number 112. and we heard from dale that he loved music, he loved to sing. he was in the barbershop quartet. we saw this picture already. remember dale talked about in his deposition that was played for you all, he talked about listening to the radio, watching tv, listening to the music shows. he talked about watching bandstand. it was actually called the lucky strike hit parade, sponsored by lucky strike cigarettes. as were all the tv shows back then. we saw some of them. even the flintstones, the tv cartoon sponsored by winston. so it should not surprise you to learn that when dale is listening to lucky strike and he tries his first lucky strike, he continues to smoke lucky strike, along with old gold and chesterfield. but he smokes lucky strike. why? it was the popular cigarette. it was what he listened to on the radio, lucky strike hit parade, and it kept him going with the nicotine. and he also smoked the old gold, and he also smoked -- excuse me, the chesterfields. remember we heard about the fact that he joined the army. let us look at photo -- actually, before we go there, let us go to photo 016, please. he loved -- i'm sorry, not that one. take that down. go to 107. i apologize. he joined the army, and he became a paratrooper. army airborne. that is the elite of the army, so they say. i do not want to offend anybody that might be part of the other branch. but army airborne is the elite. he joined it, he volunteered for it. he joked around, yeah, they paid more money. but, you know, he joined it. he volunteered for it. and he was proud of that. he was proud of that. and well he should be. and while he was in the army, he got hurt. and he told the story that while he was in the hospital laid up for three months, they were handing out free cigarettes. chesterfield, a liggett product. lucky strike, an r.j. reynolds product. and old gold, a lorillard product. and that is what he basically started smoking on. an r.j. reynolds product. lucky strike, old gold, and chesterfield. and that is what created that addiction. those cigarettes together. one cigarette after the other, until eventually he started smoking packs, buying packs at age 14, in the army, smoking a pack or two a day. and he was getting them for free. that is what created that addiction. and so r.j. reynolds from lucky strike, liggett for chesterfield, and lorillard for old gold, they all helped create that addiction in dale moyer. and they are all to blame for that. go to photo number 68, please. 068. he got married to corinne, we heard about that. we heard about his wife. and shortly after, a few years after they got married in 1955, she got polio. she had a child dane, who has now since passed away, and they had three beautiful daughters that you all heard and got to meet. and heard about their life and how dale affected their life. but they learned from dale to put family first. that is what he always did. it is important to him. and it is been important to these girls. that is what he instilled in these girls. you heard about how their family was important to them. you heard about how important all the events were for dale. photo 061, please. went to their softball games. you heard about how he went to all their softball games. he was smoking all the time. photo 045 and 047, 115, and 116. birthday parties, so important to the family. they always got together. and going to church together. always important to them. and they went every sunday. family was so important to dale moyer. and yet, he left his wife after a while for a number of years, and we heard about the fact that he had a relationship with irma and with loretta. but he never actually left his family. he left the house, but never left his family. and that is important. because these girls were his world, heather, dawn and lisa. they were his world. and he made it a point to come home, go to church with them on sundays. he made it a point to come home for their birthday parties. he made it a point to remain a family. even though he was not living in the family home. that is pretty unique. that is an impressive type of guy. that shows how important family was to him. and it shows how important these girls were. so he switched -- and he started smoking -- he smoked those brands, and then he switched to kents because he believed what the tobacco companies said, that they were safer. and he smoked those for 20 years until he switched to salem menthols and then salem lights. based upon the health assurances by these tobacco companies. and it only -- slide number 2, please. these are the brands he smoked. and you will see r.j. reynolds makes lucky strike. liggett makes chesterfield. lorillard, old gold. lorillard made kent. he switched to kent and then switched to salems in the later years, r.j. reynolds products. and you heard it from dale's mouth about how addicted he was. number 21. 6 7 follows:) q. was there ever a point in time as you sit here today that you recall that you actually did enjoy smoking? a. it is a really hard line between, you know, enjoy, and i came to realize that i had to smoke. i mean, that is -- i wanted to quit. there was a hassle. it was expensive, it was dirty, it was a filthy habit, and all my family did not like it, and i did not like it, and i wanted very much to quit. but i was smoking because i was addicted to cigarettes. (video clip concluded.) mr. hammer: put up slide number 20, please. and we heard the evidence in the case. he chain smoked. he smoked first thing in the morning, last thing before bed. he burnt the couches and sofas with cigarette ashes. he smoked after he was diagnosed with the various diseases. he was never without a cigarette. when he was, he was nervous, he was agitated. he was uptight, angry, edgy; all withdrawal symptoms. and we heard -- number 22, please -- all the evidence in the case, all the witnesses. every single witness that was actually called and even the witnesses that the defense called. larry moyer, his brother, and loretta hedberg, which they read their depositions in. they all said he was addicted. and what did we hear from the defense? absolutely nothing. they did not present any evidence to the contrary. dale moyer was absolutely addicted to the nicotine in cigarettes. no question about it. and you heard that he tried to quit many times. let us do slide 19, please. he tried all sorts of things: patches, nicorette gum, habitrol, hypnosis, cutting down, throwing away cigarettes, lighters, his ashtrays. throwing them out the car window. and he finally quit with zyban, a prescription drug. thank goodness. he needed zyban to quit. thank goodness that came around. and the two witnesses that the defense put on, larry and loretta. loretta said certainly his behavior was not of a person who could not do without his ciggies. remember she said that? that he smoked a lot, and consistently. and larry testified: we all encouraged dale to smoke (sic) over the years, as early as the '70s. and he said -- he said: i do not know if my brother ever used the word "addicted," but that is basically what his problem was. he could not quit. and he said he made several attempts. he was making an effort. and he even said when something would be introduced on the market, he would try it. that is what larry told us, his own brother. and larry made it clear that he believed dale smoked because he believed him to be addicted, and it was his opinion that dale was addicted to cigarettes because, quote, "given the difficulty he had with giving them up, i know from public awareness and public knowledge that cigarettes are addictive, and he is a lifelong smoker. put the two together." that is what larry responded to questions asked by the defense. remember that testimony? basically a no-brainer, put it together. he was addicted. of course. now, we heard discussions about dale's sickness and you saw him testify. and you saw and we talked about the fact that he finally quit with zyban. but unfortunately for dale, it was too late. slide 34. the disease process that had gotten so far advanced as a result of his addiction that he could not breathe without the aid of oxygen. these are some of the medical records that talk about just how bad his copd had gotten, that he needed 24-hour oxygen. he became a respiratory cripple, and eventually the end-stage copd literally took his breath away, and he died. now, you saw the death certificate and you saw -- there was discussion about how it was amended to reflect the proper reason why he died. he died from the copd. and you heard lisa and heather and dawn talk about what their father meant. we are not here looking for sympathy. we are not here asking you to feel sorry for heather or lisa or dawn, even dale. we are asking you for justice. we are asking for justice. you can put that down. you know, fortunately, dawn and lisa and heather, they have got each other, and they turned to each other when dale passed away, and they turned to each other to grieve, and they have been here for each other every day. and they will continue to be here for each other. but they lost their father. and, you know, it was asked a lot of times: well, how old were you when your father passed away? and each of them were in their 50s. it was only last year. and how old was dale when he passed away. they kept making a point that dale was 84 years old, as if, hey, he lived long enough. that is the point they were trying to make. and, hey, you are 50 years old. you know, you had enough time with your father. there is never enough time. because when dale was 84, last year, they were looking forward to spending his 85th birthday with him in june of this year, as opposed to preparing for this trial. that is what they were looking forward to, but he never made it. and they were looking forward to having a 90th birthday with him. and you heard what the table said, 6.7 years. he could have lived until 90. but that is taken away from them. and it is taken away from them because of what cigarettes did to him. and that is why we are here. now, the verdict form i want to go through very quickly with you. can we turn this on? technician: sure. mr. hammer: i already talked about these questions. these are the class membership questions. was smoking cigarettes a legal cause of dale moyer's heart disease? of course. did dale moyer's copd or emphysema first manifest on or before november 21, 1996? of course it did. that was back in '93, '94, when he was diagnosed. was he addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, and if so, was such addiction a legal cause of his copd or emphysema or heart disease? of course. those are the threshold questions to make him a class member. that is why we are here. the next page is going to have -- there is a question: did dale moyer have primary parotid cancer? and you heard evidence about that. you heard evidence from the defense who called their only medical expert, a doctor who said no, that was skin cancer. well, you also heard from dr. -- from -- name escapes me. mr. schlesinger: policzer. mr. hammer: policzer. thank you, scott. from dr. policzer. he said based on his experience, he is an oncologist, that parotid cancer was basically caused by smoking. that is for you to determine. we think we have submitted sufficient evidence to show by a greater weight of the evidence that parotid cancer was caused by smoking, and that he had primary parotid cancer. now, did the cigarettes that these defendants made, lucky strikes, chesterfields, the old gold, the kents, the salems, did they cause dale's smoking-related illnesses? of course they did. no question about it. so you should check off yes there. the next question, percentage of fault. and that is something you will need to think about yourselves. but dale accepted fault for his smoking, for his inability to quit, perhaps. but think about dale's choices and then think about the tobacco company's choices that they made. the court: five minutes, counsel. mr. hammer: i would suggest to you, since he smoked reynolds products and lorillard products for most of his life, the kent, lucky strike, salems, they are forty percent. liggett is 15, and dale is 5. did he reasonably rely on these statements that were made? well, he certainly switched to kent filters based on their assurances, health assurances. he certainly switched to salems after '82. so he relied before and after '82. so these questions should be absolutely checked off yes all the way down, because he relied on what these companies said about their health effects, health reassurances. i know i'm going through this fast, but i want to get to this part. and that is: were -- were dale's smoking-related diseases a legal cause of his death? and we say that as a result of the parotid cancer, which we say was caused by smoking, and the copd that prevented him from having the surgery to remove the parotid cancer, that led to his death. so we say yes. so, therefore, heather and dawn and lisa should be entitled to compensation for the loss of their father. and how do you put a dollar figure on somebody's life? how do you do that? because it is not going to bring them back. but you talk in the only way that we can, and that is money. i would suggest to you that $2.5 million is fair and just compensation to each of these girls for the loss of their father. and that the medical expenses that were incurred, we heard was $373,436.55. and then you total that up, and that would be 7.873,436. but if you do not think -- if you do not think that cigarette smoking, his addiction caused his death, but rather something else did. if you believe it was all the skin cancer that they are talking about, we will accept that. we will respect that. and if that is the case, you go to dale moyer's suffering. and how do you compensate dale? he is dead. but how about those years he went through, 20 years, 1994 until just last year when he died, of gasping for air, gradually getting worse over the years, where it got to be that he was on 24/7 oxygen. now, you saw him. he testified. you saw him testify five different days. november 18 into december, december 5th and 6th, and into january, and then he testified march 7th, 2012. a year before he died. exactly a year. so you got to see what he looked like over a period of time. you saw from that short period of time, he declined quite a bit. but then we got a year later in january and had the day in the life video you saw. you saw how much worse he was. that is what dale moyer was going through every day. gasping for air. how do you compensate somebody for that? he did not choose that. nobody chooses that. we think fair and just compensation to dale would be $10 million. that is fair for what he suffered through on a daily basis for nearly 20 years. that is certainly fair. and you may think that is too much. you may think it is not enough. that is totally your province, your decision. and we respect whatever decision you might make. and, of course, the medical bills again were $373,436.55, for a total of 10,373,436.55. now, scott is going to talk to you about punitive damages and why they should be punished. but i think after he talks to you, you all will feel comfortable in saying yes, they do -- these companies do deserve to be punished for what they did and continue to do today. thank you. mr. schlesinger: may it please the court, counsel, ladies and gentlemen. i talk faster than steve hammer, and i've got a lot more to cover. so i'll try to let it come out. some of it will wash over you, but i'll go as fast as i can. i'll go to the first slide. dale moyer never knew that cigarettes contained paint stripper, welding torch chemicals, ant poison, napalm, lighter fluid, car batteries, car exhaustion, insecticide, embalming fluid, and so on and so forth. polonium 210 used in nuclear weapons, rocket fuel, things like that. he never knew that. so you know, today you have in evidence in this case these documents, including this document right here. this is the latest surgeon general report. this is from 2014. it came out into evidence, it came out in the public in january of 2014. every two years, they put one out. so this is current information. you have the last four years: 2010, 2012, and 2014. and in the most recent order of things that are important to know what is happening in this country with regard to cigarette smoking, when this group, the surgeon general, the chief medical officer of the united states, who is the one who is in charge of looking after the public health, wants to tell you what the current status of information that you need to know, he says in his major conclusion of the report, on page 6 of that report in evidence -- page 7, excuse me. you can write these down. you are going to have them. you can see them. if you want to write them down, you can see them. this is the conclusion: the tobacco epidemic was initiated and has been sustained by the aggressive strategies of the tobacco industry, which has deliberately misled the public on the risks of smoking cigarettes. that is current information as of today. so that our research, our understanding, the surgeon general's 2010 report, the surgeon general's 2012 report, the entire report is about teen smoking. what is smoking? smoking is drug addiction. pure and simple. it is hard to wrap your minds around it, but that is all it is. what has it been since tobacco has begun, the inhalation process to unleash the demon of deep addiction? that is all it is ever been. they know it. that is what they sell. the epidemic of addiction-driven disease is what we have in this country today unchanged. his honor talked about are you going to punish them? well, you can consider mitigation if you punish them, meaning what have they done different? what have they done different? nothing. the surgeon general's report as of the last few months says as a scientific conclusion: that this epidemic that we have in our country of losing a half a million people a year, over 1200 people a day, 20 million people since 1964, that these deaths, these scourges, these unnecessary deaths have all been because of an industry that initiated and sustained aggressive strategies and deliberately misled the product -- the public on the risks of smoking cigarettes. now, let us go to -- i'm going to start with 6 and then i'm going to click. okay? okay. so this is addiction causation. we are going to talk about that real briefly. this is just 2004, nicotine addiction leads directly to cancer through a bunch of biological pathways. question 1. addiction drives smoking. addiction is the center of the universe of the tobacco business. of course that is how you get diseases. you get it from smoking. do not forget class membership -- is this going to work -- do i have the clicker? technician: yes. mr. schlesinger: class membership, this is important, is not about the fault of either party, the reliance on statements from the tobacco industry, whether addicts lose total control over their minds, and whether addicts can quit. that is not what class membership is about. where am i supposed to point this to get it to work? technician: you should be able to click it. mr. schlesinger: was that me or you? technician: that was me. mr. schlesinger: is this thing working or not? i've got no time to waste. heck. technician: you accidentally turned it off. it is on. mr. schlesinger: okay. very simply this. addiction to nicotine. a legal cause of smoking leading to copd, heart disease, lung cancer. and as dr. policzer said, head and neck cancer, parotid cancer. you heard about that. it is an epidemic of addiction-driven disease and death. how do we know that? if you go to this book here, the authoritative, definitive reference, the admitted in evidence because of its validity to you in your decision making, the bottom line is that nicotine addiction is the fundamental reason that folks persist in using tobacco products, and that persistent use contributes to many of the diseases described in this report. addiction leads to disease. they said it in 2004 in the surgeon general's report. they say it here on page 77: nicotine maintains the addiction and thereby leads to ongoing exposures of smokers to come up with compounds with known adverse effects. and what do the tobacco companies know in this unbelievable conspiracy and fraud that took 50 years by an industry that utterly lost its moral compass, that acted utterly -- mr. boyce: objection. morality, your honor. the court: i'm sorry, counsel? mr. boyce: objection to the reference of morals. mr. schlesinger: in the supreme court opinion. the court: objection noted. overruled. this is argument. proceed. mr. schlesinger: when we ask you to get through compensatory damages, that is restorative damages for the family members, the conduit to punitive damages, a call for you to look at this as an expression of moral condemnation. it calls for a day of reckoning, a time where there is a punishment for past misdeeds, so a tobacco industry wants them -- they have an instruction and they want to be considered as people. they have the rights of people, and we agree. they have the rights of people. and we agree, they have the rights of people. well, you know what comes the rights of personhood and humanity? the responsibilities of personhood and humanity. which means, be decent. act decently to one another. you do not trade lives for money. you do not act where unmitigated greed takes over and somebody embarks upon a plan where they will addict children, hook them for life, kill them and replace them with more children? mr. woods: objection. mr. schlesinger: that is the business in this country? the court: take it down a notch, counsel. mr. schlesinger: yes, sir. sorry. i'll speed it up, but i will not get too fired up. that is not an appropriate business model in this country, and that is their model. lure, entice, addict. turn your addicted customer into a cash flow for a period of time. and when they meet the demise that you fully know they will, replace them with more youth and children. that is not a business model. they say it is a legal product. it is a legal product. but it is not legal to sell it to minors. and the entire basis of the business is minors. the surgeon general 2012 again, even now, even in 2012, even this recently, we have to have the surgeon general putting out reports saying we have got to do something about youth initiation. all smoking. it is right in the preface of this document. all smoking begins in youth and adolescents. if you took away cigarette smoking from anyone under 21 years old, if no one under 21 years old could get a cigarette, cigarette smoking would go down ninety percent in this country. ninety percent in this country. they would still have a business. instead of making the money they are making, they would make less. but it still would be a going business. that is a very important thing to consider. everything here. they say it is a rat in the cage. they compare their customers to a rat in the cage. they humanize themselves. they talk about the health of their country -- of their company. the health of their profits. they are giving birth to new smokers. the language of anthropomorphizing characteristics to themselves where they describe their customers as rats in a cage. there is even a document there where they talk about the crop of new youth. this is the kind of language they have used over the years in secret documents that nobody ever thought would see the light of day. no one has ever become a cigarette smoker by smoking cigarettes without nicotine, and very few consumers are aware of the effects of nicotine. do you think that my client, dale moyer, ever had any idea when he was nine years old what was getting himself into? you want to know about, did they contribute to cause by managing the information environment and getting folks to think that they were having a good time and having satisfaction that mr. moyer had any long-range understanding of what he was getting himself into? remember, they said $250,000 billion dollars -- no -- $250 billion on advertising. if they had spent $250 billion telling the truth, would my client have been a long-term smoker and gotten sick? they said they would go out of business if it was ever proven that this was a dangerous commodity that they were selling, this tobacco. if they had told the truth and stopped making it, would my client have died from any cigarette-related diseases? absolutely not. would he have been sickened to the point where his life deteriorated in the last 20 years? he was only in his 60s when he got sick, and solely but surely began gasping for air. did my client know that there is over 70 carcinogens, and over half of all smokers die from tobacco-related disease? and as the current surgeon general's report says, 480,000 a year dying, 20 million, 1200 a day. one of the things you will learn when we read about this, and you will see it in these reports. i encourage you to look at them as you think about this. the numbers numb. they are so huge. if we have a tragedy that makes it on to the evening news and a few people get hurt or there is a bad killing abroad or something and several people get hurt, people know about that. it is evening news. and yet this is a tragedy. this is an irrational madness that hides in plain sight. we have this scourge living in our country that happens every single day. over 1300 people are dying, 20 million have died, even since the 1964 surgeon general report. does not make sense, but it is happening right under our nose. everything the surgeon general explains is there is no free choice in smoking. and that is the tautology, that is the logical thing that you must take into consideration. i do not know that the defendants are always being anything but a little hypocritical about it -- mr. woods: objection. ms. ruiz: objection. the court: sustained. mr. schlesinger: you do not have a choice when it comes to smoking. it is not a matter of free choice. kids cannot make long-range plans. their brains are developing. they do not know where they are. they do not know what they are getting themselves into. here is what they say in their own internal documents. you remember shook hardy, the lawyer that hired the pathologist that came to testify. that is a law firm. mr. woods: objection, your honor. the court: i overruled the objection. mr. schlesinger: right here. right here, internal secret document. we got these documents in the year 2000. we have the goods on them now. smoking is going down as we learn more. these books are full of research. what we are learning from what tobacco knew all along. they were light years ahead. they were light years ahead of the public health community. they knew more about nicotine. they knew more about cancer. they knew more about those filters that did not work. they knew that the light cigarettes did not work. they beat the ftc machine. that is in this book right here, the national cancer institute book number 13. read the pages from 200 to 233, and you will see what a fraud it was that filters and lights would reassure the health. and what do they do now? what has changed? has anything at all changed? now they have american spirit. today. right now. american spirit. one hundred percent additive free organic tobacco. in our modern world in the year 2014, what do we think when we hear "organic, 100 percent additive free"? oh, by the way, with menthol, which we know in this book makes cigarettes more addictive, one-third of all sales of cigarettes are menthol. the fda is considering banning menthol, and dr. proctor testified -- mr. boyce: objection, your honor, further tpsac report. mr. schlesinger: i'm not talking about the tpsac report. mr. boyce: move to strike. the court: counsel. you are to rely on your own recollection of the evidence. thank you. proceed. mr. schlesinger: yes. menthol makes cigarettes more addictive. one-third of cigarettes are menthol. dr. proctor testified it makes it more addictive. he talked about it. mr. moyer was a smoker of menthol. thought they would be better for him. like he thought the lights would be better for him. like he thought the filters would be better for him. he smoked kents. kents were a health reassurance brand. they had the american medical association advertising, the journal of the american medical association advertising how smart people and scientific it was to have this micronite filter. and dale moyer jumped all over that, and he testified that was part of the reason why he continued to smoke. and that was what they were planning. he fit their -- he fit their marketing plan to a tee. there is the simple truth. do we have to -- does it take more than that? it does not. it does not take more than that. but this looks like a consumer product. it is invisible to people who do not notice it, but it is just sitting back behind the counter there. but that is the simple truth. he did that. i did that. dale smoked a million cigarettes. a million cigarettes. nobody smokes a million cigarettes except for the compulsive use of a drug. eight puffs of cigarette, 8 million direct hits of nicotine to the brain. this is the chain -- you played this, right? technician: yes. mr. schlesinger: this is heart disease. very interesting about the heart disease. there is no doubt that he had a manifestation of heart disease before 1996. for class membership, i'm doing it real quick. ascvd, that is atherosclerotic vascular disease. and the fact is, you are not going to be asked a question about manifestation. he had cigarette -- he had a heart disease before '96. that is not in dispute. that is one of the things that should be not in dispute. but what you do have to figure out is whether or not the heart disease was caused from smoking. here is what we know about it. i'm going to do it quick. mascarenhas and civantos both testify about it. civantos came in here. this guy was a top doc. and i know you know it, because that man was a professor, he was credentialed. he was a scholar. i hope you found him credible. he appeared to be. he said within a reasonable degree of medical probability, smoking was a substantial contributing cause to dale moyer's heart disease. all by itself, if that is true, and addiction leads to heart disease, which it is the number one cause of heart disease, he is a class member just on the heart disease. and mascarenhas said it too. but mascarenhas said it is the number one cause factor. and he said as the number one cause factor, it acts in combination with whatever other cause factors the defendants were trying to establish. mr. boyce: objection, misstates the evidence. misstates dr. mascarenhas's testimony. the court: excuse me. ladies and gentlemen, rely on your own recollection of the evidence. counsel. mr. schlesinger: we will come -- what is interesting is, i'm a lumper, because the law in this case calls for us to be lumpers, not splitters. what does that mean? the contributing cause, in order to be the cause of something, it need not be the only cause. it can be a contributing cause. many things can combine to cause something. that is lumping. when it comes to heart disease -- and i'll point it out to you, it is in this book. it is in the surgeon general 2010. the number one factor for smoking, for heart disease, is smoking. it acts in combination with family, with family history, with all these other things. and you will see that it is the number one factor, and dr. mascarenhas said it acted in combination. the questions they asked him tried to make it seem like there is only one thing, was it the cause. that is not the law. it is was it a cause? could it have contributed with a family history, which by the way, they said assume hypothetically his father never smoked. well, you heard dale and his brother testify that his father did smoke. so take that away from it. this is the perfect place to learn about lumping. when you guys saw that lengthy jury instruction read to you over and over again about contributing cause, acting in combination with other causes, that is what lumping together was, and we will go through that. this -- all the places where -- before 1996, dale was diagnosed with chronic lung disease, severe chronic lung disease secondary to emphysema, chronic obstructive lung disease, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. discrete effort capacity probably secondary to associated copd. i assume they are not going to spend time talking about this at all, because they have no evidence whatsoever to contradict it. they did not bring anybody in. nobody, nothing. this is manifestation for class membership. these are the symptoms. you heard the judge instruct you. signs, symptoms, or the diagnosis. so there is eight places in the key relevant time period before '96 when the diagnosis was made, and here's nine places where he was having wheezing and rales and rhonchi and all that congestion and nasty stuff in his lungs, which goes along with the existence of the condition which he had. so he had the disease in the relevant class period. and let me tell you how much evidence they have to contradict it: nothing, zero, nada, zip, zilch. now, nine visits, he had symptoms of copd all in the class period. so this is what -- this is what mascarenhas said. i'll do it real quick. i should not have to spend the time on it. i will. remember, this is the defense asking the questions. you agree looking at those risk factors you cannot say to a reasonable medical probability which one was the cause? no. he does not agree. you lump them together. there is a point score which does put cigarette smoking at number one. i'll let them read the rest to you. but the fact is, dr. civantos said: it is a well-known, recognized fact that smoking increases it. and i asked him: did it substantially contribute to the production of his heart disease, and it is true within a reasonable degree of medical probability. all by himself, addiction to cigarettes causing heart disease is a class membership qualification. he was a heavy smoker, that means 100 pack years of smoking. you know, if he is not an addicted smoker who is sick from smoking -- he had the big three: heart disease, lung cancer, emphysema. he had the big three. if he is not a class member, nobody could be a class member. how big is the class? do the math. it is in the books. how many people get sick every year. mr. boyce: objection. the court: what is the objection? mr. boyce: improper argument, misstates the class definition and reference to harm to others. the court: thank you, counsel. ladies and gentlemen, i have instructed you on the law. my instructions are concerned -- this is counsel's take on what the evidence presented. proceed. mr. schlesinger: may it please the court. i suggest to you -- here is what i do. i rebut the logic of the defendants' arguments. if you take their arguments to the logical conclusion, and it is old like aristotle philosopher way of doing logic: reduce it to its most basic components. reductio ad absurdum. it is latin. you have probably heard of it. it means, let us take it all the way to its logical conclusion. their defense in this case will reveal that under no set of circumstances could anybody ever be a class member. mr. boyce: objection. the court: sustained. sustained. mr. boyce: move to strike and request a curative instruction, please. (the following discussion was held at sidebar:) mr. schlesinger: hold my time, please. the court: it is running time. listen, a couple things. number one, you talk about what defense will argue. do not be talking about -- they have not argued. you are going into rebuttal and they have not done their argument yet. you are saying -- going through this. do not denigrate whatever defense they are putting on. i'm not going to tolerate it. mr. schlesinger: yes, sir. mr. woods: your honor, while we are here, the objection that i had to the shook hardy document was this. mr. schlesinger said that shook hardy hired that expert that came in to testify. first of all, that is not true. it was brent filbert. he was with my firm. but second, that is exactly the concern that i had with that document, the tie-in to attorneys in this case, and that is exactly what happened. the court: yes, sir? mr. schlesinger: i just want to go. the court: thank you. (sidebar discussion concluded, and the following was held in open court:) the court: ladies and gentlemen, regarding the last comment of counsel, just disregard it. all right? resume your closing statement. mr. schlesinger: okay. so civantos talks about cause of death, and he explains it is a combination of parotid cancer and the copd, and they both played a role and they went hand in hand. remember what civantos said. and i asked him, because we did not get to get dale here. we would have liked to have dale here. he did not make it here. you cannot help that. you know what, 20 years after lawsuits are filed for sick smokers, a lot of them die. mr. boyce: objection. the court: counsel. sustained. counsel, it is not relevant in this case. come on. mr. schlesinger: dale died before he could get to court. however, he was sick for 20 years from smoking. when he died, he died from a tobacco-related complexity of illness. when you get sick and you die of tobacco diseases, like lung cancer and things like that, they combine and they make it difficult to treat you. so as dr. civantos said, i could have treated that condition. i could have done surgery on the cancer on his face, and given him a high of 60 to seventy percent likelihood of cure and additional life expectancy, but under no set of circumstances could i do the procedure because the pulmonologist would not let me. and there is many records throughout there that said he was not a candidate for surgery. he was not an ideal candidate. now, he also said -- because we want to be transparent with all the evidence. we gave it to you as it came in so you guys could evaluate it -- that on balance, civantos said: i do not think -- i thought that cancer came from his skin cancer. remember policzer said: i think it is a smoking-related cancer. a head and neck smoking-related cancer in the parotid. that is what dr. policzer said. he was very forceful about that. that was his stated testimony. in it came. civantos said -- and i said: on balance, how do you fall down on whether it is in the parotid or not from something else, could be from skin? he said: more likely than not, i think it is from skin. and we presented that to you. now, if you decide the end-stage copd on top of the smoking-caused cancer, which by the way, i remember in opening statement hearing something about he had lung cancer for three weeks. there is no such thing as lung cancer for three weeks. i think that underplays what the severity of the disease was. he had lung cancer and surveillance of successful treatment for five years. okay? i do not think you can compare lung cancer, something that comes and goes like the flu for only three weeks. he had lung cancer on top of copd, profoundly diminished lung function, was not a candidate for the surgery on his cancer that civantos said was skin, more likely than not. but despite that, he could have saved him seventy percent, 60, seventy percent, except for the fact he could not withstand surgery. and policzer said: it is a head and neck from smoking. if you say -- if you decide, hey, you know what? we know he was sick from smoking. we know he paid a price for those cigarettes, but we do not think that his death had anything to do with it, if that is how you see the evidence and that is why we provided it all to you, we feel the greater weight of the evidence -- that is why i brought these scales -- it is what is more likely, what weighs more, what persuades me more. if you feel on balance the greater weight of the evidence is clearly that cigarette smoking played an important role in his death, then the damages are death damages. but if you do not go that route, the damages are survival damages, for all of the pain and suffering that dale went through during the years he was alive. here's all the records, they are all in evidence. just so you know, you see this: one, two, three, four, five, six. you see this, that is six gigantic bankers boxes, and they are all for you. all for you. take as long as you like. you can look through any of them. all the evidence is in there. all the records are in there. all the internal documents are in there. anything you want to know, take a little work to find it. you can all verify it. it is all there. but the bottom line for all of it, he is not a surgical candidate. dr. civantos explained clearly the choice is surgery, not radiation, and he had less than a 25 percent chance of cure with the -- with chemotherapy, because he knew it was palliative only. that is what dr. policzer said. you were not going to save dale by going the route of radiation when you were not able to cure him with the surgery, which was the primary treatment. which is why when dale had such a terrible reaction to the radiation and he already knew he was not really likely going for cure, he knew he was in a rock and a hard place. that is what dr. civantos said. they had to make a decision. the anesthesiologist was not going to put him to sleep. alvarez told dr. civantos: there is no way we can give this guy the surgery. and as a result, he lived for a little longer and he died. this board here, i think that mr. hammer showed you really quickly, you can look at it from '95 all the way through 2013, chronicles a progressive deterioration of this man's ability to live a life because of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, destructive emphysema, which is what cigarettes do to you. nothing else does it. there is no dispute it was caused by it. and his life got worse and worse and tougher and tougher. even at the end in that little day in the life film, you could see him gasping for air. even in his depositions, you saw him and you knew he lost function. he lost those 20 years of life. he could have been out smelling the roses, doing all that. he lost all that. we already covered this. he is a class member. here are the engle jury findings. you know, these were all disputed. these all had to be proven. but they caused all these diseases. nicotine in cigarettes is addictive. these cigarettes are defective and unreasonably dangerous. more dangerous than they have to be. they are inhalable. they are highly addictive. they deliver a dose of nicotine faster than any other way to the system, and as a result, you can engineer them differently. dr. proctor said: take away the inhalability. take out the addictiveness. give people a real choice. they could do that, but they will not do that. that is the basis of their business and the center of their universe. that is the fraud finding, because they lied about what they knew and they lied intending for folks to rely on it. down here the conspiracy, they all got together and did it. liggett was part of the conspiracy. they all worked together, they all paid the tobacco institute, the tobacco research institute, the tirc. the tirc, they paid them to put out all those phony papers. they paid off the ama. they did a lot of stuff that does not meet with the bounds of reasonable human decency in this country. extraordinarily reprehensible conduct. but all of these are findings that are preclusive. they cannot deny them. and you can listen to hear how they talk about them to you when they have a chance to talk. this is the business, the lumper. this is the lumper -- instruction. and then -- oh, my goodness. there is too many words there. let me tell you this. let us talk about dale moyer. tobacco companies created a new product for this, a new market for this altered product, these inhalable cigarettes that unleashed the dragon of nicotine addiction and ingrained it into the fabric of society so that it became the social norm to smoke. young dale moyer in the '30s, in the '40s, in the '60s, all the way up to 1966, there was not a single word on the pack of cigarettes that said there was anything wrong with it. everybody was smoking; doctors, hospitals, you could smoke everywhere. it was the social norm. more than half of men smoked. he started smoking in an era of innocence. smokers most commonly switched to the brands -- the leading brands that are advertised more frequently and gained market share in the popularity of the market. that is exactly what he did. just like dale moyer. a majority of smokers fell prey to the filter fraud of the '50s, and it was a filter fraud. just like dale moyer. and many smokers switched to kent with the micronite filter and lorillard marketed it as a safer cigarette. this is page 201 from monograph 13. right here. look at that advertisement. the american medical association voluntarily conducted their own laboratory and independent tests and reported in jama. these tests proved of all the filters tested, one was the most effective for removing tars and nicotine, the filter used by kent. just like dale moyer. he was on those cigarettes for 25 years. he was given the illusion of filtration. they never intended for the filters to work. it was a gimmick. but dale did not know it was a gimmick. he relied on it being something to help him. he did not know it was a gimmick. smokers switched to menthol, thinking they were better for them. they advertised menthol as medicinal. that is also in this book. they were also aware that menthol cigarettes were much more addictive. you know why? the incredibly additional addictiveness that menthol, which represents one-third of the cigarette market in the united states. one out of every three cigarettes smoked is menthol. and they are smoked by teens and youth. they ease youth initiation, but they deepen addiction and make it harder to quit. mr. boyce: objection, your honor. mr. schlesinger: it is in this book. the court: counsel. ladies and gentlemen, you are to rely on your own recollection of the evidence. thank you. proceed. mr. schlesinger: just like dale moyer. many smokers were fooled by the illusion of safety created by lights and switch, rather than keep trying to quit. just like dale moyer. many smokers were unaware that the cigarettes they were smoking were no better and quite possibly the worst from the full flavor alternative they switched from. just like dale moyer. cigarette smokers were unaware that the cigarette companies had gamed the systems as to lights. just like dale moyer. and fooling the ftc machine is right here in monograph 13, on page 233. fooling the machines, and using the data to fool smokers. this is the national cancer institutes of health. the book is in evidence. it lays it out specifically. most smokers were unaware that the cigarette had been engineered for addiction. they did not know about ammonia, flavorants, flue curing. they did not know this is what the cigarettes were being -- done, and neither did dale moyer. dale was one of the millions of smokers that fell into their marketing plan, followed their marketing plan to a tee, stayed in the holding strategy that they created. they had no idea what the companies were up to behind closed doors to manipulate the information, environment and manipulate the truth. just like dale. and it is in the book, over 95 percent of daily smokers who try to quit fail because they cannot overcome the powerfully addictive effects of nicotine. just like dale. millions are caught in the web of deceit. and more than that, this surgeon general's report, the new one, on page -- on the introduction -- introductory section from howard koh, assistant secretary of health: on the other hand, cigarette smoking remains the chief preventible killer in america. this is 2014. with more than 40 million americans caught in a web of tobacco dependence. that is -- i saw the web, it reminded me. there is over 40 million smokers, and the surgeon general says there is over 40 million caught in the web of tobacco dependence. i explained that dependence and addiction are synonymous terms. and they are. that is because smoking is addiction. that is what it is. that is all it is. there is dale. in cases like this, the truth matters, and you are supposed to have consequences for the truth. and when companies do not tell the truth, there should be consequences. when companies engineer for addiction, there will be consequences. when companies target and addict teens, there should be consequences. when companies engineer for addiction, there should be consequences. when they offer up safe alternatives for trying to quit, knowing they do not work and they are just as dangerous, there should be consequences. when they choose to keep selling an addictive, defective, unreasonably dangerous product rather than fix it -- and as dr. proctor said, take out the inhalability, change the ph, lower the levels to subaddictive levels, there should be consequences. when companies sugarcoat and trivialize the powers of nicotine addiction to hook the next generation of teenagers, putting them at unnecessary risk, there should be consequences. when you sell a product and millions of americans, and there is still over 40 million smokers, the truth matters. and there are devastating consequences of these companies' actions driven by eyes-wide-open greed. and that is why punishment is appropriate. i read that to you. that is in the book. that is hot off the press surgeon general. do not forget presentism. look at this case through the eyes of dale moyer in the years he lived at the time he was there. not all of us are anywhere near his age. there is no one in the courtroom here that is that old. i think i'm probably the oldest lawyer in the courtroom. i did not know that was going to happen. it does. but for those of you that have been around and know something about what it used to be like then, work with your fellow jurors and say, let us look at it like dale was able to look at it. the case is about dale moyer, but the case is much more -- mr. boyce: objection, your honor. the court: what is the objection? mr. boyce: can we approach? the court: sure. (the following discussion was held at sidebar:) the court: what is the objection? mr. boyce: he is encouraging jurors to look at their personal experience based on their age. that is the golden rule, personal life. they just said some of you are older than others, bring that experience in and help the jurors -- the court: i agree. all right. go ahead. objection noted. sustained. (sidebar discussion concluded, and the following was held in open court:) mr. schlesinger: i know i'm going fast. i'm sorry. i'm going to give you as much as i can. i know there is a lot of evidence here. some of the information you need to know. one-third of all cancers in the united states are caused by addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine, and that is in this book. if we eliminated cigarettes in this country, it would be the same thing as finding a vaccine that cured one-third of all cancer. $200 billion every year are spent in direct medical costs for the needless diseases caused by the epidemic of nicotine addiction. $200 billion a year are lost in this country every year because of lost productivity -- mr. boyce: objection, your honor. the court: what is the objection? mr. boyce: relevance. the court: overruled. mr. boyce: not appropriate basis for punitive damages in this case. the court: thank you. objection noted. overruled. mr. schlesinger: and as you know, dr. proctor, when they were asking questions about it said it is a defective, unreasonably dangerous product. it is too dangerous to be marketed. it should not be, it should not exist. and his book calls for the abolition of tobacco. that is part of the title of his book that he read to you, the cigarette catastrophe and the case for abolition. well, guess who agrees with dr. proctor? surgeon general 2014. major conclusion -- mr. woods: objection, beyond the scope. the court: sustained. mr. schlesinger: let me read this one excerpt to you from the book: the burden of death and disease from tobacco use in the united states is overwhelmingly caused by cigarettes -- combustible cigarettes and rapid elimination of their use will dramatically reduce this burden. so as an evidence-based standard, the most modern science, the surgeon general calls for rapid elimination of the use of cigarettes. that is just a scientific fact. we talked about their design for addiction with levulinic acid, ammonia compounds and flavorings, menthol and special filtration with tiny holes and bronchodilators so your lungs will open up and see that nicotine. you saw that in opening. they created this market for inhaled nicotine that did not exist, and they made people, through this information, that were affected by it. dale acted in direct accordance with their plan. and as his honor read to you from the description of the jury instructions, it does not have to be any specific, exact ad that went right to dale. it is whether it got there indirectly, inferentially. and it was not a one in one operation. this $250 billion was -- go ahead and play that -- was being spent to influence all of america. 5894 2 follows:) voice: what cigarette do you smoke? you will be interested to know how the doctors of america answered that question. doctors in every branch of medicine were asked: what cigarettes do you smoke? do you inhale? then you are better off smoking philip morris, and here is how you can prove it. light up a philip morris. take a puff. get a good mouth of smoke. voice: join the men who know. nothing satisfies like the big clean taste of top tobacco -- voice: do not miss the bottom smoking: (inaudible). voice: let us take a winston break. voice: that is it. winston is the one filter cigarette that delivers flavor 20 times a pack. winston has that blend (inaudible). voice: yeah, fred. voice: take a good smoke. sure wish you could taste it. voice: i am tasting it, granny. voice: kent with the micronite filter is smoked by more scientists and more educators than any other cigarette. why not discover for yourself that for good smoking taste, it makes good sense to smoke kent. would not it make good sense for you, too? (video clip concluded.) mr. schlesinger: that was a minute 20. to me it seemed like about six. play it out, please. 12 13 follows:) q. when did you switch to kent? a. as soon as i found out about it, they came out with a big advertising program about the micronite filter, and i jumped right on. because that is when it started to become apparent that there was a health problem due to smoking. i never gave that much thought before then. (video clip concluded.) mr. schlesinger: so there is lots of advertising showing it is fun, it is hip. santa claus was selling cigarettes. santa claus is selling cigarettes. salem. salem cigarettes. there is an old carton. salem. merry christmas. people used to buy these for gifts. prewrapped, ready to go. with an advertisement that says -- with a warning: caution, cigarette smoking may be hazardous to your health. but then again, it may not be. that was the doubt campaign -- mr. boyce: objection, your honor. mr. schlesinger: -- of uncertainty. the court: excuse me, what is the objection? mr. boyce: preemption, violation of the instructions. the court: thank you. ladies and gentlemen, objection noted. overruled. you rely on my instructions, ladies and gentlemen. proceed, counsel. mr. schlesinger: so again, we talked about dale being a smoker for -- he was 36 years old. smoked for 28 years by the time the first caution came on the pack. remember, during this time, from '53 on, they embarked upon the holding strategy. the doubt campaign. they say it is an open question. we do not know what causes smoking. we are bound to find out. and the only caution said was: it may be harmful to your health. well, then again, it may not. one of the things they talked about was dale should have quit. they should have quit too. they should have quit lying. right here, 250,000 -- 250 billion. when i say 250,000, it is because 250 billion is $250,000 million. that is just a lot of money. and this is from the ftc, the federal trade commission, you know, the effect of advertising, saying tobacco spends more money on marketing in one day than the public health authority spends in a year. so in terms of who is drowning out the message, who is muddying the water, who is creating this atmosphere of confusion, tobacco certainly was. let us see what dale says about it. please. 25 5898 follows:) q. when you switched to salem cigarettes, why did you switch to salem? a. i thought -- i do not know whether it was right or wrong. i thought that they were a better -- another step in the health direction. being less harmful. q. and you said at some point you switched from salem to salem lights; is that right? a. yes. q. why did you do that? a. again, because i thought there was less health problems. q. and what gave you that idea, that there was less health problems? a. they were light, the same way you -- the connotation that you get with beer, thinking that there is less calories or less whatever. (video clip concluded.) mr. schlesinger: and remember, they knew all along that the filters did not do a thing. remember claude teague, one of the documents? he invented a color-changing filter. when you put the dye in it and when the warmth comes to it, it would turn brown because people attach great significance to what is in the filter. even though it had no effect, the marketing advantages are obvious. so a fake gimmick color-changing filter to make people think something bad was being taken out of the cigarettes. mr. boyce: objection, your honor. mr. schlesinger: that is a document in evidence. mr. boyce: misstates the evidence on whether that was ever used in any product. mr. schlesinger: come on. the court: ladies and gentlemen, you are to rely on your own recollection of the evidence. proceed. mr. schlesinger: may it please the court. that guy there, he won a gold medal in the 400 in track, and he is smoking a kent. he was advertising it. scientists and educators. they are telling dale moyer through this wallpaper advertisement, the 1967 ftc talks about, the immersive advertising that nobody could escape, that smart guys smoke kent because it is got the scientific micronite filter. and then all along internally they said, cullen said, oh, if there is anything bad, we will take it out. filters are coming along now. there were no filters back before the health scare came out in the '50s. now it is 99 percent filters even today, 99 percent filters. and they do not make things better, they make things worse. but they knew in their internal documents that smokers were getting as much nicotine and tar, but it abandoned the regular cigarette on the grounds of reduced risks to health. they knew it was an illusion of filtration. they said: we are going to say, here is our triple filter. here is our quadruple filter. and incidentally, a nice jolt of nicotine. and if we could pull that one off, how much will we be able to charge for kent? that is the kind of stuff that they talked about. page 20. important page in the blue book says that: the designs with filters and lights were used by the tobacco industry as a tool to undermine cessation and prevention efforts. says there -- and this is the filter cancer. the filters made the particles smaller. it is in the book. people draw in deeper, deeper into the tiny air sacs of the lung, the alveoli. the only thing supposed to go in our lungs is air. but the poisons, the toxins go in there. the nicotine is what addicts and drives the smoking. the tar is the poison that deteriorates the lung, causes the lung cancer. and they see, wait a second. when we first had that cancer square in the '50s, 20, 30 years after people were smoking, we were getting squamous cell carcinoma in the lung. now, since filters came out 20, 30 years later, we are getting adenocarcinoma. adenocarcinomas are because of the change in the filters. so not only did not they work, not only were they never intended to work, but they made things worse. oh, and by the way -- by the way, you may not have seen this. what kind of lung cancer did dale moyer have? filter cancer. he had malignant adenocarcinoma, and it took until 2014 in that book, if you look up relative risk, that the relative risk of cancer is worse, cigarettes are more dangerous now than they ever were because of these deeper adenocarcinomas directly from filters. and that is what happened to dale. can you -- can your actions speak any louder? he lived it, he proved it, he did what they told him to do. he went to the kents, he went to the salem lights, he got the filter cancer that even doctors today are reporting as recently as 2014. this talks about ftc reports in evidence. it talks about how people were made to think cigarettes were safer with filters. and finally, when this came out in 2001 -- and everything is a holding strategy. everything is a delay. when this came out in 2001, it was still seven more years before they finally rescinded the guidance from the federal government saying if you are going to smoke, smoke those filters. because the surgeon general had been duped by that smoking machine. mr. boyce: objection. the court: what is the objection, counsel? mr. boyce: speaking about what the surgeon general knew, about the surgeon general being duped. the court: sustained as to what the surgeon general knew. other than what is in the report, counsel. thank you. mr. schlesinger: in any event, when the ftc in 2008 put out his press release saying it was no longer going to let tobacco companies say what the government ratings were on tar and nicotine in cigarettes. they said that the ftc will not be a smoke screen for tobacco companies' shameful marketing practices because of the misleading tar and nicotine ratings that had previously been cloaked in government sponsorship. that is 2008. that is not me, that is the federal government saying it. the ftc will no longer be a smoke screen for tobacco companies; shameful marketing practices. and who was a victim of that? millions of people. who was one of those millions? my client, dale moyer. you know they went after teens and youth. i've explained that. you heard a lot about it. and to me that is one of the things that is -- in terms of reprehensibility -- unforgivable. and when we heard -- i remember hearing in voir dire, folks talked about when did you start smoking, when did you start smoking. one of the gals that did not make it on the jury said -- mr. woods: objection. the court: objection. mr. woods: what happened in voir dire is not in evidence. the court: sustained. mr. schlesinger: in any event, it is not kid stuff to start smoking. that very first cigarette can start the process of addiction. that is also in surgeon general '2. the very first puff of the very first cigarette can start the process of addiction for kids. that is why the menthol is good for teen initiation. and once they get hooked -- and they do not know they are going to be smoking 30 years later. it is a dangerous -- it is a dangerous road. and i remember mr. boyce had a drawbridge up in his opening statement. and i looked at it. it looks to me like it is a castle with a drawbridge up and you cannot overcome that. i say it is not a drawbridge up. the bridge is out and the kids that are lured over that bridge that is out end up in the river of addiction and end up down the stream -- mr. boyce: objection, your honor. the court: thank you. mr. boyce: improper argument. harm to others, no connection to dale moyer. the court: thank you. that objection is overruled, counsel. mr. boyce: thank you. it is not a proper basis for punitive damages. the court: thank you. that objection is overruled. mr. schlesinger: they end up going downstream to that river of addiction, ultimately to demise and to be replacement smokers. so to me the bridge is out. and here is what you do when it comes to thinking about kids, tender age, things like that. if you have the package, products, remember, it was not until 1985 that there was ever a warning on a side of a cigarette that said it caused lung cancer, emphysema. before 1985 never said that. never said that. said it may be hazardous, is hazardous, but never said how it was hazardous . but the kids that can get addicted of this at a young age is -- that is the thing that is reprehensible. we will talk about it some more. there is a claude teague document, pt01040, is great. realistically, if our company is to survive and prosper over the long-term, we must get our share of the youth market. by the way, how do you warn a child, if you really want to warn a chile? if a child is on a diving board and he is getting ready to go into a pool that is empty, and they jump off the diving board and the pool is empty and there is a sign that says "no diving." are people that really want to protect the child, that really want to warn a 12-year-old or 14-year-old, let us say, going to see him walk by that sign and say, hey, you have been warned. or are they going to say, "stop!" are they going to yell, are they going to run to try to get to the ladder to grab the kid? are they going to do everything they can to stop the child? the message coming out from tobacco companies was one of seduction, lower your fears, steal your fears, anything to make you not worry about smoking. keep on smoking. here, this is claude teague. claude teague rose to the ranks of rjr. he was senior there. there for his entire career. they said something like a few stupid people said a few stupid things. this is a master plan, a brilliantly conceived conspiracy that lasted for decades and made untold amounts of money. and this is what claude teague said, in his youth marketing document in evidence. it says: we have deliberately played down the role of nicotine. this is in the '70s. hence, the nonsmoker has little or no knowledge of what satisfactions it may offer him. no desire to try it. then he said: we must convince him of the wholly irrational reasons that he should try smoking, in the hope that he will, for himself, then discover the real satisfactions obtainable. now, you are entitled to decide whether this kind of conduct is reprehensible, and you are entitled to look at that and ask what they are doing with satisfactions we know means addiction. and you can say to yourself, and i submit that that is true, that that is cold blooded, for a youth; that you are going to lure him with something, and then he will find the real satisfactions obtainable. and then there is that -- this year's crop. they call youth "the crop." now, has anything changed? here are the replacement smokers. that is kind of a callous way of referring to 12-year-old, 13 year-old, 14-year-old, replacement smokers. and then you have got over here, as recently as 2010, this is in evidence. there is a pediatrics article in evidence. these are the barbie camels, camel no. 9, light and luscious. there is an article in pediatrics saying when that campaign came out, the percentage of girls that were 12 to 16 years old that were interested in these cigarettes doubled; and that the result in the pediatric scientific article in evidence was that this was marketing to youth, to children. and they were bypassing it. and that was in '07, '08. for a period of time, rj stopped advertising in magazines. but we talked about entitlement to punitive damages. have they mitigated? have they changed? now, they say: well, as long as there is a certain percentage of the readership over 18, we can advertise. this is glamour. it is in evidence. that is one direction. this is known as a boy band, the one direction. people know that as a boy band. here is the organic hundred percent additive-free tobacco, "organic" being the modern health reassurance of our times. even though it has menthol, which is an additive. and if you go here, this is in evidence, you will see it. these are the kinds of glamorous ads that they have in these magazines today. dozens of magazines since middle of 2013 come out. you can pick them up. last week's people had these ads. you can pick them up anywhere. inspiration, where a moment becomes a memory. discover the unexpected. celebrate the unforgettable. it is glamorizing smoking, and it is glamorizing smoking in magazines that get to youth. one of the things we heard in opening from mr. boyce -- i want to do this real quick -- was something about dale said it is going to happen to the other guy. that is why he kept smoking, because he had been warned, he knew it was bad, but he figured it would happen to the other guy. there was scientific basis behind that. and i did not want to leave the impression that dale was some sort of callous individual that wished something bad on somebody else. could not be -- to the contrary. the ftc explained -- consumers incorrectly believed that while smoking may be hazardous to others, it is not hazardous to themselves. that was part of the campaign the tobacco companies tried to put on people so they would be confused. and dr. seidman, he said this on his own during cross-examination: smokers have self-exempting beliefs because they are afraid. they do not think it is relative to him. that is the nature of the addict. it is the denial of the addict. it is the psychological crutch that the tobacco companies wanted to give the addict, so they could keep smoking. because if you keep smoking, you keep selling. they never wanted their smokers to quit smoking. they did everything they could to keep their smokers smoking and everything they could to stop them from quitting. it was like operation stumbling block. if you want to get an addict to quit, it has to be a clear, concise, direct, red hot and nonstop message. you cannot give them a place to retreat in the world of denial, or they will not get off the drug. and even what is more, how about with tobacco? it was not until 1988 that the surgeon general finally figured out this is as addictive as heroin and cocaine. it was a secret addiction. people did not know even how addicted they were. they did not understand it. do you think dale moyer knew he was taking a drug in his body when he was breathing those cigarettes 40 or 60 times a day, that he was getting direct hits of nicotine to his brain and a rewired brain since he was nine years old? anyway, it is all about the nicotine. look at this. here is one of the dr. tamil (phonetic), one of the big scientists. let us determine the minimum nicotine required to keep the normal smoker hooked. right here they know people cannot stop smoking. they use levulinic acid. do you think my client knew they were using levulinic acid? who ain't for more money? do we really want to tout cigarette smoking as a drug? it is, of course, but there are dangerous fda implications for going beyond these walls. and yet, when the fda got them in 2009, dr. proctor said they have had no effective regulation whatsoever in the last five years. mr. boyce: objection. the court: excuse me. mr. boyce: misstates federal law, misstates the reach of the fda's authority. misstates the evidence in this case. the court: thank you. ladies and gentlemen, you are to rely on the evidence as you understand it in this case. thank you. proceed. mr. schlesinger: may it please the court. so, and then, of course, what they said internally. these are secret internal documents that jed wilson, je wilson, one of the big guys up there in the companies. these were all well-regarded individuals. as dr. proctor said, the cullmans were a celebrated family. claude teague, may he rest in peace, was a beloved member of the rjr family. nobody was censured, nobody was punished. you will not see in evidence one single piece of paper anywhere from their internal documents that comes out and says, oh, we cannot do this. this is wrong. this is something we have to retract. i have to censure this guy. that does not exist anywhere. this was a business plan. this was a model business plan that has cost 20 million americans since 1964. and as doctor -- so anyway, they knew they would go out of business if they did not have the essential chemical compound, nicotine. they knew that. and then merrell dow. i'll do this real quick. these documents are in evidence. big chemical company. they came out in the early '80s with nicotine gum, and they were boycotted. one of the members of the conspiracy boycotted them because they did not like what merrell -- what nicotine gum was all about. because they did not want their smokers quitting, and they did not want somebody coming out with a product. so they actually impaired and impeded the entry into the marketplace of smoking cessation aids to help people. mr. boyce: objection, your honor. mr. schlesinger: it is in evidence. the court: excuse me, counsel. mr. boyce: philip morris, harm to others, no connection to mr. moyer. the court: thank you. those objections are overruled. ladies and gentlemen, i have instructions or anything about reprehensibility and what import, it is in the jury instructions. you rely on your recollection of what the evidence is, and you rely on my jury instructions. proceed. mr. schlesinger: so, remember, he read to you the act of one conspirator in furtherance of the conspiracy are acts of all the conspirators in furtherance of the -- mr. boyce: objection. that misstates the jury instructions. the jury instructions in this case are for statements and omissions only. there is nothing about acts in this case. that is a misstatement. the court: thank you. objection noted. overruled. proceed, counsel. mr. schlesinger: may i proceed? in any event, they felt the nature of nicorette gum was offensive to their business. and dale, remember, he tried the gum. and this shows -- that is youth. i'm going to skip that. this talks about they knew internally. there was no doubt in the '50s and '60s that cigarettes caused cancer. they knew that. even before the business comes up about nicotine addiction in the late '80s, this business about causing cancer, every class of smoke, there was no evidence to the contrary, and they knew that it had the unattractive side effect. and remember, they promised we will go out of business. but here is what they said amongst themselves, because they celebrated their business: it is fortunate for us that cigarettes are a habit they cannot break, and would not it be wonderful if our company was the first once to produce a cancer-free cigarette? but that is what they were saying. you let the scientists do the work and you keep going, enjoy. but they were concerned. if we smoked one cigarette less a day, it would be 40 billion a year. they were worried about losing are business and profits. and of course they got together. they did the frank statement, they talked about that. i'm not going to do it again. they made a lot of promises to the country that were not true. and they said, in this case you will see at least 11 or a dozen times dr. proctor talked about, they promised they would stop making it. well they -- if they had told the truth and been truthful about that promise, what a different world we would live in today. and cannot you see dale moyer saying, if he was here before you today: if i knew now what i learned in this courtroom that you guys learned in the last couple weeks, if i knew now what i did not know -- if i knew then what i know now, would i ever be a smoker? would i have been able not to start, or done definitely everything i could to quit? and again, the doubt and confusion. they employed a single strategy, defend itself on three fronts: litigation. it was brilliantly conceived and executed. they won battles. but it was always a holding strategy. they held dale all along. he was in their holding strategy, and the whole organization was a front and a shield. it was nothing to do with smoking and health. telling -- not telling the truth about disease. here is what they said, and this addresses something that was said in opening. that was that paper where they said there is cancer in every part of smoke. you burn that cigarette, you inhale that smoke. there is cancer everywhere, and we cannot filter it. but when they sent the information to the surgeon general, it says: we did not find anything that is unhealthy. we did not find any cancer in there. and by the way, we will filter it out if there is something in there. i do not know what that is. here it is. oh, this is the kind of information they wanted to give to the surgeon general, to be as burdensome and vague and irksome to the reader. they were looking to confuse, confuse the public health authority, confuse america. and what did r.j. reynolds do? they would say in their public statements: we do not want that -- surgeon general, we do not want the public being hoodwinked. they are unjustifying emotional campaigns and health scares. it is a gross insult to the scientific community. there is no honest disagreement among experts on the effects of smoking. it is all false. the number one problem is the extent to which these officials knowingly mislead the american public. there is an old saying: if you do not have a leg to stand on, break the other guy's leg. so they undertook a campaign to knock out the surgeon general and -- go ahead and play that -- and create an atmosphere of doubt and uncertainty, which works great on guys like dale. 18 19 follows:) voice: it was suspect from the start. hew secretary califano launched his anti-smoking campaign a year ago with all the zeal of a reformed sinner. and now, in an apparent attempt to bring some science to the side of his new evangelism, the former three-pack-a-day secretary told the surgeon general: prepare a new report. "its issuance," an internal hew memo said, and i quote, "would be a media event." closed quote. turning a significant health question into a publicity stunt is an insult to serious science. america, beware if joe califano ever gives up drinking or other pleasure pursuits, even the most intimate. (video clip concluded.) mr. schlesinger: so they went ahead and they would talk about how they preempted the surgeon general's report. he would announce it. they would get out in front of him, they would capture the media spotlight and preempt with a first strike conference. and they had speakers covering millions of miles and logging hundreds of hours on the air and hundreds of appearances, because they were letting the world know, hey, the surgeon general does not know what he is talking about. it is an open question. no one knows what causes lung cancer. just keep on smoking. and that river of cash kept on flowing. then when he finally came out and said, in 1988, and surgeon general koop, i think you saw him, hey, this is as addictive as heroin and cocaine. people have to realize that. even doctors were not hearing him. remember, doctors used to smoke. claims that cigarettes are addictive is irresponsible and scare tactics. that is what they called the important announcements from the surgeon general. '88 is in evidence and '89 is in evidence. and '89 says it is not free choice. because when you start smoking you get addicted, it is not a free choice. but addiction is their business. the cigarette is defective, unreasonably dangerous. how could you make it less defective and unreasonably dangerous? make it not addictive. raise the ph so you are not inhaling it deeply into your lungs. but they will not do that. and then they go through here, subjects to be avoided. mr. woods, your head is in the way of my slide. mr. woods: sorry. mr. schlesinger: thanks. attempts to relate human disease to smoking, subject to be avoided. return to your original position. and this is what the center for tobacco research was doing. they were not doing any good for anybody. they were a front organization. and here's what is really interesting. i will do this super quick with ya. some doc named abood was doing some research. he came up with, sort of like merrell dow, an antagonist to nicotine. or he thought he might be able to come up with a chemical compound that would block the nicotine. they said: if he comes up with a way to block the nicotine, you will have the potential of putting the tobacco manufacturers out of business. so they would not fund the study and they blocked it. but they said right there, if the progress this guy is claiming is what it is, we are in the progress of digging our own grave. again, anthropomorphizing themselves. mr. boyce: same objection, to philip morris -- the court: overruled. mr. boyce: -- documents and the conspiracy instructions in this case. mr. schlesinger: and now remember, if one in five deaths in this country are related to premature death from cigarette smoking, picture in your mind what it would be like if every single cemetery in the united states had a little "no smoking" sticker on one out of every five headstones. i'm trying to think of ways to imagine numbers that numb, because when you talk about a few people dying, everybody knows about it. when you talk about 20 million, it starts to become numbing. yet it is the number one killer in our country. this i read to you. you know about that. this was in 1980, by the way. remember in '88 the surgeon general came out with the warning that it was addictive? in 1980 they were still worried about it. they knew the public health authority was coming out with this. and it still took another eight years to get out, because they had great powers. dr. proctor said they could undermine and slow down the information getting out to the public. this is teague. he admitted that what they did was -- the pharmaceutical industry. a cigarette is a nicotine delivery device. do not think of the cigarette as the product. the cigarette is the package. the product is nicotine. and then all through here they sew doubt, confusion, deceit. they said: doubt is our product, because it is a means of establishing a controversy. the key word is confusion. anything we could do to confirm that will work to our advantage. we have got to give these smokers a psychological crutch to begin smoking, and if it was not for the tirc, we would be in deplorable position. it is been a successful defensive operation. look what they say here. this is in evidence, pt05837: nothing we can say can adversely affect our litigation position. for purposes of litigation, the industry is not willing to concede anything. in the litigation venue we will require the plaintiffs to prove causation, both legally and scientifically. we intend to play hard ball with the victims of cigarette smoking when they press their claims in the courtroom. this is the industry's ultimate public relations sham. our position continues to mislead the public, with a wink. at the end there, it is not shame, it is sham. and it is the ultimate public relations sham. you will see the document, pt05837. you will see it. you can read it. i do not know if i want to listen to this guy. is it the montage? technician: i think it is the montage. mr. schlesinger: play it. 21 22 follows:) voice: (inaudible.) we will cooperate in every way. voice: well, obviously, a filter takes out certain tar and nicotine. mr. schlesinger: (in open court.) faster, if you can. go to the next part. voice: (inaudible.) because when, as, and if any ingredient in cigarette smoke is identified as being injurious to human health, we are confident that we can eliminate that ingredient. voice: do you believe the cigarettes are safe? have they been proved to be safe, mr. cullen? voice: i believe they have not been proved to be unsafe. we do talk to the question of whether or not cigarettes are hazardous. we do not believe that cigarettes are hazardous. we do not accept that. because when, as, and if any ingredient in cigarette smoke is identified as being injurious to human health, we are confident that we can eliminate that ingredient. voice: do you believe that cigarettes are safe? have they been proven to be safe, mr. cullen? voice: i believe they have not been proved to be unsafe. and i concluded from that report that it is true, that babies born to women who smoke are smaller. but they are just as healthy as babies born to women to do not smoke. and some women would prefer having smaller babies. (video clip concluded.) mr. schlesinger: before we play this, the industry is based on deception and nicotine addiction, and the basic bottom line is, with youth being where the seed corn is where people start smoking, the design of cigarettes, highly engineered legal nicotine delivery device to make it as easy as is humanly possible to begin smoking an as hard as humanly possible to quit. why should it be so hard? and the industry claimed during all those years it did not know, it did not know, it was unknown. and now you hear them make what i call the big pitch and say: everybody knew. everybody knew. dale moyer should have known what they did not know and what they refuse to admit. when all he did was be the perfect customer they wanted in the era of innocence. well, by the time the information was getting out there, he was terribly addicted. go ahead and play that. 5 6 follows:) voice: here's the controversy about cigarettes. in the 91st congress, a house committee heard testimony from leading experts on smoking and health. the record shows that most of the country's most respected doctors openly challenged anti-cigarette claims. voice: and i'd have to disagree with you in that we do not know what causes the ailments that have been attributed to cigarette smoking. voice: cigarette smoking does not cause cancer; yes or no? voice: it is not known whether cigarettes cause cancer. has not been causally established. voice: cigarette smoking -- no causal relationship between cigarette smoking and emphysema? voice: despite all of the research to date, there has been no causal link established. voice: the case is still open. the jury has not come in. voice: it may not be harmful? you are not convinced? voice: it may be, or it may not be. we do not know. voice: do cigarettes cause cancer? i do not know if they do not. voice: i'm not in a position to give you a does or does not. voice: the medical experts agree that smoking causes emphysema. do you agree? voice: it may. voice: they agree that smoking causes lung cancer. do you agree? voice: it may. voice: we have looked at the data, and the data -- (video clip concluded.) mr. schlesinger: you have seen it. i'm only going to go a few more minutes with this. but the -- they worked out a plan. the plan worked. my client was a victim of the plan. he belongs in the class. he deserves a right, as a conduit, so you guys can go to the next phase, find that these folks not only hurt him, probably killed him, and leave behind folks that are grieving, compensate them fairly with whatever you think, and then go to the important question, which is really the question that i want to talk about. and have we shown by clear and convincing evidence that this is reprehensible conduct? does not meet the bounds of human decency, and merits a strong expression of moral condemnation? so this is just manipulating nicotine, this is sales correlated with nicotine, this is when they got that, you know, freebased nicotine, they got more sales out of more nicotine. these were all the opportunities over the years for the tobacco companies to come forward and tell the truth. they could have come forward and told the truth. they could have taken it upon themselves to say we are not going to let 21-year-olds -- anyone under 21 get the cigarettes. they could have helped people. they could have said, you know what? you have been our customers since you are 14, 16 years old, you are 30 years old. the guy that is 30, says i want to start a family, comes to them. they could have helped him quit cigarettes and had cessation and still had a business. they could go back to a non-defective product, a cigar-like product. they could go to a non-addictive product. so, when it comes to choice, it is a two-way street. my client had choices, they had choices. for class membership, it is only whether or not he was dependent upon that drug. then you can go to comparative fault relative -- that mr. hammer talked about. he talked about compensatory damages. i'm not allowed to talk to you about punitive damages or an amount that would be fair and appropriate until you decide that punitive damages may be warranted, and that is the last question. and there is dale. this is a picture i always liked of dale. i like that picture of dale. so this is what it says. that they are warranted if you find by clear and convincing evidence that the defendant was guilty of intentional misconduct which was a substantial legal cause of mr. moyer's smoking-related illness. so with everything they did, the kind of thing that makes them guilty. and this is -- this is in evidence. it is the 1964 life magazine back when the surgeon general's report was coming out. and there is a "government report nails down smoking hazards. verdict on cigarettes: guilty as charged." this is in evidence. and i submit to you that it is 1964. and we are here 50 years later. and as far as this particular decision that you all can make -- because i wanted to come up with something -- i wanted to say something beautiful and american and meaningful, and instead i read a bunch of boards to you, and i'm sorry for that. but they are guilty. and the clear and convincing evidence shows this does not meet with the bounds of human decency. we ask you when you get to that last question, check off yes. we will come back, talk to you for a little bit more. and you all can say to them in the strongest possible terms, we do not want you to do this. clear and convincing evidence is that which is precise, explicit, lacking in confusion and of such weight that it produces a firm belief or conviction, without hesitation, about the matter in issue. and there is no illusion about the confusion. there is no doubt about the doubt. so the fact that they produced confusion for decades does not get them off the hook in this courtroom, because now you have seen what some folks thought they knew, but now you know. you come in here, many -- many are called, but few are chosen. we went through a lot of jurors. we chose you. and you might have thought you knew. but now that you have entered into the college of tobacco knowledge for these last three weeks, now you know. and when you consider whether or not punitive damages are warranted, and you want to know about reprehensibility and whether a day of reckoning, punishment for past misdeeds is justifiable in this case, you may consider similar harms suffered by other persons not parties to this lawsuit in assessing the reprehensibility or the wrongness of the defendants' acts as proven in this case. that is why you heard so much evidence from dr. proctor, a day and a half laying out the entirety of the conspiracy, how it was formed, how it was enacted, how it was a holding strategy. how it maintained all the way through and how successful it was. how many cigarettes they are able to sell to so many people, despite intentionally knowing full well that their customers were dying and calling the youth that would pick up the habit and pick up the addiction to sustain their profits replacement smokers. and what did they say? because the holding strategy is one that you know eventually you are going to get caught. they said: our basic position in the cigarette industry, in the cigarette controversy is subject to the charge and may be subject to a finding that we are making false or misleading statements to promote the sale of cigarettes. we are not going to play this. you have already played it. technician: that is the end. mr. schlesinger: this guy here. that guy, his fault. seven, eight years old. that is the guy. he had a chance? what chance did he have? so i hope i stitched it together for you, and if you see it our way, i hope not only will you follow through this difficult verdict form, through the compensatory damages, but get to the question that to me is the most important question and reason why we are here, which is the concept of punishment, the day of reckoning for them. and if you do, we will come back for another day or so, and we will talk about it a little bit more. i ask you to give the same kind of attention to defense during their closings that you have given to me. but i do get one more chance to talk to you. so i will say this. save a little room for dessert. thank you. mr. schlesinger: please the court, counsel. okay, folks. home stretch. my dad was a trial lawyer for really -- many years. he is in his 65th year of practicing law. he tells a story about an old-timey, tough judge in broward county. and we had some old-timey, tough guys back then, where he explained to me, when you are in the courtroom, in front of that trial judge, you are in front of the most powerful man on the earth. and these early judges, in the '60s, they knew who they were and they knew what they were. and, one time, dad was working in a case, and they were getting ready to give, i guess, opening statement or -- or, no, picking a jury, or something like that, and dad's like, we can break for lunch, judge, because it was getting on 1:00, and the jury was antsy and they were hungry; and the judge said, well, we will break for lunch when you are done with your voir dire examination, mr. schlesinger. so he moved it along. and that is what i'm going to try to do with you. and i would like you to start by looking at the findings in this case, the engle findings from -- i guess, 36, if you would put it up -- and let us keep our eye on the ball, because i heard a lot of things that are what i consider to be nothing more than denials of the truth -- mr. woods: objection. mr. schlesinger: -- of why we are here. the court: counsel, this is argument. proceed. mr. schlesinger: and, remember, we are bound by -- the jury instruction says, these findings are if -- as if you found them yourselves. now, if you tell a lie to a public health authority, and submit a bunch of distraction research to them and a bunch of phony baloney nonsense that does not get to the question of smoking and disease as part of a conspiracy to keep people smoking, and you get away with it, and the healthcare -- the innocent national cancer institute healthcare official writes back, hey, thanks for all this information you sent, because that is a salutation, and you conned them, you do not get credit for that. if, in the '70s and '80s, you conned the surgeon general, the national cancer institute, and the federal trade commission into saying, if you are going to smoke, smoke light cigarettes, and then billions were adver -- billions of dollars were advertised, showing how light cigarettes deliver less tar and nicotine, and that fraud is not exposed until the national cancer institute does it in the year 2000, in this -- in this monograph, and explains very clearly that that is exactly what it was, fooling the machines and using the data to fool smokers -- this is page 233: filters and cigarette papers were developed starting in the '50s that air conditioned the smoke by diluting the smoke column with side stream air. when smoked by the machines, as in the ftc tests, low-tar, low-nicotine numbers resulted. a desirable outcome for promotional purposes, but higher yields were ingested by real smokers, a desirable outcome for maintaining nicotine addiction. my client, you will see from the instructions, in terms of reliance, does not have to have a direct connection between a particular ad and his behavior. his behavior is the reliance, in context with the conspiracy. now, lorillard, liggett, philip morris, r.j. reynolds -- mr. boyce: r.j. reynolds. mr. schlesinger: -- i was not going to forget -- they bought american tobacco company, brown & williamson, and they assumed the liabilities -- these folks were -- not these folks. these folks are lawyers. they may be nice guys, but they are not rjr, they are not the tobacco company. they can bring any witness they want down here, but they did not bring -- mr. woods: objection. the court: excuse me. sustained. mr. schlesinger: they can choose to bring any witness, and i'll tell you -- mr. woods: objection. the court: sustained. mr. schlesinger: you did not hear from them, on any evidence -- mr. woods: objection. mr. schlesinger: -- from any -- the court: sustained. mr. woods: burden of proof. the court: why do not you move on, counsel. mr. schlesinger: all of the witnesses that testified, dr. civantos, dr. policzer, dr. wolek, who was not an expert, he was a treating, dr. rozynes, who signed the death certificate was a treating, dr. civantos was a treating, right? dr. policzer was a treating doctor. what does that mean? back at the time, in the '90s and the 2000s, those guys were men on the street, watching something unfold. they have credibility. they have the unbiased approach that comes from men that were just trying to take care of a patient. they were just trying to take care of mr. moyer. you heard no evidence to the contrary. everybody that testified -- and we just went and brought, for the most part -- except for daniel seidman, a true authority on addiction, who had never been in a courtroom before, and came in here and told you that dale moyer was highly addicted. they came right in and told you, this man was addicted, these addictions contributed to cause the disease, that is what drives the smoking, and that is the only thing that matters with being a class member. and they blurred some distinctions here, in terms of could he quit, and whether or not he could quit, and that goes to the question of fault. that is the next set of questions on the comparative negligence form. and if you think that he should have quit harder, more -- he could have quit more, you can adjust the percentage of his relative responsibility any way you want. but ability to quit has nothing to do with what the unrebutted testimony -- mr. woods: objection. mr. boyce: objection, your honor. the court: overruled. mr. boyce: class membership -- mr. schlesinger: the unrebutted testimony of his addiction-driven disease, a heavy, heavy smoker, smoking for the nicotine that you know their business is built on, is his entitlement to be in the class. similarly, they did not present any evidence to counter the fact that everybody, including dr. mascarenhas, said he was addicted, and said that his chronic obstructive pulmonary disease was in the class period, was before 1996. that is unrebutted. there is no -- nothing to the contrary. mr. boyce may have made some of his own opinions that -- remember, the court says, it is not law when the lawyer says it; it is got to be evidence in the case. dr. civantos was a great witness. take what he had to say. he said, this man does not get parotid surgery to save him because he cannot withstand it because of lung disease. and that is what dr. alvarez told him. i can quote the testimony, if i can find it, but there is no doubt the man was not a candidate for surgery. there is no doubt the chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and his inability to breathe was a contributing cause. they said, oh, skin cancer is a terrible, terrible disease. well, so is lung cancer, and so is emphysema, which is a severe form of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, and that is what dale suffered from, to the point where, in 1999, when he saw dr. mascarenhas, his major problem was problems with breathing. in 2003, he went on supplemental oxygen, which he used as he needed it. so this -- and then, in 2000 -- by 2008, he was described as a respiratory cripple by dr. mascarenhas. the man had a very severe set of diseases from smoking. there is no -- and there is just no evidence to the contrary. the -- the -- this instruction says: each defendant is legally responsible for every act by each of the co-conspirators taken in furtherance of their agreement to conceal or omit material information regarding the health effects of cigarette smoking or the addictive nature of smoking cigarettes. these companies and organizations include the defendants, as well as philip morris usa, brown & williamson, american tobacco company, the tobacco industry research committee, the council for tobacco research usa, and the tobacco institute, and rjr and lorillard and liggett. they were all part of the conspiracy. so they concealed and omitted material information not otherwise known or available. i went through a lot of their internal documents that demonstrate it. and these books here are replete with data about it, and i encourage you to look at them. if you want to look at something, look at page 105 of surgeon general '10. there is an entire chapter on nicotine addiction. that is all smoking is. it is nicotine addiction. think about it -- i said yesterday, reductio ad absurdum, reducing to the absurd. i said it was an aristotelian sort of philosophical form of logical analysis. under their standard, nobody could ever be a class member, because everybody could quit. therefore, they cannot be a class member, if class membership is based on quitting, which his honor, who gave you the law, did not say that it was. so, you know, they just do not seem -- they are using different language. and the law says -- just like they tried to say, he caused -- his heart disease was not the cause -- smoking was not the cause of his heart disease; smoking was a cause of his heart disease. and if we go to -- i know where it is. this is what i want to do. i think it is page 353 of the book. hammer, if you want to try to find it for me, okay? let me see if i can get it here. there is a section here on page 355, tobacco use and cardiovascular disease. and it explains that each risk factor is multiplicative of the other risk factors. if you have one risk factor, it is 2x; if you have two risk factors, it is 4x; and that tobacco cigarette smoking is the number one risk factor. and that is what mascarenhas said and that is what dr. civantos said. it is another way into class membership. he absolutely had it manifested before 1996. you can look in this book. it is an absolute combination, a lumper. it is a multiple cause that contributes to cause the disease. smoking is one of the contributing causes. that is -- that is what is covered by the law in the case. they talked about this magazine. it is in evidence, you will look at it. it is full of advertisements for cigarettes. front and back, there must be four or five full-page advertisements for cigarettes in here. and you will see it. the -- when they talked about the philip morris documents do not apply to them, they do. everything -- everything the tirc does applies. baron (sic), do you have that clip about the tirc, please? technician: sure. (the video clip was played and taken down to the best of the reporter's ability as follows:) voice: that brings us to the here and now. you may take for granted a great many aspects of the tobacco institute, if you knew of them at all. most organizations would feel at a disadvantage with such a low profile, but this is entirely appropriate to our work, since most of what we do takes place out of sight of the public and the rest of the industry, even though our concerns are very much those of the public and the industry. (video clip concluded.) mr. schlesinger: mr. moyer is not supposed to know what they are doing. he is just supposed to be part of that information environment that affects him. and he was. mr. boyce: objection, your honor, improper argument. the court: overruled. mr. schlesinger: now, the reliance part on the statements, remember, his actions spoke louder than words. he followed the company plan. when they came up with the filters, which were a fraud all along, the illusion of filtration -- they even invented a fake, color-changing filter that did not work -- they knew all along, they knew well in advance of the surgeon general -- they were light years ahead of him -- they took advantage and wrapped themselves in the surgeon general and the ftc's approval, and finally the ftc came out -- i showed you that press release in 2008 -- saying, they can no longer wrap their shameful marketing practices in an appearance of approval by the federal government. we will no longer be a smokescreen for them. this here says that -- it is not just a fact, but it is a concealment or an omission. mr. boyce kept saying "statements," he did not rely on a statement; but he relied on statements and omissions. his behavior was, when they came up with filters, and kent was safer, he went to kent because he thought it was safer. and that is a stumbling block to actually trying to quit. and those were the years before the concept of addiction came out. the concept of addiction did not come out until 1988. and, by the way -- 1985. can i have the elmo? in 1985, it never said addicted -- "addictive" on it, never said "copd," never has. the warning has not changed in the last 30 years, and the ftc says, the warnings are of no effect. it is the beautiful advertising. the warnings are worn out. that is what the ftc says. it is in evidence. look closely. zoom in on that, can you? technician: yep. mr. schlesinger: you see what that says? that there is a zebra, my friends. you do not -- you will not see that anywhere, on a pack of cigarettes anywhere. but right before the master settlement agreement in 1996, bennett lebow, the ceo of liggett, did come clean about some things, and he is the one that unmasked a lot of the conspiracy. and he said, you know what? i'm going to put, "warning: smoking is addictive" right on the front of the pack. and you know what? it is not there anymore. philip morris bought this brand. you cannot find it, and you cannot -- mr. boyce: objection, your honor. the court: it is not in evidence. sustained. mr. boyce: and move to strike. mr. schlesinger: it is in evidence from dr. proctor, who testified that -- the court: ladies and gentlemen, you are to rely on your own recollection of the facts. mr. schlesinger: yes. and i will submit to you that dr. proctor testified -- look at your notes -- that if you buy a pack of chesterfields today, you will not see "smoking is addictive" on a pack of cigarettes, because it is not there. they can put anything they want on it, but addiction is the center of their business. they want to tell you that -- you want to talk about dale moyer, this is about dale moyer? sure. but it is also about them. otherwise, you would not have heard all this evidence about their conduct over the years. otherwise, you would not have seen those findings -- go back to the screen -- that talk about their -- they are all culpable of fraud and conspiracy to hide the truth, and it would not be the kind of thing that is now a major conclusion in the recent surgeon general's report. the -- a material fact is one that is of such importance that mr. moyer would not have acted -- acted as he did, but for the concealment or omission. it is not necessary for -- that a direct statement be made to mr. moyer in order to give rise to the right to rely upon the statement. it is immaterial whether the statement passes through a direct or circuitous channel in reaching mr. moyer, provided the statement is made with the intent that it reach him and he acted on it. and remember what it says there: these were meant to be relied on. they expected folks -- they expected folks, when they lied about the addictive nature, that the public would rely to their detriment. and you did not hear one single reference to an acknowledgment of any of these, when the law says that you embrace them as if you found them yourselves. and they wanted to talk about mr. moyer, but mr. moyer's one of all the similar cigarette smokers, millions of them, that have all fallen into the same trap. that is the nature of the business. the -- this slide (indicating). these slides, please. okay. i want to show you something. on page 1 of surgeon general '10 -- this is my reading copy. you will have a clean copy. on page i, roman numeral i, my copy, it says: tobacco smoke damages every organ in the body and causes disease and death. okay? now, these records are in evidence. remember we talked about the hip, okay? and we know the man was -- was -- had a hip injury. take a look at this. when he came in for the problem with his hip, he had aseptic necrosis of the left hip, okay? you know why? the patient does have a history of long-term steroid use for bronchitis and emphysema, aseptic necrosis of the left hip. hip osteonecrosis. left hip osteonecrosis. go to the next one. where is the surgical -- the surgical report? go to the next one. mr. woods: your honor, i would object. it is not in evidence. mr. schlesinger: this is all in evidence. mr. woods: any connection between -- mr. schlesinger: excuse me. this is in evidence. mr. woods: can we have a sidebar? the court: sure. mr. schlesinger: can you hold my time, judge, please? mr. woods: it will be quick. (the following discussion was held at sidebar:) the court: yes, sir, mr. woods? mr. woods: your honor, i have an objection because there is absolutely no medical evidence in this case whatsoever connecting his hip problems, his hip surgery, with smoking. none. he cannot make this -- the court: excuse me. i do not think the emphasis was there. he is asking -- these are medical records in evidence, correct? mr. schlesinger: yes. the court: he is allowed to talk about these. (sidebar concluded.) mr. schlesinger: put it back up. do you have the surgical report, as well? technician: that is the -- the court: excuse me, counsel. mr. schlesinger: i need the full page. yes? the court: ready to proceed? mr. schlesinger: yes, i am, please the court. the court: go ahead. mr. boyce: just for the record, there is no claim that smoking caused -- mr. schlesinger: excuse me. it is a speaking objection. the court: hold on. mr. boyce: there is no claim that smoking caused bone disease in this case. mr. schlesinger: excuse me, judge. the court: thank you. counsel, we went sidebar. the objection was made; i overruled the objection. we are moving on, all right? thank you. mr. schlesinger: i need the operative report, please, with the language from the operative report. may i proceed? the court: yes, sir. mr. schlesinger: i'm sorry, guys. rebuttal is tough because, on the fly, i'm trying to catch all these points. but i'm trying to show you this: he went in for the hip, he had hip osteonecrosis, he was found to have aseptic necrosis of the left hip because the patient had a long-term history of steroid use for bronchitis and emphysema. at his operative note, it said that his hip -- and you will see it in the record -- total osteonecrotic collapse of the hip at surgery. and then there is another record in here where it uses the term "osteoporosis." that is the next slide. put up the next slide. if you can find the operative note, you will put it up, okay? osteoporosis. now, do you remember i spoke to dr. civantos about the side effects of osteoporosis? we talked about the side effects of osteoporosis. i'll get there. and he explained, among other things -- and we have records on this -- part of this man's weight gain was from his steroid use, long-term steroid use, to try to help him breathe better. and there are records in there -- i may not be able to put my hands on them -- where the poor fellow is complaining about his difficulty gaining -- losing weight, because he is been on steroids, and they are adjusting steroids. and abnormal body fat deposition was one of dr. civantos' opinion. i said: what else does it do? he said: it washes out your bones and gives you osteoporosis. this man had osteoporosis, with a resultant osteonecrotic collapse of his hip, and surgery, secondary to steroids for emphysema and copd. and, by the way -- can i have the elmo? in evidence, page 4 -- and i said that smoking hurts every single part of the body. let us get the whole head in there. that is fine. that is good enough. you see one of the things that -- the health consequences causally linked to smoking and exposure to secondhand smoke: hip fractures. mr. woods: objection. mr. schlesinger: when a man smokes -- the court: the objection's noted. it is overruled. mr. boyce: same objection. mr. schlesinger: when a man smokes for 55 years, up to three packs of cigarettes a day, he is not doing it for the advertising and marketing terms of "enjoyment" and "pleasure" and "satisfaction," okay? he is doing it because, as claude teague said, nicotine is the sine qua non of smoking. the sine qua non. that is latin. it means, without which, there is nothing. that is what smoking is. there is no acknowledgment here. call it what you want, addiction, make up any term you want -- mr. woods: objection. mr. boyce: objection, your honor. mr. schlesinger: -- this is not -- the court: excuse me. this is argument, counsel. overruled. mr. schlesinger: so, you want to talk about personal responsibility? let us talk about personal responsibility. let us focus on that. because corporations are treated as persons under the rights of the law of this case and, therefore, they also have the responsibilities of persons. and i said, if you want to be a person, act like a person. behave with decency towards your fellow man. and this -- this industry has not, and they continue to not do so. and what you should do is, you should protect children. you should not mislead them or prey on them. children should be protected, right? we should help people. we should not hinder attempts to quit. zyban was a new drug that was not around that long. by the time he got to it, it helped him quit. but, also, he had to learn that his -- his disease process of copd had progressed to the point where it was so bad that he quit -- he finally quit using zyban when the "s" hit the fan -- they love to say that over and over about this guy, okay? -- but you saw this man testify for hours. remember, he was only questioned by his adversaries. there was no question -- mr. woods: objection. the court: sustained. mr. schlesinger: -- by his lawyers there. the questioning was -- the court: excuse me. mr. woods: he had every opportunity -- the court: counsel, i ruled, all right? i do not want you to keep talking after i ruled. mr. woods: sorry. mr. schlesinger: the treaters in the records that you saw are contemporaneous. mr. moyer was questioned, as an elderly man, in 2012, 2011. his last deposition was a year before he died. and he was reflecting back into the '90s. but those records in evidence were every one of the treating doctors that we brought in to tell you he had this disease process in his lungs, in the class period, and he was addicted to smoking, he was a heavily addicted smoker, and that that smoking addiction was a direct and continuous cause of his disease process, all testified to you, unrebutted, as credible experts who were just there taking care of him at the time. so the -- and you met the client. he seemed like he was a straight shooter, if you watched him, in the records; and, quite frankly, he did say something that was facetious. i do not know why they kept talking about it. he said, i was so impressed by what the fellow had to say that i finally quit 30 years later. so, the -- the court: five minutes, counsel. mr. schlesinger: in this book, on page 517, it says here: the cigarette industry has been artfully maintaining that cigarette advertising -- did i read this to you guys yesterday? -- the court: counsel -- mr. schlesinger: -- that cigarette advertising has nothing to do with total sales. this is complete and utter nonsense. the industry knows it is nonsense. i'm always amused by the suggestion that advertising, a function that has been shown to increase consumption of virtually every other product, somehow miraculously fails to work for tobacco products. mr. moyer continued to smoke the salems after 1982, he testified, because he thought they were safer. lights connoted safety. he relied on that. his behavior and his actions speak louder than anything else. just like he smoked filters. he fit their company marketing plan to a tee. therefore, he relied, but he got sick. if you think he should have tried harder, then all you have to do is, on the comparative negligence comparisons, give him a higher percentage. but all mr. hammer suggested was five percent, because i think that, reasonably, what they did, not just negligently, but intentionally, through conspiracy and fraud and intentional concealment and selling a dangerously defective product, more dangerous than it needs to be, is at least 20 times worse than what they did. he was an innocent. if his human weaknesses were such that, try as he might -- and he did try -- try as he might, he was unable to quit until he came down with a devastating disease, then you take that into consideration and you give him the percentages of fault you feel are attributable to him. but i would say that you could equally argue that what they did was a hundred times worse, because they did it on purpose and they did it for money. if you want to talk about personal responsibility, what about the personal responsibility of all of these executives and all of these scientists and all of these men, who spent all of this time making all of this money on the backs of addicted smokers, knowing full well that what they were doing was going to result in the death of millions of americans? how about the personal responsibility of a corporation to make decisions to cure cancer, not cause cancer? and here's -- here's a shout out to liggett, because liggett's role in the conspiracy is a little bit less -- although, they are an active part of the conspiracy -- but despite the industry's arguments about -- about smoking, there are times when cigarette company executives, themselves, have acknowledged that marketing reaches and influences underage adolescents. for example, in 1997, bennett lebow, ceo of the holding company that owns liggett, stated: liggett -- ms. ruiz: objection, your honor. mr. schlesinger: -- acknowledges the tobacco industry markets to youth -- the court: i'm sorry. excuse me. ms. ruiz: objection. that is not in evidence, your honor. mr. schlesinger: this is in evidence. the court: it is the surgeon general's report? ladies and gentlemen, you are to rely on your own recollection of the evidence. counsel's representing to me he is reading from something in evidence. mr. schlesinger: thank you, judge. the court: the objection's noted. it is overruled. mr. schlesinger: page 518. for example, 1997, bennett lebow, ceo of the holding company that owns liggett, stated: liggett acknowledges that the tobacco industry markets to youth, which means those under 18 years of age, and not just those 18 to 24 years of age. later that year, mr. bennett lebow further testified that cigarette companies -- all the cigarette companies -- targeted young people to try to keep people smoking, keep their business going. so that is an admission that he finally came out with, but it is true that that is an important basis of their business, and it always has been. the -- you cannot deny in this courtroom that this is an addictive drug, because the findings say so, every -- every witness that testified says so. and if not mr. moyer, who? everybody could try harder to quit under that scenario. everybody could smoke more cigarettes. if they smoked one pack a day, that is not enough, you got to smoke two packs a day. if you smoke two packs a day, it is not enough, you got to smoke three packs a day. if you tried 30 patches, that is not enough, you got to try 60 patches. even if you think that some of that is true and some of the human weaknesses of mr. moyer apply, it is on the fault part of the question. but in terms of, is he a class member, engle has class members. was he someone whose dependence on smoking was a cause, a part of the drive that led him to consume a million cigarettes into his lungs and get sick? you bet he was a class member. does he bear some responsibility? yes. but we think the evidence is it was far less than what they bear. i think if -- you saw our client, mr. moyer, up there. i thought he was a straight shooter. you can make your own decisions. mr. woods: objection. the court: thank you. mr. schlesinger: i take that back. the court: counsel -- mr. schlesinger: you can make your -- the court: you need to start wrapping up, counsel. mr. schlesinger: okay. and, then, in 19 -- one of the documents by lorillard, that they did not read, that is in evidence, talks about: by taking advantage of these opportunities, we can forcefully refute reader's digest criticism related to smoking. there was a handful of smoking articles in reader's digest, but lorillard was out there trying to knock them down, just like they knocked down the surgeon general. there is also a document in evidence that says: we now possess a knowledge of effects of nicotine far more extensive than exists in the public -- in the public literature. they had -- in 1990, there is a school letter to fifth-grade students, from rjr to the school children of willow ridge school, in evidence: despite all the recent research going on, the simple and unfortunate fact is scientists do not know the cause or causes of the chronic diseases sought to be reported and associated with smoking. if everybody was supposed to know, why did not the tobacco companies know? and what a difference the world -- it would have made if they had been morally honest with their customers and done what they knew they needed to do. and that was do something about this deadly, cancer-causing product. the surgeon general, 2010, says -- mr. boyce: objection, your honor. the court: excuse me. what is the objection, counsel? mr. boyce: the objection is, your honor, quoting from the surgeon general's report. none of this stuff has been talked about with the jury, with a witness. there is no context for it. the court: thank you. it is in evidence, counsel. your objection's noted. it is overruled. mr. schlesinger, i do remind you, you need to wrap it up. mr. schlesinger: all right. the preface to the surgeon general '10: the way tobacco is grown, mixed and processed today has made cigarettes more addictive than ever before. here, page 355. i knew i would find it, on the -- on the heart disease: beyond its status as an -- page 355, surgeon general '10, the blue book: beyond its status as an independent risk factor, smoking appears to have a multiplicative interaction with the other major risk factors for coronary heart disease, high serum levels of lipids, untreated hypertension, and diabetes mellitus. and then, also, in surgeon general 2012 -- and i embrace it. they wanted to quote from surgeon general -- mr. boyce: your honor -- mr. schlesinger: -- 2012. please review it. mr. boyce: -- can we go sidebar for one quick second? the court: sure, counsel. mr. schlesinger: thanks, judge. (the following discussion was held at sidebar:) mr. schlesinger: sorry, judge. the court: the problem is -- mr. woods: by my count, his time expired a minute ago. we all worked very hard to get in under two-and-a-half hours. your honor told him five minutes ago -- you told him to wrap up. he then read two more exhibits, another quote from the surgeon general, and he just keeps going. he is out of time. the last thing he should get to say to this jury is "thank you," or give five more minutes to each defendant. but we worked really hard last night to get in under two-and-a-half hours. he is out of time now. it ought to be over. the court: counsel, i guess part of the thing is, i have a running clock here, and i know mr. schlesinger's asked for something different than that, but we have had at least three sidebars here during his rebuttal argument. that takes time from what is going on. i have told him, i want you to wrap it up. mr. schlesinger: okay. (sidebar concluded.) mr. schlesinger: again, this will be in the -- the court: hold on, hold on. mr. schlesinger: yep. the court: madame, you all set? court reporter: yes, sir. mr. schlesinger: time limit to a lawyer talking is agony, but i have to wrap up. there is a few things -- again, you will see them in the record. i was reading to you that -- i read to you about the heart as a multiplicative risk factor. in terms of addiction causing disease, i pointed out a bunch of stuff from surgeon general '10. surgeon general '12, the red book, on kids: one of the most significant health effects is addiction to nicotine that keeps young people smoking longer, causing increased physical damage. that is right in the preface, the introductory pages of that book. and on page 871 of the surgeon general 2014, it says: the cigarette is also a defective product, meaning, not just dangerous, but unreasonably dangerous, killing half of its long-term users, and addictive by design. and the fda, as dr. proctor has testified, has not been able to put through any regulation. and if you look at the -- mr. boyce: objection. mr. woods: objection. mr. boyce: objection, your honor. the court: excuse me. sustained. counsel, you need to wrap it up, all right? that does not mean going on to new topics, all right? mr. schlesinger: all right. let me just see if i've got one more here, judge, and i'll call it a day. there is only one thing i want to read. it will take me less than a minute. george orwell wrote a book called "1984." and in that -- one of his quotes in that book -- mr. boyce: your honor -- the court: overruled. mr. schlesinger: thank you. in that -- in that book, he had a quote that, you know, was a post-apocalyptic quote, and it talked about ignorance is strength. there is another counter quote by a famous person i do not remember now: knowledge is power. and george orwell said this: in -- and it was played by richard hurt and -- no. richard burton and john hurt. and richard burton was leaning over john hurt, and whispering in his ear before they were going to torture john hurt, and he said: you must stop imagining that posterity will vindicate you, winston. posterity will never hear of you. you will be lifted clean out from the stream of history. we shall turn you into a gas and pour you into the stratosphere. nothing will remain of you. not a name in a register, not a memory in a living brain. you will have been annihilated in the past, as well as in the future. you will never have existed. by your verdict, you can see to it that when mr. moyer, in his death, has -- mr. woods: objection. mr. schlesinger: -- risen up against the tobacco company -- the court: overruled. mr. schlesinger: -- you can see to it that he will not be forgotten and he will not be absent as a name in a register. you will be able to register he was one of millions. and like so many millions of others, you can consider harm to others in determining -- mr. boyce: objection. mr. schlesinger: -- the reprehensibility of the conduct -- it is in the instruction. [#deleted objection dialogue#] mr. schlesinger: i want to say that i will not presume to tell you what you must do, nor what i believe you absolutely will do. i will tell you what i have told many juries that i've had an opportunity to speak to: i wish you great luck at arriving at a just result in this case, and i hope to get to be able to talk to you again. thank you.