19 mr. geraghty: may it please the court. good morning, ladies and gentlemen. you know my name is bill geraghty. on behalf of myself, my partner, frank cruz-alvarez, and philip morris, i'm going to start by thanking you for your jury service. our legal system depends on good people like you who are willing to give up their time to help us decide a civil lawsuit like this. i know that you have all paid very close attention to the evidence, and everyone involved in the case really appreciates your time and effort. so let me start simply by just saying thank you very much for your service in this case. we are getting close to the end of the case, which i'm sure is music to all of your ears, and it is almost time for you to retire to the jury room and deliberate. judge ungaro will give you a set of legal instructions and a verdict form, and then you are going to be asked to decide the issues in this case. but before you head off to deliberate, i'd like to take this opportunity to summarize the evidence that we have seen and heard during the course of the trial. now, remember during my opening statement i told you that the plaintiff would spend a good amount of time talking about statements or representations made by philip morris, lorillard and other tobacco companies, many of which were made more than 30, 40 or 50 years ago, and i told you, ladies and gentlemen, i would not try to defend those statements. philip morris and lorillard made statements and had ideas that today neither you nor i would say or think. but i also told you that if that was what this case was really about, we all would have gone home two weeks ago. but we did not, and that is because this case is not about all cigarette smokers. it is not about the general public. it is about one former smoker, fred jacobson, and it is only about him. and now, ladies and gentlemen, after having heard all of the evidence, you know that fred jacobson was not paying attention to anything that philip morris or lorillard was saying. judge ungaro is going to instruct you that the plaintiff bears the burden of proof in this case to prove to you that a cigarette company's statement made by a cigarette company, or something that they failed to say, had a direct connection and a substantial impact on fred jacobson's decisions about cigarette smoking; and there was simply no evidence to support that in this case. just as i told you in my opening statement, you heard from mr. jacobson's family and friends that he was strong, intelligent and well informed. that is what they told you. from an early age, mr. jacobson was well aware that cigarette smoking came with significant health risks, and despite those risks, he chose to smoke for many years. he was not waiting for philip morris or lorillard to tell him, you know what, smoking is dangerous, you need to quit. he heard from his family, his friends and from his doctors that cigarette smoking was bad for his health and that he should quit. but fred jacobson for many years enjoyed smoking and was not interested in quitting. but the key point here, ladies and gentlemen, is that was fred jacobson's decision and his decision alone. now, let me say something about the findings you have heard from this class action, and there is no debate about this. those findings do not tell you how to answer any of the questions on the verdict form, and that is because by your verdict you will decide, ladies and gentlemen, you get to decide, whether those findings have any meaning in the context of fred jacobson's life and the decisions that he made. after all, this case is about fred and ronnie jacobson. mrs. jacobson is the one who filed this lawsuit and she is the one asking you to award her millions of dollars for her husband's decision to smoke cigarettes. and you are the only jury, ladies and gentlemen, that has heard fred jacobson's story. now, i started my opening statement two weeks ago with a list of issues that were not in dispute in this case. we can add one more item to the list. everyone in this courtroom feels sympathy for mrs. jacobson for the loss of her husband. we are all human. it is only natural to feel sympathy for someone who has lost a loved one. but as judge ungaro instructed you at the beginning of the case, and she is going to remind you one more time, you have to set those natural feelings of sympathy aside and decide this case based only on the evidence you heard from that witness stand during the course of the trial and from the legal instructions that you are about to get from the judge. and knowing how hard and diligent you have worked so far in the trial, we all have no doubt that you are going to be able to do that. now, before we get into the evidence, i want to remind you what we discussed about the sources of evidence that you heard during the course of this trial, and i asked you to pay close attention to that first source of evidence. the medical records that were written by the doctors who treated fred jacobson and the patient questionnaires and insurance forms that mr. jacobson himself filled out, you now know why that evidence is so important, because it is the only evidence we have today in this case that comes directly from fred jacobson himself. and this evidence was created many years before anyone was thinking about filing a lawsuit, before anyone had a financial interest in remembering things in a way that was favorable to their case. now, judge ungaro is going to tell you, you can choose to believe or disbelieve any witness you hear, and she is going to tell you to think about a series of questions to help you decide that. and i put some of these questions on this board. this is what judge ungaro is going to tell you to ask yourself as you listen to the evidence. did the witness impress you as one who was telling the truth? did the witness have any particular reason not to tell the truth? did the witness have a personal interest in the outcome of the case? did the witness seem to have a good memory? and finally, did the witness' testimony differ from other testimony or evidence you heard during the course of the trial? and as you saw throughout this trial, much of what you heard from ronnie jacobson about her husband and his cigarette smoking was contradicted by what fred jacobson told his own doctors, by what he wrote down in his own records, and by what his friends and family members told you about mr. jacobson. and mrs. jacobson's testimony was contradicted on important points in this case: for example, whether he read the warnings and knew that cigarette smoking was dangerous many, many years ago; whether he quit smoking several times for more than a year or two; and whether he was ever, ever diagnosed by any of his doctors with copd. just as i told you she would, mrs. jacobson confessed to you that today there are many things she cannot remember because it has been so long ago, more than 20, 25, and in some instances more than 30 years ago. and so, as you think about the evidence you heard, please consider that judge ungaro will instruct you that you get to decide whether you find each witness to be believable or whether you think some of the things the witness said were influenced by an interest they have in the outcome of the case. the judge will instruct you that you can accept or reject any testimony you have heard during this trial, in whole or in part. that is your job, ladies and gentlemen, and your job alone. now, you will remember that at the beginning of the case i told you it was about two words: "control" and "responsibility," "control" and "responsibility." and we are going to walk through all of the evidence you have heard during the course of this trial. and just as i did in my opening, i want you to consider a series of questions as we talk about the evidence. who was in control of fred jacobson's lifestyle choices, including his choice to smoke cigarettes? who was in control of his efforts to quit smoking? who controlled fred jacobson's motivation to quit? was fred jacobson addicted, and if so, was he someone whose addiction was so strong, so substantial, that it overpowered his ability to quit? and finally, did fred jacobson rely on anything, anything that philip morris or lorillard said or failed to say about the health risks of smoking? now, we have heard a lot of testimony about the lifestyle choices that fred jacobson made. he made those choices, no one else. fred jacobson was strong and independent. he lived his life the way he wanted, and that included smoking cigarettes. you now know that fred jacobson enjoyed smoking cigarettes and you know now that his wife, ronnie jacobson, also enjoyed smoking cigarettes. smoking was simply something that fred and ronnie jacobson wanted to do, and for many years it was not something that mr. jacobson wanted to give up. like many people, fred jacobson knew that smoking was dangerous. yet, as you heard, his attitude with family and friends was: mind your own business. let me live my life the way i want to live it. and he had every right to do so. we all have the right to make decisions for ourselves, even decisions that today, with the benefit of hindsight, we might say were not in his best interests. we believe in the freedom to make choices. that is a fundamental principle upon which our country was founded. but with that right, ladies and gentlemen, comes the obligation to accept personal responsibility for the consequences of those choices. now, let me talk to you very briefly about the burden of proof. you have seen documents. you have seen medical records. you have heard several days' worth of testimony. the plaintiff bears the burden to prove each of her claims in this case by what is called a preponderance of the evidence. that is what the judge is going to tell you. so, what does that mean? that means to tip the scales in her favor, the plaintiff was required during this trial to produce more evidence and more persuasive evidence than the mountain of evidence that we have presented to you during the course of this trial, the mountain of evidence that shows fred jacobson was always in control; that fred jacobson did not have copd; that he was not hopelessly addicted; and that his claimed addiction was not the legal cause of copd. and we are going to walk through all the evidence you have heard during the course of this trial, and i'm going to show you, ladies and gentlemen, that the plaintiff has failed to carry her burden of proof. now, during my opening statement i showed you a timeline, and we used that timeline to walk through all of the significant events in fred jacobson's life, and i'm going to show you that timeline again, and i'll show you that everything we told you about fred jacobson we proved it during the course of this trial. but before we do that, i want to remind you of one last thing. i told you during my opening statement that there were four key points, four key points, about the evidence you would hear that summarized all of the evidence you would hear about fred jacobson, and i told you that those four key points were all that you needed to know to decide the issues in this case. and i've now put on the board. you heard about all this during the course of the trial. number 1: fred jacobson knew that smoking was dangerous and potentially addictive for many years before he developed lung cancer. number 2: fred jacobson enjoyed smoking cigarettes and he did not want people pestering him to quit doing something that he enjoyed. number 3: when he was motivated to quit, mr. jacobson quit smoking several times for more than a year, and he finally quit for good in december of 1996, before he was diagnosed with lung cancer. and finally, ladies and gentlemen: mr. jacobson did not have chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, or copd, and he certainly did not have it before november 21, 1996. now, let me show you the timeline one more time. this is the very same timeline out of the same series of four boards that i showed you during my opening statement, and you heard about all of this during the course of the trial. you know, ladies and gentlemen, fred jacobson was born on may 6, 1943, in queens, new york. his father, william jacobson, was a dentist. his mother, dorothy jacobson, was a homemaker. he had an old sister, lois jacobson. she was born four years before him. you know that fred jacobson was raised by loving parents who placed a premium on educating their children. we move into the early 1950s. you heard he was diagnosed with asthma. his sister told you, his sister told you, that he was allergic to many things and many things caused him to have asthmatic reactions. you have also now seen the medical records and you have heard the testimony of dr. feinberg and dr. frazier, fred jacobson continued to have bouts of intermittent asthma as an adult. now, let us drop from this point below the gray bar. and remember, mr. kaiser said it again today. he said to you that philip morris and lorillard somehow hid the fact that cigarette smoking was dangerous and addictive for more than 50 years and that the american public did not know that cigarette smoking was dangerous or addictive. and he brought you dr. proctor. but after hearing dr. proctor and all the other witnesses testify, you know that is simply not the case. you heard that as far back as the mid to late 1800s, before philip morris even existed as a company, people in this country were smoking what is called roll-your-own or hand- rolled cigarettes. dr. proctor told you those cigarettes were inhalable and they were just as addictive and dangerous as manufactured cigarettes. i heard mr. kaiser refer to flue-curing. remember what dr. proctor told you. he told you long before flue-cured tobacco was being used, people smoked turkish tobacco, cigarettes made of turkish tobacco. they were inhalable as far back as the 1850s. he told you in other countries, cuba and in other countries in south america, they smoked cigarettes made out of something called black tobacco. those cigarettes also are inhalable and cause the same lung cancer and diseases that flue-cured tobacco causes. that is what you heard from their expert, dr. proctor. what else did dr. proctor tell you? dr. proctor told you before fred jacobson was even born, people in this country referred to cigarettes as coffin nails, meaning every cigarette you smoke is another nail in your coffin. he said they referred to cigarettes as cancer sticks. they referred to cigarette smokers as nicotine fiends. these were terms that were introduced more than a hundred years ago, long before fred jacobson was ever born. you heard that fred jacobson's family and friends heard cigarettes referred to as coffin nails and cancer sticks by at least the early 1950s. you also saw that popular magazines, like reader's digest, published articles in the 1930s and 1940s that talked about the health risks of smoking and the addictive nature of smoking. this was not hidden. this was not some secret. dr. proctor told you that reader's digest was the most popular magazine in this country in the '30, '40s and 1950s. he told you that as we moved into the early 1950s, some of the early scientific research is being conducted that specifically links cigarette smoking with what? lung cancer, lung cancer. this was front page news on newspapers and magazines throughout the country. so widely covered was this information that dr. proctor told you, by 1954, when fred jacobson was 10 or 11 years old, ninety percent of the people in this country had heard that cigarette smoking was a cause of lung cancer, ninety percent. now, let us go back up above the gray bar. you heard in this period of time, in the mid 1950s, fred jacobson's mother, his father and his older sister, lois, all smoked cigarettes. you heard that many of his friends were experimenting with cigarettes. so it is no surprise, ladies and gentlemen, that fred jacobson himself later becomes a cigarette smoker. dr. proctor told you, dr. proctor told you that many people begin to smoke, they are more likely to smoke, if their friends and family also smoke cigarettes. so we move into the mid to late 1950s, and about 1957, you heard from his friend, alan weidberg, fred jacobson tries cigarettes for the first time. what else did mr. weidberg tell you? he told you that many of their friends were experimenting with cigarettes. he also told you, you know what, we knew, we knew we should not be smoking. our parents told us we should not be smoking, but we smoked anyway. that is what you heard from alan weidberg. now, about two years later, you heard that fred jacobson attends a private high school in manhattan called roads prep. he begins to read the new york times newspaper to and from school on the subway every single day. you heard from his wife that he was a voracious reader and he reads the newspaper every single day for the rest of his life. he graduates high school in about 1961, and a year later, in 1962, he tries to enlist in the army and he is rejected by the military because of his asthma. and how do we know that, ladies and gentlemen? we do know that. we know that because that is exactly what fred jacobson wrote in the life insurance application he filled out years later in 1991. that is how we know that. he starts working on wall street for a couple of years, and then in about 1964 or 1965 he is hired as a salesman for a company called superior linen company. you heard that he rose through the ranks of that company very, very quickly and he ultimately becomes a senior executive. now, that brings us to 1964, and let us drop below the gray bar here, and we are in january of 1964. you heard that in january of 1964, the surgeon general of the united states issues a landmark report on smoking and health. that report concludes cigarette smoking causes lung cancer and chronic bronchitis. and you now know chronic bronchitis is a type of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. now, dr. proctor told you that this report was front page news on newspapers across the country, including new york where fred jacobson was living. this is the front page of the new york times on january 12, 1964, the day after the surgeon general's report is released. here's what it says: "cigarettes peril health. u.s. report concludes remedial action urged." this is what is being said in newspapers across this country nearly 50 years ago in 1964. you also heard that this report was the lead news story on every television station: abc, nbc, and cbs. we showed you the special broadcast from cbs and the coverage by harry reasoner. mr. jacobson was 20 years old when this report was released. his friend, alan weidberg, his good childhood friend, told you it was scary when this report was released. he told you that within his circle of friends, which included fred jacobson, they all knew that cigarette smoking caused lung cancer. that is in 1964. so, let us move forward. that brings us to 1966, two years later. we are still below the gray bar here. in 1966, congress passes a law which requires a warning label to appear on every pack of cigarettes. that warning reads: "caution: cigarette smoking may be hazardous to your health." this warning label appears on all cigarette packs when fred jacobson is 22 years old. and from this point forward, every pack of cigarettes he buys carries a government mandated warning that tells him cigarette smoking is hazardous to his health. now, you heard mr. kaiser talk about an ftc report. well, ladies and gentlemen, what did fred jacobson's family and friends tell you about the impact that this warning label had? alan weidberg told you, when he saw this, it caused him to take notice and to think twice, think twice about the possibility that if he smoked he could get sick from cigarette smoking. you heard from his good friend, dr. michael weiner. he told you he quit around the same period of time, 1965, 1966, because of all of the information that was out there about cigarette smoking and disease. and finally, what did ronnie jacobson herself tell you? she recalled this warning and in her deposition she remembered the language of this warning nearly word for word almost 50 years later. that is what the people who knew fred jacobson told you about that warning. now, let us go above the gray bar here. that same year, in 1966, you heard that fred jacobson meets his first wife, bonnie shulman. they got married a year later, in 1967. two years later, in about 1969 or 1970, they move to miami. fred jacobson is transferred to miami by his company, superior linen, because they want him to help expand their sales throughout the state of florida. now, let us move from here to below the gray bar. in 1970, congress changes the warning label on cigarettes. it now says: "warning: the surgeon general has determined that cigarette smoking is dangerous to your health." that is the warning as of 1970. one year later, in 1971, all cigarette advertisements are taken off of television and radio, as of 1971. one year later, in 1972, every ad in the newspaper or magazine or billboard is required to carry this surgeon general's warning. that is the information that was out there, ladies and gentlemen. the plaintiff would have you believe that these warnings and health messages were being drowned out by statements made by cigarette companies. but the evidence you have heard has demonstrated just the opposite. remember what dr. proctor told you, dr. proctor, the plaintiff's historian. there we go. i put it on the screen in front of you. we asked dr. proctor all about this. he told you that as of 1970, 13 million americans had quit smoking, in the four-year period from the time this warning went on until 1970. he told you that between 1964 and 1979, from the first surgeon general's report, 30 million americans quit smoking. that is two million people every single year. he told you that as of today, fifty-five to sixty million americans have quit smoking. he said the surgeon general called this a revolutionary change in health behavior. the people who quit smoking heard the same information as fred jacobson. it may have taken many of them more than one try to quit. but many make the choice to quit and they quit for good, but not fred jacobson. fred jacobson enjoys smoking and at this point in time he is not interested in quitting. now, shortly after moving to miami in 1970, you heard his daughter, jennifer dill, is born in 1970. two years later, his son, jeffrey jacobson, is born in 1972. you heard that the jacobsons live in kendall lakes. they are part of the social group that includes lots of other young and educated professionals, including doctors. one of their good friends and neighbors is a doctor by the name of dr. michael weiner. we read his deposition to you. he told you that he told fred jacobson, when they met in the early 1970s, that cigarette smoking is dangerous and you need to quit. that is what he told fred jacobson. did fred jacobson respond by saying, you know what, i'm not convinced; i do not think so; i do not believe that cigarette smoking causes lung cancer? of course he did not. dr. weiner told you that based on what mr. jacobson told him, it was clear fred jacobson knew all of this long before they had those conversations, long before they had had those conversations. what did you hear from fred jacobson's children themselves? they told you that they were both well aware that cigarette smoking was bad for their health at a very young age. they begin to urge their father to quit smoking in the mid to late 1970s because that is what they are being taught in school. you heard that jennifer and jeff bought their father a sign at a school bake sale. that sign said: "thank you for not smoking." "thank you for not smoking." and you will recall jennifer jacobson's testimony about this. this is what was played to you. jennifer jacobson was asked the following questions, ladies and gentlemen: what is the youngest age at which that was something that you knew, "that" meaning that cigarette smoking is bad for your health? her answer was: maybe 8 or 9 years old. the next question is: when you bought that thank you for not smoking sign for your father, at that point in time did you already know that cigarettes could be bad for you and could kill you? her answer: i believe so. i believe so. so she is eight or nine years old. you heard jennifer dill testify that her teacher in school showed her a pair of pink healthy lungs of a nonsmoker and the brown and diseased lungs of a longtime heavy cigarette smoker. jennifer dill said that was a very vivid demonstration of the health risks of smoking. that is what she told you. you heard that she draws her father a birthday card. she draws a brown heart on the birthday card and she tells her father, please stop smoking, daddy. i want you to be healthy. that is what his daughter tells him in the late 1970s. you have heard from dr. proctor that it was part of the curriculum of the school system, the public school system here in miami-dade county, that children, elementary school children, were taught the health risks of smoking. and jeffrey and jennifer jacobson dill all confirm that to you. they confirm that to you. in fact, you know that mrs. jacobson, ronnie jacobson herself, was an elementary school teacher right here during the same period of time in the 1970s in miami-dade county. now, let us move forward to the early 1980s. you heard that in 1982, fred jacobson's first wife, bonnie jacobson, is diagnosed with leukemia. she is treated for about a two-year period, but unfortunately she passes away in november of 1983. she is treated by a doctor named alan feinberg. that is the same doctor who ultimately treats fred jacobson when he is diagnosed with lung cancer many years later. while he is treating bonnie jacobson for leukemia, he tells fred jacobson cigarette smoking is bad for your health; you need to quit. and you know what? fred jacobson does quite smoking at this point in time. he quits for approximately one year. and how do we know that? we know that because that is what fred jacobson tells his own doctor. you have seen the record before. let me show it to you again. this is a june 30, 1988, medical record written by dr. morton korn. dr. korn was fred jacobson's primary care physician. you will remember mrs. jacobson told you he was my doctor first and i recommended that fred jacobson go to see him. well, he has an appointment in 1988. the first time he sees dr. korn, dr. korn asks him if he smokes cigarettes, and here is what fred jacobson tells dr. korn. unfortunately, he smokes cigarettes. he had stopped for one year when his first wife died and then unfortunately he went back to it. that is what dr. korn wrote that is what fred jacobson told him. so in 1988, fred jacobson tells his doctor that he quit for about a year in 1982 or 1983, when his wife was diagnosed with leukemia and passed away. now, i heard mr. kaiser say this. mrs. jacobson and her lawyers want to suggest to you that somehow this record is not accurate. but mrs. jacobson herself told you she knows nothing about her husband's cigarette smoking before they met in 1984. she also told you it is difficult for her to remember these things because it is almost 30 years ago. you now know, after listening to all the evidence in this case, that what fred jacobson told his doctor in 1988 is far more reliable than mrs. jacobson's memory of what occurred 30 years ago. you know that, ladies and gentlemen. now, we know that at some point, about a year later, fred jacobson decides to start smoking again. what do we know specifically? we know that his first wife, bonnie shulman, was a nonsmoker. less than two months after she passes away in november 1983, fred jacobson meets the plaintiff. she was known as ronnie jackowitz at that point. you heard they hit it off immediately, they begin dating, and less than six months later they are married. ronnie jacobson herself told you i enjoyed smoking cigarettes. she told you that during her testimony. and it certainly makes sense that at least one of the reasons why fred jacobson would decide to start smoking again is because he is now dating a woman who enjoys smoking cigarettes just like he does. now, mrs. jacobson refused to admit to you when she testified that her husband enjoyed smoking. but ladies and gentlemen, judge ungaro is going to tell you, you get to use your common sense. you can use your common sense. you heard the testimony. you saw the pictures. there is no doubt that fred jacobson and ronnie jacobson enjoyed smoking cigarettes. they enjoyed smoking together. mrs. jacobson had to admit that to you. their own witness, dr. proctor, told you a person is more likely to smoke and less likely to want to quit if their spouse also smokes cigarettes. that is what their own doctor, dr. proctor, told you. now, let us move forward. we are in 1985 here. we are below the gray bar. in 1985, congress changes the warning label on cigarettes again. there is now a series of four rotating warnings. one of those warnings says: "surgeon general's warning: smoking causes lung cancer, heart disease, emphysema and may complicate pregnancy." that is in 1985. let us move to the late 1980s. we know that in either 1989 or 1990, fred jacobson quits smoking for several years. how do we know that? because that is what fred jacobson tells us in a life insurance application that he fills out in may of 1991. you have seen this life insurance application before. it is in evidence. fred jacobson signs this. he signs the document in may of 1991, jackson mutual life insurance application. he is asked a very simple question: have you smoked cigarettes in the past 12 months? he checks the box that says no, i have not smoked cigarettes in the past 12 months. there is another page of the application where he is asked a very similar question too. again, this is signed by fred jacobson. he is asked: has any person proposed for insurance smoked cigarettes within the last 12 months? he writes or he checks the box no, and then he tells the insurance agent: quit several years ago. fred jacobson indicates on this life insurance application that he quit several years ago. so, sometime in 1989 or 1990, mr. jacobson quits smoking again for several years. but this is another record, ladies and gentlemen, another record that mrs. jacobson and her lawyers in this lawsuit want to tell you is just wrong, just wrong. she tells you she remembers this is wrong from the late '80s, early '90s, when remember, she could not even husband that her husband quit smoking for good in 1996 just a few months ago in her deposition. but think about what mrs. jacobson and her lawyers are really saying when they tell you this record is wrong. she is saying that she and her husband made a false statement under penalty of perjury. to save what? a few hundred dollars on a life insurance premium? that is what she is saying at the same time that she and her lawyers are now asking you to award her millions of dollars, millions of dollars. you heard that fred jacobson made a comfortable living. they went out to dinner several times a week. they went on many cruises. after everything you have heard about fred jacobson during this trial, there is absolutely no reason to believe that he would have put false information in this application to save a few bucks. the fact of the matter is, mrs. jacobson does not remember when or for how long her husband quit smoking over the years. take a look at the document. page through the document. you will see the life insurance company has a doctor perform a physical exam on fred jacobson. they take a blood sample. they take a urine sample. so, ladies and gentlemen, consider the source of the evidence: an application that is filled out by fred jacobson and signed under penalty of perjury by fred jacobson many years before anyone was thinking about filing a lawsuit versus the testimony of someone who has a financial interest in remembering things that are helpful to her case and is asking you to award her millions of dollars in damages in this case. now, that brings to us 1996. and one of the questions you are going to be asked to decide is whether or not fred jacobson had copd on or before november 21, 1996. i'm going to talk about that, but i'm going to talk about that when we get to the question on the verdict form in just a moment. so that brings us to december 17, 1996. and on that day, fred jacobson quits smoking for good. and again, we know that because that is what fred jacobson said in his own health insurance -- or, excuse me, patient health history questionnaire. you have seen this document. i'm highlighting the passage. we have highlighted -- this is filled out by fred jacobson himself in his own handwriting. under tobacco use he says he smoked one pack of cigarettes a day for 35 years. and at the very bottom he says: if you have stopped smoking, when? he says: december 17, 1996. and mrs. jacobson, when this was presented to her, said, yes, i agree, that is when he quit. that is when he quit. mrs. jacobson acknowledged that her husband simply said enough is enough and made the decision to quit. and as you heard, when he quit smoking for good in 1996, he did it without any assistance whatsoever, with no serious withdrawal, and apparently with little difficulty. it was such not a big deal that mrs. jacobson did not even remember that this is when he quit when she gave her deposition just a few months ago. now, that brings us to may of 1997. you heard that while working in his backyard, fred jacobson has a sudden onset of shortness of breath and cough. mrs. jacobson testified this is the very first time, the very first time he ever had any breathing difficulties that she is aware of. and look at the date compared to this date. he immediately goes to the doctor. they find that he has a large tumor in his chest, and unfortunately, he is diagnosed with lung cancer. you heard that he does reasonably well for the next three years, and despite aggressive treatment, there is ultimately a recurrence of the cancer and he passes away in february of 2001. ladies and gentlemen, that is the story. that is the entire story you have heard about fred jacobson during the course of this trial. now, what i would like to do with the time i have remaining is walk you through the specific questions that you are going to be asked to decide on the verdict form, and let us start with the very first question, that question that we have talked about several times. question number 1 says -- can you all read that from there or i do need to move it closer? i'm going to move it a little bit closer. i saw somebody leaning in a little bit over there. the question is: did fredric jacobson have chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, copd, and, if so, did his copd first manifest itself on or before november 21, 1996? and this word "manifest" simply means did it exist, did it appear, did it occur -- mr. finger: your honor, i'm objecting. that is not the verdict form that this jury is getting. the court: i cannot see it. so i do not know. mr. finger: that is not the question. the court: but we have made the verdict form available to everyone. so the first question is: did fredric jacobson have chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, and, if so, did his copd first manifest itself on or before november 21, 1996? mr. geraghty: that is exactly what i have. the court: i just read from the verdict form. mr. finger: all right. i have trouble seeing it from a distance. i'm sorry. the court: well -- mr. geraghty: ladies and gentlemen, this is the question you are going to be asked to decide on the verdict form. you will see the verdict form. now, i'm sure it must have seemed odd that in a case in which it is undisputed that fred jacobson died of lung cancer, that the parties spent so much time talking to you about copd and emphysema. so let me see if i can explain that to you. the judge is going to tell you in her instructions that the plaintiff wants to take advantage of certain procedural benefits, benefits that enabled her to file this lawsuit and benefits that relieve her of the obligation to prove certain things that she would otherwise have to prove. but she is only entitled to do that if she can prove that fred jacobson had a qualifying disease, and that qualifying disease is copd. so, mrs. jacobson has the burden to prove to you by a preponderance of the evidence that her husband had copd on or before november 21, 1996. if you answer "no" to this question, if you answer "no," your verdict is for the defendants, the case is over and we all go home. so, let us talk about the evidence that you heard. and i told you in my opening statement, i told you in my opening statement, that the plaintiff would base her entire argument that fred jacobson had copd on or before november 21, 1996, on this single medical record from dr. neil schneider. you now know, ladies and gentlemen, that this is the only medical record of dr. schneider's that mrs. jacobson and her lawyers asked him to keep after all of his other records were destroyed. you heard that after they asked him to keep this record, all of his other records were destroyed. you have to ask yourself why was that so. there is no good explanation for that in this case, ladies and gentlemen. so, all of the other evidence, all of the other evidence in this case points to the fact that fred jacobson did not have copd, and he certainly did not have it on or before november 21, 1996. so, let us talk about dr. schneider's record first. i told you that dr. schneider would tell you that he made a tentative diagnosis of copd, a tentative diagnosis, and that is exactly what dr. schneider said when he testified. i've put the testimony now in front of you. this is dr. schneider's testimony. i asked him the following question: is not it true that you said you made a tentative diagnosis of copd when you gave your deposition in this case -- which you know is under oath testimony -- back in may, just a few months ago? his answer was: yes. i then repeated it: that was the words that you used was "tentative diagnosis"? dr. schneider said: yes. remember what else what dr. schneider told you. you heard that a "tentative diagnosis" means uncertain. he was not sure. and what else did dr. schneider tell you about the examination that he performed on april 24, 1996? he told you the entire examination was one hundred percent normal. the history, the physical exam, his examination of mr. jacobson's lungs, the chest x-ray, one hundred percent normal. so, what other evidence did you hear on this issue? i tried to summarize the evidence you have heard on this board. this is all the evidence that conclusively establishes he did not have copd and he did not have it on or before november 21, 1996. so, let us start with number 1. it is undisputed fred jacobson did not have any symptoms, no symptoms of copd or emphysema, on or before november 21, 1996. and we know that because mrs. jacobson told you that in her testimony right during the course of this trial. here's her testimony. i asked her the following questions: the bottom line is, before he was diagnosed with cancer, you never saw him experience any breathing difficulties of any kind? his answer -- her answer, excuse me: correct. and you do not recall him ever being treated for emphysema or copd? her answer: no. and you do not recall him taking any kind of medications for copd or emphysema, right? her answer: correct. that was ronnie jacobson's testimony. her husband had no breathing problems before november 21, 1996. so, second, you now heard that dr. feinberg, his oncologist, and three pulmonologists never diagnosed fred jacobson with copd or emphysema. none of them diagnosed him with that. you have now heard, ladies and gentlemen, that fred jacobson was treated by three different pulmonologists, doctors who specialize in diagnosing copd and emphysema. you heard about dr. bruce krieger, you heard about a dr. latanae parker, and you heard about a dr. louis gidel. here is dr. feinberg's testimony on this point. i asked dr. feinberg these questions. question: during the period of time that you treated mr. jacobson, that three-year period, he was evaluated by three separate pulmonologists, right? his answer: at least. the next question: all right. and we could go back and look at their notes, but none of these three pulmonologists ever diagnosed fred jacobson with either chronic obstructive pulmonary disease or emphysema, is not that right? his answer is: on clinical examination, no, they did not diagnose him. mr. kaiser and mr. finger can pull out references where people say they suspect copd, they say something is suspicious of emphysema or consistent with emphysema. find the medical record, find the medical record where a single doctor diagnosed fred jacobson with copd. it does not exist. you heard about this dr. louis gidel. his final diagnosis was asthmatic bronchitis. and the judge is going to tell you asthma and asthmatic bronchitis are not qualifying diseases. they are not qualifying diseases. they are not caused by cigarette smoking. dr. feinberg himself told you he did not diagnose fred jacobson with copd or emphysema at any point during the three years he treated him. this dr. feinberg's testimony: you never diagnosed fred jacobson with either chronic obstructive pulmonary disease or emphysema, is not the true? his answer is: i -- no, i did not make a diagnosis of that. do not you think if any of these other pulmonologists from miami had diagnosed fred jacobson with copd or emphysema, the plaintiff would have him here in this courtroom and they would tell you that from that witness stand? dr. krieger, dr. latanae parker, dr. gidel, they did not testify. they did not testify because they did not diagnose fred jacobson with copd and the plaintiff knows that. that is why you did not hear any of those doctors testify. now, third, ladies and gentlemen, you heard fred jacobson had intermittent asthma, intermittent asthma. we presented the testimony of dr. william frazier. he is a board-certified lung specialist, the only pulmonologist, the only doctor you heard from during this entire trial who treats people for copd and emphysema. he walked you through all of the medical records. he showed you all of the pulmonary function tests. he told you that fred jacobson had mild obstruction but that that obstruction improved significantly -- the word he used was it reversed -- it reversed when fred jacobson was given that medication called a bronchodilator and he repeated the pulmonary function tests again. mr. kaiser can pull statements out of these things and tell you he thinks they know what they mean. but you did not hear a single doctor support any of the things that mr. kaiser told you. dr. frazier came in. he explained it all told you. he told you that the pulmonary function tests were a sure sign that fred jacobson had asthma. he said he did not have emphysema or copd. now, you know that many of the records in the case show that fred jacobson continued to have bouts of intermittent asthma as an adult. here's dr. korn's record. you saw this records just a moment ago. i highlighted another passage. but this is dr. korn in 1998. he writes -- this is fred jacobson, tells him these things. that is the only way dr. korn gets the information. he says: he had childhood asthma and occasionally he does wheeze. when he wheezes, he has some shortness of breath, and then he writes further down he wheezes occasionally. this is in 1988, when fred jacobson is 45 years old. he is 45 years old. here's another record. i do not believe this was discussed during any of the testimony. but this is the record from dr. latanae parker. he is a pulmonologist, a pulmonologist who treated fred jacobson for intermittent breathing problems in november of 1997 at baptist hospital. and what does dr. latanae parker write: it is possible that he could have a recurrence of his underlying childhood asthma. dr. frazier explained that to you. he explained the whole thing to you. dr. parker does not diagnose fred jacobson with copd or emphysema. ask mr. kaiser and mr. finger to show you the record. they cannot because there is no such record. it does not exist because it did not happen. now, finally, ladies and gentlemen, the most persuasive evidence that fred jacobson did not have copd or emphysema is that neither he nor mrs. jacobson ever believed that he had copd or emphysema. let me remind you what dr. schneider told you. let us go back to dr. schneider's testimony. dr. schneider told you that if he did in fact make a definitive diagnosis of copd back in 1996, what did he tell you he would have done? he said, i would have sat mr. and mrs. jacobson down. i would have explained the results of the tests and told him you have emphysema, and he said i would have done that because that is the way medicine is practiced in this country. here is dr. schneider's testimony. he here's the question i asked him: are you telling us, then, that if you did in fact, definitively diagnose fred jacobson with mild copd on april 24, 1996, you would have sat him down, showed him the test results, and explained to him the significance of what those test results were? his answer was: i would have showed him the test results, yes. that is what dr. schneider told you. and ronnie jacobson herself claims, she claims she remembers this conversation. she says, yes, he did tell us that fred jacobson had emphysema. here is her testimony. this is ronnie jacobson during the trial. i asked her: so, dr. schneider told you and your husband in april of 1996 that he had emphysema or copd? her answer: correct. i asked her again: you are sure about that? her answer: correct. that is what ronnie jacobson said. so, she claims she remembers this conversation taking place in april of 1996, when again, ladies and gentlemen, she could not remember that her husband quit smoking for good just several months later. that is her testimony. so, what evidence did you hear? neither fred nor ronnie jacobson ever told a single doctor, a single doctor, that he had emphysema or copd, despite the fact that you now know that they had dozens of medical appointments with many, many doctors over the next four years. so, let us go through the records very carefully. i did not blow this particular record up, but you saw it several times. you know that the first time fred jacobson saw dr. feinberg was on june 18, 1997. this record is in evidence. this is the first time he went to see dr. feinberg about his lung cancer. ronnie jacobson told you, we never told dr. feinberg that fred jacobson had copd or emphysema. and you can look through the record. there is not a mention of it, not a mention of it. that is june of 1997. three months later, remember, three months later, in september -- i'm going to move this down here -- you will recall that three months later, in september of 1997, mr. and mrs. jacobson went to dana farber cancer institute in boston for him to have a second opinion about the treatment for his lung cancer, and ronnie jacobson told you this was a serious matter. it was life and death. fred jacobson filled out a patient health history form. mrs. jacobson told you this was in his own handwriting. fred jacobson was asked specifically, do you have emphysema. he said, i did not have emphysema. he leaves it blank. but what does he check? he checks the box that says allergies or asthma. so fred jacobson remembers being diagnosed with allergies and asthma as a young boy in the '50s, but he does not remember that his primary care doctor told him he had emphysema a year earlier? ask yourself if that makes any sense, ladies and gentlemen. does that make any sense? six months later, you heard that fred jacobson fills out a social security disability application. we showed you that application during mrs. jacobson's testimony. he was asked about all of the medical conditions he had never been diagnosed with. he puts a laundry list of things in this answer. this is in his own handwriting. he even mentions that he has high cholesterol and that he has an itching condition. but anywhere in this application does he say i've been diagnosed with emphysema or copd? of course not, because he had not, ladies and gentlemen. finally, i'm going to show you one more. this is june 6, 2000. this is when he is admitted to the hospital by dr. feinberg. dr. feinberg has been treating him now for three years. he knows his past medical history extremely well. he actually asks him, he asks, have you ever been diagnosed with copd or emphysema. he asks ronnie jacobson and fred jacobson that question. what do they tell him? here's what dr. feinberg writes: he has a history of tobacco abuse but no history of any chronic lung disease. his wife stated that there was a history of asthmatic bronchitis in the past. dr. feinberg asked them the question point-blank, and they tell him, no history of any chronic lung disease. and what does ronnie jacobson tell him? he has asthmatic bronchitis, asthmatic bronchitis, which is not a qualifying disease in this case. now, ultimately, mrs. jacobson had to acknowledge at the end of my cross-examination of her that she never told a single person, not one of his doctors, that he had copd or emphysema while he was alive. this is ronnie jacobson's testimony under oath before you about a week and a half ago, ladies and gentlemen. i asked her: now, ma'am, is not it true that while your husband was alive, you never told anyone, anyone, not any of your family members, not doctors, that fred jacobson had emphysema or copd? is not that right? her answer: correct. that was her testimony under oath in this case. but her lawyers stand up and tell you the answer to this question ought to be yes. so, despite claiming that dr. schneider told her and her husband in 1996 that he had emphysema, she never told a single person, not one of his doctors, that he had it. and the reason, ladies and gentlemen, she never told anyone that fred jacobson had copd is because he did not have it. the conversation with dr. schneider never took place. he had asthma and asthmatic bronchitis, just like she told dr. feinberg in june of 2000, and those are not qualifying diseases, as judge ungaro will tell you. mrs. jacobson knows all of this to be true, but she cannot admit it to you, ladies and gentlemen, because she knows what the effect of that will mean for her lawsuit. remember, when her lawyers and she filed the written document that started this lawsuit in this court a year ago, in 2012, they did not mention that fred jacobson had copd. you think that was an oversight? when mrs. jacobson gave her deposition under oath just a few months ago, a few months before this trial, she was asked by mr. pedrosa, did your husband have chronic obstructive pulmonary disease? her answer was no, no. then several hours went by. they had breaks. she had an opportunity to talk to her lawyers, and then she comes back and says, whoops, i forgot, i always knew it as copd. that is what she said. ladies and gentlemen, the answer to this first question is no, and if you answer no, the case is over and we all go home. now, i'd like to talk to you about the next two questions on the verdict form and i put them together because they kind of go together. question number 2 says: was fredric jacobson addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine? yes or no. and if you answer yes, the next question is: was his addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine a legal cause of fredric jacobson's copd? now, let us start with the first question, was fred jacobson addicted. and let me remind you, the court is not going to give you a definition of what it means to be addicted in this case. and i told you in my openings the plaintiff would not present an expert to you, a medical expert who would explain to you from a medical standpoint what it means to be addicted. instead, you heard mr. kaiser refer to passages from a surgeon general's report. well, that 1988 surgeon general's report actually has a set of diagnosing criteria. it is on page 249, if you want to bother to look, and it talks about the fact that psychiatrists, addiction medicine specialists, have a series of medical criteria that they use to diagnose some long term heavy cigarette smokers as addicted. but the plaintiff never presented an expert to you in this case and she gave you no real information to conclude that her husband was addicted. instead, you heard from ronnie jacobson and her two children that, in their personal opinion, he was addicted. that is it. that is all you have heard in this case. now, we read to you the deposition of dr. michael weiner. he is a medical doctor and an old, old friend of fred jacobson's. and we read his deposition to you in part because he said hey, look, i know that addiction is a medical diagnosis, and even though i know fred jacobson smoked about a pack of cigarettes a day for many years, i cannot tell you whether he is addicted. that is an honest opinion coming from someone who does not have an interest in the outcome of the case. so, let us focus on mrs. jacobson's testimony. she told you she knows her husband is addicted. she is sure that he is addicted. but she refused to acknowledge anything, anything else that might be harmful to her case that might lead you to conclude that he knew the health risks and that he was not addicted. let me remind you of some of the things that she said. she is sure that her husband was addicted. she claims he was addicted. but remember, she told you, i do not really know why my husband was trying to quit smoking. she told you, i could not get inside of his head. she also told you, i do not know when he quite smoking for good. we had to remind her with the medical record. she also said, i do not know whether he ever discussed the health risks of smoking with anyone. she told you she was not even sure whether he ever saw or read the pack warnings. she said, i assume but i cannot tell you for sure whether my husband enjoyed smoking cigarettes. so, ladies and gentlemen, she does not know any of these things, any of these things, but she is darn sure he was addicted. so, when you evaluate mrs. jacobson's testimony, please keep the following in mind: the same person who is telling you he was addicted is asking you now to award her millions of dollars. she cannot remember or will not acknowledge things that your common sense tells you, ladies and gentlemen, a wife would know about her husband. and many of the things she is told you about her husband and the cigarette smoking were contradicted by what he told his own doctors and what he wrote down in his own records many years before this lawsuit was ever filed. so, ask yourself, is that sufficient in a court of law or do you believe actual evidence, tangible evidence from a source that has no interest in the outcome of the case should be required? i think the answer is obvious. the plaintiff has simply failed to carry her burden to prove to you that her husband was hopelessly addicted and the answer to this question ought to be no, it ought to be no. but even if you ultimately decide that fred jacobson was addicted, your work is just beginning, because the plaintiff has to prove more than that. the plaintiff bears the burden to prove this question by a preponderance of the evidence. they have to prove that fred jacobson's claimed addiction was a legal cause of his so-called copd. now, i put the instruction -- i'm going to put it up here so you see what the instruction on legal cause says. and frankly, ladies and gentlemen, i'm not going to read it all out to you now. it is difficult to follow, no question about it. i highlighted the words "directly," "substantially" and "but for," because i told you those words would appear in the instruction. but to understand what this concept of legal cause is all about, i think the best example is the one that i gave you in my opening statement. imagine someone walks across the street and they get hit by a bus. the bus is the medical cause of why they were injured. but to understand the legal cause, you need to know more than that. was the light green when they tried to cross the street? was the person paying attention or were they distracted? were they talking on their cell phone? were they texting? did the person look both ways before they crossed the street? did the person know the bus was coming and yet still try to beat the bus across the street? you need to know all of those things to know what legal cause is in this case. now, in this case, ladies and gentlemen, the question of legal cause really boils down to the issue of quitting. was fred jacobson's claimed addiction so strong, so substantial that it prevented him from quitting? addiction is not the legal cause of mr. jacobson's claimed copd if you find that fred jacobson was capable of quitting when he was motivated to do so. instead, it is his informed decision to smoke cigarettes for many years and his decision not to quit for good until it was too late. we all know that fred jacobson could quit smoking because he did quit smoking several times for more than a year or two without any assistance. mr. jacobson smoked for more than 30 years not because he was forced to do so by an addiction. he smoked because he enjoyed it and for many years he had no real interest in quitting. remember the testimony you heard. he never tried a nicotine patch. he never used nicotine gum. he never went to a stop smoking clinic or class. he never asked his doctors or anyone for help in quitting. these were all methods that were available to him if he was truly motivated to quit and if, as his wife would have you believe, he was struggling to quit. the truth is fred jacobson was strong, independent and intelligent and for many years he did not listen to what his friends, his family or his doctors told him when it came to cigarette smoking. you heard that his old friend, alan weidberg, told him, you know what, you should quit smoking. fred jacobson responded, you know what, you should lose some weight. when his daughter, jennifer, pestered him to quit, he said to her, quit hawking me, jen, quite hawking me. alan weidberg, his oldest and dearest friend told you, his attitude was, mind your own business; let me live my life the way i want to live it. mr. jacobson demonstrated to everyone in this courtroom that he was capable of quitting when he decided he wanted to quit. he quit for a year in 1982, he quit for several years in 1989, and he quit for good in december of 1996 with no assistance, no serious withdrawal and little difficulty. and we know all of those things, ladies and gentlemen, because that is what fred jacobson told his doctors many years ago. you heard dr. proctor tell you that fifty-five to sixty million americans, longtime cigarette smokers, have quit smoking in this country. many of them smoked more than fred jacobson. the nicotine in cigarettes did not prevent these people from understanding that smoking is dangerous and from exercising their free will and making a decision to stop and to stop for good. and you have heard no evidence during the course of this trial that fred jacobson was any different. in fact, even ronnie jacobson had to admit that when he quit smoking for good, it was because he decided it was time to quit. it was his decision and his decision alone. the evidence shows fred jacobson was always in control, not philip morris, not lorillard, not the nicotine in cigarettes. your answer to question number 3, ladies and gentlemen, should be no, and if you answer no, the case is over and we go home. now, if, however, you answer the first three or four questions, yes -- i do not think you will get that far in this case, but i want to talk to you about a couple of questions that appear later on the verdict form. question number 5, i put on the board here. it is going to ask you to assign a percentage of responsibility for fred jacobson's lung cancer and death. there is a line for fred jacobson, a line for philip morris, and a line for lorillard. now, you heard mr. kaiser tell you that the plaintiff admits that fred jacobson was partially responsible for his own cancer and death, and the judge is going to repeat that in her instructions. so, what does that mean? it can only mean one thing. it means that fred jacobson knew that cigarette smoking was dangerous and caused disease, and that he had the ability to quit smoking in time to avoid his injury. otherwise, how could he be responsible. the fact that they tell you he is partially responsible is an admission that he knew the risks and he could quit when he was motivated to do so. you heard from his good friend, dr. michael weiner. he told you fred jacobson was not the kind of person who blamed other people for the decisions he made in life. he was the kind of person who took full responsibility for his actions. and based on all of that, i respectfully suggest that if you get to question 5, you assign one hundred percent of the responsibility to fred jacobson. the plaintiff tells you he is responsible, and that is what taking full responsibility is all about, ladies and gentlemen. let me show you questions 6 and 7 on the verdict form. now, again, i do not think you are going to get this far on the verdict form. but if you do, let me read to you questions 6 and 7. they go together. these are the reliance questions. i'm going try to read it. it is long. please state as to each defendant whether mr. jacobson relied to his detriment -- i highlighted that -- on representations made by that defendant on or after may 5, 1982, that concealed or omitted material information concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes, and, if so, whether such reliance was a legal cause of his lung cancer and death. so this concept of reliance is in here, legal cause. now, let me make three quick points, three quick points about this. if you answer yes to either question 6 or 7 -- i think the evidence supports the answer should be no -- but if you answer yes, that percentage of responsibility that we just talked about with the earlier question, question 5, goes out the window; and if you decide that you want to award any money to ronnie jacobson, she keeps one hundred percent of the money irrespective of that assignment of responsibility. second, these questions look very similar to one another. so you may be asking yourself what is the difference between the two. well, this question refers to each defendant. it says, please state as to each defendant whether mr. jacobson relied to his detriment on representations made by that defendant. so they are talking about the two defendants in this case, philip morris and lorillard. this question is limited to representations made by philip morris and lorillard. question 7 broadens it a little bit to include statements and representations made by other cigarette companies. finally, ladies and gentlemen, i want to focus you on the date. there is a date in both of these questions, may 5, 1982, may 5, 1982. that is a requirement of florida law. so the gist of what you should be thinking about with respect to both of these questions is as follows. ask yourself if fred jacobson made any decision about cigarette smoking because of a representation made by a cigarette company after may 5, 1982. the evidence is undisputed in this case, ladies and gentlemen. fred jacobson never saw, read or heard a single statement about smoking and health made by a cigarette company, and certainly not after may 5, 1982; and we know that because ronnie jacobson told us. her testimony on this point was crystal clear, crystal clear. these are the questions i asked her: mr. jacobson never told you that he ever saw, read or heard a single statement about smoking and health made by either lorillard, philip morris, r.j. reynolds or any cigarette company, for that matter, is not the true? her answer was: correct. well, i did not stop there. we asked her additional questions. you heard about some of these industry organizations that dr. proctor talked about. so we asked her about those too: he never told you that he had ever seen, read or heard a single statement put out by either the council for tobacco research, the tobacco industry research committee, or the tobacco institute? and her answer was: yes. mr. kaiser talked about all kinds of statements, talked about everything dr. proctor said. mrs. jacobson told you, as far as my husband told me, he never saw, he never read, he never heard a single statement from a cigarette company. and you know now, after hearing the whole story, he was not influenced by anything that cigarette companies were saying or doing. mrs. jacobson told you, my husband was not the kind of person who was going to be influenced by advertising. he was a salesman. he understood what it was all about. you know that long before may 5, 1982, fred jacobson was told by many people that cigarette smoking caused disease and was addictive. he was told by the surgeon general in 1964. he was told by his friends, alan weidberg and dr. michael weiner. he was told by his own children. every cigarette pack from 1966 forward told him that. and dr. feinberg told him in 1982. you now know that for many years fred jacobson did not listen to what anyone told him about cigarette smoking. so, if he was not listening to his friends, his family or his doctors, what makes anyone think he would have paid attention to anything a cigarette company had to say? he was well informed and independent. fred jacobson, and only fred jacobson, made the decision to make cigarettes and ultimately he was the only person that made the decision to quit. your answer to questions 6 and 7 should be no, ladies and gentlemen, should be no. now, i do not think you are going to get that far. but if you get this far, you will consider the issue of compensatory damages. the issue is to determine the amount of money to compensate mrs. jacobson for the loss of her husband. and you heard mr. kaiser ask you to award millions of dollars. and frankly, i do not even know what to say about that, ladies and gentlemen. but use your common sense. recall mrs. jacobson's testimony under oath in this courtroom. remember the things she refused to acknowledge to you about her husband under oath. remember that her testimony was contradicted by what her husband told his doctors many years ago, by what he wrote down in his own records, and by what she said in her own deposition under oath just a few months ago. i would respectfully suggest that if you get to the issue of compensatory damages, you write in zero, zero, ladies and gentlemen. we all make lifestyle choices and we have to live with the consequences of those lifestyle choices. now, the final issue is punitive damages and let me just address that briefly. what you are being asked to decide today is whether or not punitive damages should be awarded. you are not deciding the amount. if you say yes that you think punitive damages should be awarded, there will be an additional phase of this case; there will be additional evidence and witnesses presented to you; and you will have a second round of deliberations to decide what the amount ought to be. any punitive damages that you ultimately decide to award would all go to mrs. jacobson, and only mrs. jacobson. the purpose of punitive damages is to punish and deter, not to compensate. so, if you decide ultimately that you think mrs. jacobson is entitled to receive money for her husband's decision to smoke, you will compensate her fully through an award of compensatory damages. punitive damages are an additional amount above and beyond any compensatory damages you might award. now, the court will instruct you that there is a higher burden of proof. it is called clear and convincing evidence. it will be defined for you in the instructions. the gist of it is you have to be really, really, really convinced based on the evidence you have heard that punitive damages are appropriate. now, let me make one last point. punitive damages are warranted based only on conduct that you heard that specifically affected fred jacobson. this is mr. jacobson's case and only mr. jacobson's case. it is not a class action anymore. it is not about other people. so this is about whether the conduct you heard during the trial harmed mr. jacobson specifically. now, based on the evidence you have heard in this case, ladies and gentlemen, there is simply no basis to award punitive damages. fred jacobson was strong, independent, intelligent, well informed. there is absolutely no dispute about that. you know that philip morris and lorillard had nothing to do with the decisions he made about cigarette smoking. fred jacobson made his own lifestyle choices. so there should be no question that if you get to the question of punitive damages, your answer should be no. the court: i can only give you five more minutes, mr. geraghty. mr. geraghty: i'm going to be done in 45 seconds. the court: okay. mr. geraghty: i am going to sit down in a moment, and after mr. pedrosa addresses you, mr. kaiser and mr. finger will have one more opportunity to speak to you and that is because the plaintiff bears the burden of proof in this case. as you listen to either what mr. kaiser or mr. finger says on rebuttal, i want to you remember the four key points. these four key points have been proved very clearly to you during the course of this trial, and they tell you everything you need to know to decide the issues in this case, everything you need to know. we enjoy a tremendous amount of freedom in this country, ladies and gentlemen. we have the right to make decisions and lifestyle choices for ourselves that are not in our best interests, and with that freedom comes the obligation to accept personal responsibility for the consequences of those decisions. and at the end of the day, that is what this case is all about: are we going to hold philip morris and lorillard legally responsible for the informed decisions of a strong, intelligent and independent man who lived his life exactly the way he wanted to live it. based on the evidence you have heard, i think the answer is clear. the evidence supports a verdict in favor of philip morris and lorillard, and i would ask you, ladies and gentlemen, to return a verdict in favor of philip morris and lorillard. now, i am just about done and i want you to understand that it has been an honor and a privilege to be able to present this case to you. you have been extremely attentive and patient during everything i've done during the trial, and i want you to know one final time that i appreciate it very much and i thank you very much for your jury service. thank you. mr. pedrosa: good afternoon, everyone. on behalf of my partner, david batista, and my client, lorillard, i want to join mr. kaiser and mr. geraghty in thanking you for your service, and, in particular, in thanking you for being so attentive. you know, i owe you, i think, probably a little bit more thanks than anyone else because i'm always the last one to get up, and i usually have the least to say. so thank you for paying attention from beginning to end, even to me. you know, mr. geraghty was very thorough in going through the evidence with you from start to finish and in going through the verdict form with you. i certainly agree with everything that he said, so i'm not going to go back and cover all of that. but in thinking about where i would kind of end with you all, i figured i would end where i started. at this point it is not a real surprise what i'm going to say, but i do want to take a moment to talk about the evidence that we saw about mr. jacobson. that evidence was that mr. jacobson was a person who was informed at a very early age that there were health risks associated with smoking. we heard evidence going all the way back to the 1950s, the type of environment that his parents created, the type of environment that existed in the schools where they were required to teach about the health effects of smoking. we learned over the course of this trial that mr. jacobson was a smart man, that he was intelligent, and he understood risks and understood the risks of smoking. he was a smart, savvy businessman who was independent and made his own decisions. we learned over the course of this trial from every witness that knew mr. jacobson that he was the type of person that in all aspects of his life took charge, took control of his own decisions, and was in control of his choices including the decisions that he made about smoking. you know, for a lot of years in the 1960s and '70s mr. jacobson was aware there were risks to smoking, but he was not interested in quitting. that is what he would tell the people that would talk to him about it, like his friend alan weidberg. alan, you should go lose some weight. i will live my life, you live your life, and that is the way it is going to be. that is okay. because when mr. jacobson decided that he wanted to quit smoking in the early 1980s when his first wife bonnie was sick, he was successful and he quit. and he stayed quit for as long as he wanted to stay quit. on that particular occasion he stayed quit for about a year until the time that he met the woman that would go on to become his second wife, ronnie jacobson, who was also a smoker back then. when mr. jacobson after a year of being quit did go back to smoking, it was not nicotine that led him back to smoking. he had not had a cigarette in about a year. the nicotine was all out of his system. it was not advertisements that led him to go back to smoking. you heard the testimony from mrs. jacobson and from mr. jacobson's daughter, jennifer. he did not pay attention to advertisements. he was a salesman. he knew all about advertising, and he taught his daughter, jennifer, when she was a little girl not to trust advertisements. when mr. jacobson made the decision to go back to smoking in 1984, '83, '84, he was in control, and he did it because it was something he enjoyed doing, even though he understood that there were some risks associated with smoking. you know, mr. kaiser told you that if mr. jacobson had stayed quit at that point, had quit in the early 1980s and stayed quit, we probably would not be here because as soon as someone quits smoking, their body starts to repair itself, and the risk of getting any disease from smoking starts to go down. that is true. but i want to be very clear about one thing. we are not here to second guess mr. jacobson's decisions about how he was going to live his life. the questions that you are going to answer on that verdict form are not about whether or not you agree with the decisions that he made. nobody is here to blame him for his decisions. they were his decisions to make. you know, like everyone in this room, like everyone who lives in this country, mr. jacobson had the freedom to decide to do things that he enjoyed doing, even though they might be risky, even though they might have some long-term health consequences. you know, everyone in this country has to make those same decisions for themselves every single day. am i going to smoke or not? am i going to drink alcohol or not? how fast am i going to drive? am i going to engage in hobbies that might be dangerous or have some risks associated with them? but with the freedom to make those kinds of decisions for ourselves comes responsibility. mr. jacobson was no different. you did not hear any evidence in this case that made him any different than the 55 or 60 million americans who have quit smoking. ladies and gentlemen, those decisions were his decisions to make. it was up to him and no one else. and the evidence in this case has been clear, addiction did not control mr. jacobson. addiction did not control him when he quit smoking for a year in the early 1980s. addiction did not control him when he quit smoking for several years in the late 1980s, and addiction did not control him when he quit smoking for good in 1996. mr. jacobson was informed about the health risks of smoking. he was intelligent and understood those risks, and he made independent decisions because he was always the one in control. ladies and gentlemen, thank you.