6 mr. kaiser: may it please the court. ladies and gentlemen of the jury: good morning. the first thing i want to do -- and i think i speak for everybody -- is to thank you for bearing with us and for serving and for basically ignoring your life and being here for the last couple of weeks, because without you we would not be able to do this. so thank you very much for your service. it is almost done. what i want to do -- and you are going to get a packet of instructions read to you and you are going to get a verdict form, and there are going to be certain questions you are going to be asked to answer, and i'm going to go just in order as i did in my opening statement, but this time in my summation i will follow the exact order. and the first thing that you are going to be asked to decide is whether fredric jacobson was an engle class member. you will be asked whether he was a class member, which means, number one, did he have copd on or before november 21, 1996. that is the first question that we have to talk about. the second question was, was he addicted to the nicotine in the cigarettes that he smoked; and finally, was his condition a legal cause of his copd. that is what engle class is all about. so let us start off with copd. the question is whether or not he had copd on or before november 21, 1996. and i might add that if you find that 99.9 percent of mr. jacobson's problem was related to asthma and .1 percent was related to copd, you will answer "yes" to question 1 whether he has copd. mr. geraghty: objections your honor. misstates the testimony and the law. the court: it is up to the jury to recall what the testimony was. go ahead, mr. kaiser. mr. kaiser: why? because all we have to show is that he had copd, not exclusive of asthma, not exclusive of anything. we have to show you he had copd. so, what did the evidence show? first of all, you did not see any medical records where fredric jacobson was diagnosed with adult intermittent asthma in this case, not one. you did not see any medical record where fred jacobson was diagnosed with any medication for adult intermittent asthma. you did not see medical records where fredric jacobson talked about allergies as an adult which are associated with asthma. and recall, when dr. frazier testified, he said that as a child fred's asthma was precipitated by allergies. you also heard during the defense's opening statement that fred could not have a dog as a child or in his life because of his childhood asthma, when in fact not only did he have a dog as a child but he had dogs throughout his life. never heard anything about allergies. what you did hear on the medical records, what you saw was that in almost every one of these medical records they talk about his smoking history, which is relevant to copd because that is what causes copd. his smoking history, his name is identified in almost all of the medical records that were displayed to you in this case. now, what we have in this case is a number of pulmonary function studies in 1997 and forward, and i'm going to show you in a minute and we are going to talk about what these pulmonary function studies show. and beginning on the top left from this chart, we see the note from dr. krieger. and recall, dr. krieger, in his history of the patient -- and this is in 1997 -- what did he note? he noted that fredric jacobson had a history of childhood asthma while growing up in new york which has not caused any problems in the past 40 years. that is clear as day from the history that dr. krieger took in 1997. well, you ask, what about that 1988 note from dr. korn that we saw during the defendant's case, and that note you recall talked about fred jacobson does wheeze. how often? we do not know. when? we do not know. how long? we do not know. and it said, when he does wheeze, he would get short of breath. how often? we do not know. what we do know is that wheezing is not necessarily a single cause of asthma. wheezing can be a cause of a number of things, including bronchitis, for example. so, what does that note from 1988 tell us? virtually nothing. because if you review the note, you are going to see that dr. korn did not prescribe any medication for fredric jacobson for asthma, he did not diagnose him with adult asthma, and he did not indicate any follow-up was necessary after 1988 for asthma. also, the defense pointed out to you that, well, there is this insurance form that fred jacobson filled out and he said that he was rejected from the military because of a asthma. what does that mean? does that mean that he went for a physical examination when he was an adult and they found he was suffering from adult asthma and they said you are rejected from the military? we do not know. does that mean that he filled out his registration for the draft when he was 18 years old and on the registration said i suffer from childhood asthma and he got a letter back saying you are rejected? we do not know. does that mean his father pulled strings and got him out of the military in the '60s so he would not have to serve and they said it was because of asthma? mr. geraghty: i would object, your honor. there is no evidence to support that statement. the court: just a second. i think it is fair argument, and again, it is up to the jury to recall what the evidence in the case was. and i would just remind the jury that what the lawyers say during closing argument is not the evidence in the case. it is what you recall the evidence was and what the record reflects. now, that is not to say that the lawyers cannot make arguments based on inferences derived from the evidence. but again, it is up to you to decide whether you want to accept those inferences or reject them. mr. kaiser: and these are just some of the questions that you need to ask, because the document does not tell you that. and, so, when you see this reference that he was excluded from the military, what does it really show you? it shows you absolutely nothing. now, let us look at the pulmonary function studies after 1996, and we can see that the first one that you were shown was in july of 1997 from baptist hospital from dr. hernandez, where, as a result of the test that was performed, his analysis indicated a moderate obstructive lung process, which the defendant's own doctor said can be consistent with copd, although he said it is not diagnostic of copd. what they also told you was, well, during this time he had this huge mass in his upper airway that was causing the obstruction. remember, dr. feinberg testified, yes, he had obstruction in his upper airway, but his diffusing capacity was low, and that is copd. that is in july of 1997. we have confirmation of an obstructive lung process. not one word said about asthma. in october, october 17, 1997, when there is absolutely no evidence of a mass in fred jacobson's chest, we see a pulmonary function study, baptist hospital, richard prager, m.d. and what does he tell you in his interpretation? he tells you that it is consistent, his obstructive lung process, with emphysema. he does not say asthma anywhere in his report. so in october he tells you emphysema. we move on to dr. ziffer, which the defense did not even mention in their questioning of dr. frazier. and what did dr. ziffer say? he did a study and his study demonstrated severe bilateral lower lobe air trapping, not upper, but lower, in 1997. dr. feinberg, what did he say air trapping is consistent with? copd/emphysema. what did dr. frazier say air trapping is consistent with? emphysema. here we have 1997, a test, low air trapping, severe. and finally, we have dr. gidel, a consultation in june of 2000, and in june of 2000 he examined fred jacobson and he noted asthmatic bronchitis. he was fully aware of asthmatic bronchitis. "bronchitis" is the word here, asthmatic bronchitis, not asthma, bronchitis. and he also, despite that finding of asthmatic bronchitis, said he has a smoking history, which we know is related to copd, because that is what causes it, and said likely underlying chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, not asthma. now, taken into consideration, what did dr. gidel conclude? he had asthmatic bronchitis as well as copd, which can coexist together. so, we have one physician saying asthma did not bother the man in 40 years. we have dr. hernandez who says obstructive lung process. we have dr. feinberg saying as well that, well, yes, he also had copd at that same time, because of his diffusion capacity. we have dr. prager saying consistent with emphysema. we have dr. ziffer saying lower lobe air trapping consistent with emphysema. we have dr. gidel saying i understand asthmatic bronchitis, but i can tell you that is likely of underlying chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. we have met our burden by a greater weight of the evidence that fred jacobson had copd. now, the defense is going to tell you, but that is not a confirmatory diagnosis, none of this was confirmed. but we do have a confirmatory diagnosis before this in april of 1996 by dr. schneider. dr. schneider was the treating physician, and you have heard dr. frazier basically establish dr. schneider's confidence. how did he do that? he talked to you about receiving certain records for his review in order to formulate his opinions. he testified that one of the depositions he reviewed was dr. schneider's. and i questioned him about that, and he agreed to a number of things. for example, he told you he agreed with dr. schneider's assessment that the fev 1 and the fev 1 ratio are the most important variables for spirometry testing. he agreed with that. he agreed with dr. schneider's working definition of asthma. he agreed with that. he agreed with dr. schneider's distinction between emphysema as air trapping and asthma as a spastic component. he agreed with dr. schneider's testimony that you can have copd and asthma at the same time. he agreed with dr. schneider that you can diagnose or at least see emphysema on an x-ray study, and even if you do not see it on an x-ray, that does not exclude the possibility of emphysema. and he also agreed that you can have copd mild with no symptoms. now, you heard dr. schneider testify. at the time that he did a pulmonary function study test on fred jacobson in april of 1996, he had been doing that testing for 20 years. he had previously diagnosed asthma. he had previously diagnosed copd. he knew the criteria to apply in order to diagnose either one, and he had the numbers based on the pulmonary function test. you were also told this test is a very simple, not complicated test. dr. frazier agreed with that. and it is also a test that does not have to be administered by a pulmonologist. dr. schneider is not a pulmonologist. he is an internist and a cardiologist. but dr. schneider had all of these parameters when he made his diagnosis. and he made a note on april 26 of 1996, on the same day of the testing. and based on all of his knowledge, all of his experience, his 20 years that he had of doing pulmonary function tests, what did he decide? he came up with a diagnosis of mild copd. in 1996, he came up with that diagnosis, mild copd. now, you heard dr. frazier say this is a slow process. this disease is not something that you just wake up with one morning. but the proof is that the fact that he had copd on subsequent testing verifies dr. schneider's diagnosis that he made in 1996, which was mild copd. and he also recommended the best treatment -- it was even agreed to by dr. frazier -- the sole best treatment for treating copd, especially mild copd, and that was to stop smoking, stop smoking, stop smoking, and he told fred jacobson that his copd was caused by smoking and he needed to stop. there is more. we talked a little bit about a test in june of 2000. remember, dr. gidel's consultation. well, in addition to dr. gidel's consultation, there was a pulmonary function study that was done in june of 2000. and i'm not going to get into the details of all of the test results. but even according to dr. frazier, when i asked him, the fev 1, that was not normal. the fev 1 ratio, that was not normal. and you can see that. all he could say was, well, it is consistent with copd but it is not diagnostic. that is all he could say. and i questioned him more, and you can see from the printout which he said he never reads, and the computer printout, what did it show? suggesting emphysema. well, almost every other test has said. but most importantly were two variables. number one, the rv, not the vc, the rv, residual volume. and i asked him, i said, well, is not that a little bit high? and he said, yeah, but that is unreliable. now, you will remember this. he said that was unreliable because baptist hospital in miami did not use the right testing equipment. they did not use this body box. instead, they used this helium dilution method. so dr. frazier said it was a total unreliable result. well, he had to say that because he could not explain any other reason for why that would be what it is which suggests emphysema/copd. so he told you that miami, baptist hospital health system as a whole has an unreliable test and that all these patients over the years that are being tested have an unreliable test because they are using the wrong machine. now, really, do not you think that our good pulmonologists in miami working throughout the baptist health system would know perhaps that the testing they are using might be unreliable if that were really the case? or maybe it is that the helium dilution method is just as reliable as the body box test that dr. frazier says they use in mississippi. because we have the administrators of the baptist hospital health system along with the pulmonologists using unreliable tests for all these years, does that really make sense? but that is all that dr. frazier could say about that. and what was it that dr. frazier said about the diffusing capacity when i asked him? sure, it was severely low, he said, but that is because fred had severe anemia. well, i showed him the tests for his hemoglobin that was done at the same time as these tests, and when he looked at it, he says, oh, it is mild anemia. and the next question was, well, what result would that have? what effect would that have on the diffusion capacity? he said, very little, very little. on those two results alone, ladies and gentlemen, that is copd. that is copd. dr. frazier is different than dr. schneider and dr. feinberg. dr. frazier was hired while this litigation was pending. dr. frazier gets paid a thousand dollars an hour to come in here and tell you what his opinion is. dr. schneider is a treating physician who is not a paid expert. dr. schneider treated fred jacobson, knew fred jacobson, knew his history. it was his patient. dr. feinberg is not a paid witness. he is not a paid expert. dr. feinberg was a treating physician; he knew fred jacobson; he treated fred jacobson; and they treated fred jacobson well before this litigation was even thought about. and, so, you have dr. frazier coming into this courtroom from mississippi and he is telling you about his prior testimony. what did he say about that? well, there is five cases where he is testified on behalf of the railroad, the illinois railroad, and in each of those cases the plaintiff said that they were exposed to asbestos and they got a disease because of that. and what did he say? in each one of those cases he testified it was not asbestos; it was something else. he testified in another case -- several cases on behalf of a mining company, where plaintiffs were contending that they were -- mr. geraghty: your honor, none of this is in evidence in the case. none of it. the court: that is sustained. mr. kaiser: well, he testified about whether -- the court: it is sustained. mr. kaiser: and he is testified in other cases. in each one of those cases it was always something else other than the disease. and so, in an engle case in the past he testified. in that case he testified, yes, the woman had copd, but it was outside the time period of the engle time period. the court: actually i do have to stop you. my realtime has collapsed. the reporter: it is coming back. mr. kaiser: may i proceed? the court: yes. mr. kaiser: so that is how he is testified in the past. it is always someone else. so that when he was hired in this case, of course, it is not copd despite all this evidence; it is something else. it is asthma. and you know what? simple logic will show you how dr. frazier is wrong. dr. frazier, you see, all through the medical records there is not any talk about adult onset of intermittent asthma. and yet, this one record from june of 2000, what does it say? asthmatic bronchitis, and he seizes on that. this is asthma. remember, he said it should even be changed. it should not be asthmatic bronchitis. it should be bronchitic asthma. well, interestingly, is not there something called bronchial asthma we have all heard about? does not say a word about that. let me just show you. simple logic. dr. frazier's testimony, what does he say? copd includes emphysema and chronic bronchitis. they are not exclusive. they are always together. that is what he said. you know what else he said? when you have chronic bronchitis and you have an exacerbation, a worsening of your chronic bronchitis, is that asthmatic bronchitis? and he said yes. well, what does that mean? that just meant that fred jacobson's chronic bronchitis got bad for a day or to and it became asthmatic bronchitis, not asthma, asthmatic bronchitis. and when dr. feinberg was talking about asthmatic bronchitis, remember what he said? he wrote down acute bronchitis with bronchospasm. and he was asked on the bottom whether or not acute bronchitis with bronchospasm, if there is a difference between that and asthmatic bronchitis. he goes, there is no difference, there is no difference. so, all this means is that fred jacobson had acute bronchitis with a bronchospasm, a cough, and it was an exacerbation of his underlying chronic obstructive disease, which was chronic bronchitis on the one hand and emphysema on the other. that is all it was. so dr. frazier seizes on this and he says that was asthma. and we know it was not. it was copd. and you know what? even if you find maybe he did have an asthmatic component, we showed you he had copd as well. so, when you are asked on your first question did fred jacobson have copd on or before november 21, 1996, i submit to you the evidence suggests yes, he did. secondly, we need to talk about fred jacobson's addiction. was he addicted to the nicotine in the cigarettes he smoked? well before anyone thought of litigation in this case, dr. feinberg prepared a note from june 6, 2000. no one thought of litigation in this case when fred jacobson was alive. and dr. feinberg wrote in his report that fred jacobson has a history of tobacco abuse. no one hired him as an expert. this is a treating physician who knew his patient, he treated his patient, and he said fred jacobson had tobacco abuse. now, you also heard the testimony of various friends and family members who testified in this courtroom starting with jeffrey jacobson, fred's son. and jeffrey jacobson was asked what he can remember about his father smoking. he said, i can remember him always smoking. that was him. do you think your father was addicted to smoking? yes, sir. he said, i saw my father smoking regularly. it is what he did. he always had a pack of cigarettes with him in his pocket. wherever there was a break, he smoked. it is like what he did. and over what period of time are we talking about? and jeffrey said: my entire life that i knew my father until the end. he was a smoker. what about jennifer dill, his daughter? she was asked, do you believe your dad was addicted? she said, yes, i do. and it was the question why. and what does she do? she gave a definition of what she thought was addiction. and what did she say? because he could not stop and people that loved him and asked him to over and over, and he could not stop and he wanted to stop. what better definition for "addicted"? his loved ones urged him, begged him, pleaded with him to stop smoking. he recognized it must have been bad for him, and he tried and he tried and he could not quit. is this someone who enjoyed smoking or perhaps he could not quit because he was addicted? the evidence suggests he was addicted. and ronnie jacobson, who was his wife for 17 years: you would say he smoked about a pack or a pack and a quarter a day? yes. do you think he was addicted to cigarettes? absolutely, she said, absolutely. now, you have got people that were around him for a long time in his life. you have a medical record that supports the fact that he was suffering from tobacco abuse. we have proved by a greater weight of the evidence, ladies and gentlemen, that fred jacobson was addicted to the nicotine in the cigarettes. but there is more confirmation to his addiction, and that can be found in the surgeon general's reports that are in evidence from 1988 and 2010. and i ask that you review those, because in 1988 you are going to see from the surgeon general that the workings, the processes that determine tobacco addiction are similar to those that determine addiction to drugs such as heroin and cocaine. that is pretty significant that cigarettes are equated with heroin and cocaine insofar as addiction. that is the surgeon general in 1988 telling us that, ladies and gentlemen. and in 2010 the surgeon general spoke on the issue again, and the report concentrated on addiction. and if you review certain parts of the report, you can see. what does it tell you? number one, it does not really take that much to become addicted. here it says up to a half a pack of cigarettes a day and that is enough to sustain addiction and you do not need more. that is pretty compelling from the surgeon general in 2010, is not it? and then relapse is something that happens a lot. relapse, look at the percentages here. relapse ultimately claims 30 to forty percent of smokers who stop smoking for one year. now, we do not contend for a minute, despite the records, that fred jacobson quit smoking for a year or any length of time up to a year. maybe a few days, maybe a few weeks. you have not heard from one witness in this courtroom who said fred jacobson quit for a year. you have not heard one witness say fred jacobson quit for six months. you have not heard one witness say anything other than he quit for a few days or maybe a couple of weeks and that is it. and even if he did -- which we do not believe he did -- relapse is very common, and you can still be addicted and relapse. and typically, smoking initiation occurs during adolescence. research shows that adolescent smokers report some symptoms of dependence even at low levels of cigarette consumption. we know fred jacobson's level of consumption was not low. he smoked a pack a day for 40 years. and let me explain that to you in simple math. fred jacobson smoked kents when he started out smoking for a number of years from '56 until 1976, maybe to '79, after which he switched to benson & hedges. those are the long cigarettes. how many puffs do you think it takes to smoke a whole cigarette? well, we know that fred got his money's worth because his wife told us that he smoked them to the end. is one puff enough and then you put the cigarette out? not if you are going get to the end it is not. two? no. much more than that. maybe ten? how about eight to ten puffs before you put that cigarette down. based on that, we compute, if fred jacobson averaged out to be a pack-a-day smoker for a 40-year period of time, just how many dozes bathed his lungs containing nicotine. let me show you the doses of nicotine that fred jacobson bathed his lungs with for his 40-year smoking history. if he smoked a pack a day for 40 years, that is 20 cigarettes times 14,600 days, which is a 40-year period of time. that is 292,000 cigarettes he smoked during that time. if you average eight puffs on those cigarettes, he had 2,336,000 doses of nicotine that bathed his lungs, and we know that nicotine is addictive. i ask you, does it take 2,336,001 to be addicted, two to be addicted, or you think maybe that is enough? if you bathe your lungs with a substance that is addictive, maybe it is not going to take that much to be addicted. and that is how may doses he took over his 40-year smoking history. and i suggest and i submit to you that we have proven by a greater weight of the evidence, yes, fred jacobson was addicted. a doctor said so, his family members said so, and calculations say so, as well as the surgeon general. when you put the two together, did he have copd? yes. was he addicted to cigarettes? yes. was his addiction a legal cause of his copd? of course, it was, because if fred jacobson was not addicted and he did not smoke cigarettes, he would not have gotten copd and died. that is class membership. so, on your verdict form you are going to be asked, did fredric jacobson have chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, and, if so, did his copd first manifest itself on or before november 21, 1996? the evidence says yes. number 2: was fredric jacobson addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine? the evidence supports the fact that he was. number 3: was his addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine a legal cause of fredric jacobson's copd? again, the evidence supports the fact that it was a legal cause. if you answer the questions yes, yes, yes, we have proven that fred jacobson is a class member. you are then entitled to the engle findings, which the judge has read to you, will read to you again. and particularly, for what i'm going to talk about next, there are two findings that i want to read to you: one, that defendants placed cigarettes on the market that were defective and unreasonably dangerous. that is a fact that has been proven and you do not need to decide it again. number 6: that defendants were negligent. that is a fact that has been proven and you do not need to consider any evidence, again. that is a finding that you must agree that you must accept that defendants were negligent. well, the question you are going to be asked, then, is: as to plaintiff's negligence and strict liability claims, please state as to each defendant whether smoking cigarettes manufactured or sold by that defendant was a legal cause of mr. jacobson's lung cancer and death. copd is no longer relevant because we have proved class membership. all class membership does is unlock that door so that you can now consider the other issues in this case, and that is fred jacobson's lung cancer and his death from cigarettes. so the question asks you whether smoking the cigarettes manufactured by philip morris and lorillard caused, are the legal cause of fred jacobson's lung cancer and death. we know that fred jacobson's lung cancer was caused by smoking. there has been testimony to that effect. that is not disputed. lung cancer, small cell in this case, is caused by smoking. we know that fred jacobson smoked benson & hedges and kents. kents were manufactured by lorillard. benson & hedges were manufactured by philip morris. he do not smoke any other brands for any type of long period in his life. those cigarettes that he smoked caused his lung cancer. if he did not smoke those cigarettes or any cigarettes, he would not have gotten lung cancer and died. that is legal cause, ladies and gentlemen. so that we have proven to you the strict liability and negligence claim. that is all we have to show, a legal cause because of the findings after class membership that the defendants placed cigarettes on the market that were defective and unreasonably dangerous and they are negligent. so, what is the next step? after we demonstrate legal cause, the next step is, well, how are you going to apportion fault. how do you apportion fault? it has to equal 100 percent. who is at fault in this case? we accept responsibility. i said that at the start. we accept some measure, very little, for fred jacobson's smoking. the defense accepts none. i'm going to demonstrate to you, based on the evidence in this case, how the defense should be almost totally responsible for fred jacobson's decisions that he made in this case. this case is not just about fred jacobson and his choices that he made concerning his smoking. this case is about the tobacco companies, it is about the defendants, and it is about the choices and the decisions and their responsibility in this particular case, and i want to go over that. because you heard from dr. proctor and you heard from other witnesses, alan weidberg, the tobacco industry created a climate where smoking was normalized. that was dr. proctor's words. remember? they created this climate through their mass marketing and advertising when smoking was normalized. it was part of life where everybody smoked and you could smoke virtually anywhere without restriction, and that went back a long time ago. and they advertised their products. you heard testimony that on the radio there were shows that were sponsored by tobacco companies, and they advertised their products on radio. you heard that on television there were shows that were sponsored by tobacco companies, and they advertised their product on television shows for years until 1970 when it was banned on network television. you heard that billboards advertised cigarettes and they advertised their products on billboards. in fact, you heard in times square there was a particular billboard that blew huge smoke rings out that we know fred jacobson saw. and they created this climate, and sometime, even before the '50s, there were studies, one in particular by angel roffo in argentina, where he came up with his own correlation between smoking and cancer. he painted the back of rabbits. and we know from 1950 there were four studies in the united states that linked smoking and cancer, and we know that the tobacco companies and these defendants were aware of those studies and they had been following those studies, because that is what dr. proctor told you in his testimony. so the tobacco companies, when they knew about this, they also knew about addiction. when they knew about this, they had certain choices to make, just like fred did. and what choices did they have? number one, you heard that they had the ability to use nonflue-cured tobacco in their cigarettes and the result would be it would be virtually impossible to inhale the smoke. did they choose to do that? no, they did not. you heard that they had the ability to take enough nicotine out of the tobacco in their cigarettes so that they would not sustain addiction, so that people could smoke cigarettes and they would not get addicted. did they choose to take the amount of nicotine out necessary so as not to sustain addiction? no, they did not. they had a choice to make. they found out about this information. did they tell the american public, the consumers who were buying their products, what they knew at that time when they knew it? they did not. that was a choice they made, not fred jacobson. so, when fred jacobson picked up his first cigarette in 1956 as a 13-year-old boy, there was not a warning on that pack of cigarettes saying fred, do not smoke. and in 1957, there was not a warning on that cigarette pack saying do not smoke. lorillard was not telling them that. on those packs of kents, philip morris was not telling people do not smoke our cigarettes because they are dangerous, or be cautioned. in 1958, they were not telling fred jacobson, when he was smoking, that these cigarettes are addictive and they might cause harm. in 1959, they did not tell him. in 1960, they did not tell him. in 1961, they did not tell him, up until 1966, when the cautions first went on the packs of cigarettes and they were mandated by congress, not by the defendants. and these were the choices they had before fred jacobson ever picked up that first cigarette. so that when he did pick up that first cigarette in 1956 as a 13-year-old kid, i submit to you he was ill-informed what he was getting into. and while they were marketing their cigarettes, while they were sponsoring tv and radio shows and they were pitching their product with athletes, famous athletes at the time that everybody knew about, mickey mantle, people like that, they were pitching their products with actresses and actors that were well known at the time -- everyone knew them -- they were pitching their products with politicians talking about the virtues of cigarette smoking, all along not telling people but we also know they could be really bad for you and they could be addictive. and we also know that during this time they were marketing their cigarettes to kids. now, these are the choices that were made by philip morris, by lorillard, by the rest of the tobacco industry. and we could look at certain of their internal documents and see what they knew and what they were doing to show how blameworthy they are and just how blameworthy fred is. and let us take a look. we know back in 1946, in a letter, internal correspondence with lorillard tobacco company, that they were aware of certain dangers in cigarettes, at least a presumption. that is in 1946. we know in the early '50s they knew about addiction and they knew about cancer and they knew about the correlation between their cigarettes and health and addiction. and so we know by the time they met at the plaza hotel on december 14, 1953, they were not meeting because they were concerned with safety and health of their consumers. they were worried about their bottom dollar because their stocks were falling. and so, when they got together at the plaza hotel on december 14, 1953, it was a public relations issue, and that is why they hired hill & knowlton, the most influential well known public relations company in the country. and so, from december of 1953, when they first came out with what is called the forwarding memo, when hill & knowlton representatives interviewed certain of the research directors for the large tobacco companies, what did they say? and they quote different people, different research directors. fortunate for us that cigarettes are a habit they cannot break. that was something that they liked. it was fortunate for them that people smoking those cigarettes were going to get a habit, they would get addicted, and they were not going to be able to stop. they real liked that. what else? boy, would not it be wonderful if our company was the first to produce a cancer-free cigarette? what would we do to the competition? now, this is 1953. and what do these interviews show you? they knew about the dangers of their product. they knew about the addictive nature of the nicotine in their product. and what did they decide to do? not tell fred jacobson and everybody else that was buying their cigarettes. they issued the frank statement to smokers on january 1954, and the frank statement was the beginning of their fraud for 50 years, their concealment fraud where they concealed the truth about their knowledge of cigarettes and addiction. for 50 years that is what they decided on privately. what did they say publicly? what do their records tell us? their records said that basically they are going to get to the bottom of this health scare from these studies. they are going to do all the research they can do to get to the bottom of things. do not panic. we are going to hire the best researchers and we are going to study the issue of smoking and health. that is what they put out in the frank statement, because they thought the public needed to know and they were committed to that, and they were going to form the tobacco industry research committee to do this granting of monies and to fund these studies and hire the best people to do research about smoking and health. and that is what they said publicly. and you know what they said privately? this was a scam. this was a front. this was an industry shield against the truth, because they were going to study everybody but smoking and health and let the public believe they were really going to do something to get to the bottom of this. and you know how that is proven? if we look years ahead -- this is 1954 -- if we look at a memo written by philip morris in 1978, almost 25 years later, what did they say privately in a memo? that the tirc was set up as an industry shield in 1954; that it was nothing more than a front. like dr. proctor said, it was a shield against the truth. it was to create doubt in the public that there was no problem with smoking and they were getting to the bottom of it, and they knew for 50 years they were doing everything but getting to the bottom of it. is that fred's fault? they knew, 1963, the battelle hippo memo, that is a brown & williamson memo. they later become part of r.j.r., r.j. reynolds. you are going to be told that as far as the agreement to conceal, this conspiracy, the act of one is the act of all. one company becomes the agent of all the others, so that when brown & williamson writes this memo, lorillard is responsible for its contents; philip morris is responsible for its contents. all the coconspirators are responsible for the contents as if they wrote it. and remember, at the frank statement, at that meeting at the hotel on december 14, 1954, every one of the big tobacco executives was there, presidents, chairmen of the board. chairman kent was there for lorillard. the ceo of philip morris was there. the heads of all of these tobacco companies were there when they agreed to do this concealment fraud for 50 years. they all agreed to it. and so, in 1963, what are they telling? what do they know? nicotine is addictive. they are not in the business of selling cigarettes for enjoyment. they are in the business of selling nicotine, an addictive drug. they knew at that time people were not smoking their cigarettes because it was enjoyable. they were smoking their cigarettes because they were going to get addicted and they needed to smoke their cigarettes. that is what they knew and that is what they were writing privately that they did not publicly tell anybody until 2000. is that fred's fault? in 1964, in response to the surgeon general's report, what does philip morris say? and again, philip morris is speaking for every other coconspirator when they write this in 1964. they needed to find a way to give smokers a psychological crutch so they would continue to smoke and not stop. now, this is a company, philip morris, that when dr. proctor testified, they said, well, did not we contribute, did not we give research to the surgeon general, and did not the surgeon general thank us? and dr. proctor said, yes, the surgeon general thanked you. and yet, what was their response to the surgeon general's report when it came out in 1964? they ridiculed it. publicly they ridiculed it. they said it was irresponsible. and privately they were saying we have got come up with a way to make people believe they can still smoke instead of quitting, because our business relies on that. that was 1964. and they wanted to do it in a numerous way, a light way. that is how they were going to respond to the findings of 1964, make it light and funny, when all the while they knew we want people to smoke, not stop. is that fred's fault? no. we take none. we take no responsibility for their actions during this time frame. i'm sorry, we just do not. we move on to 1966. in 1966, again, philip morris, as an agent for everybody else that was part of this agreement, including lorillard, what does philip morris say? a cigarette that does not deliver nicotine cannot satisfy the habituated smoker and cannot lead to habituation. that is addiction. so, what were they saying? if they do not have nicotine to addict their smokers, people are not going to smoke, because people smoke for addiction, for the feel, for the nicotine. and that is why they said -- and you will see that in the federal trade commission report in 1967, what did they say? well, first of all, the cautions on the cigarettes they say prove to be ineffective mainly because was no one was looking at them. that is how good those cautions were back then. and they also said that so pervasive is cigarette advertising that it is virtually impossible for americans of almost any age to avoid cigarette advertising. they got their message out and they were getting their message out without telling the people the truth about what they knew about their cigarettes. and in 1972, r.j. reynolds, again, an agent for everybody else, and what are they writing? happily for the tobacco industry, nicotine is both habituating and unique in its variety of physiological actions. hence, no other active material or combination of materials provides equivalent, quote, satisfaction, unquote. now, they knew, they knew at this time and before that nicotine is what provided smokers with the impetus to smoke cigarettes, not enjoyment, not bathing lungs with this nice gray smoke, not liking the feel of a cigarette in their hand, not enjoying a cup of coffee with a cigarette, not enjoying chatting with people smoking a cigarette. it was to get satisfaction for nicotine, and the tobacco industry was happy. they were giddy with the fact that nicotine was habituating and unique. that is how they were acting at that time. they have to be responsible for their actions. they have to be responsible for their choices. they have to accept responsibility for what they were doing back then in not telling people like fred jacobson. was their strategy that they employed successful? was their information getting out to the public? remember what they were doing. they were using all sorts of techniques in addition to advertising to get their message out, the white papers, newsletters, press releases, television exposure, executives talking and denying the health risks of smoking, public appearances, speeches, all sorts of things to get their message out. and in 1972, tobacco institute memo, what does it say? that their strategy was brilliantly conceived and executed almost 25 years later. and how was it brilliantly conceived and executed? among other things, in creating doubt about the health charge without actually denying it. they recognized that their message was out there, that their strategy was brilliant, that their message was getting out to the public and it was creating doubt, and people were continuing to smoke their cigarettes and they were not quitting because there was enough doubt where they did not need to quit. and they were lauding themselves for that in 1972. and they did not stop in 1972. in 1994, on television, before congressman waxman, every major executive from the tobacco companies under oath testified, number one, we do not believe nicotine is addictive. they knew that for the last 50 years, and they are still lying in 1994. and they said, all of the executives, the top executives, we do not believe cigarettes cause cancer. this is in 1994, and according to dr. proctor, it was not until 2000 that they finally admitted that cigarettes cause cancer and that nicotine in their cigarettes is addictive. that is from there own documents, their own internal documents where you can see privately what they were thinking and what they were saying publicly. and there are certain questions that you need to see how the defense addresses them in their closing argument. how are they going to address these questions? and the answer is going to be, they will not be able to. they will not address them. why? because they will have to admit fault, and they will not do that. they will not answer these questions for you. and you need them answered because you need to apportion fault. and i submit to you, if they cannot answer the questions, their fault needs to be real high in comparison to fred's. so let us see how they will answer these questions. number 1: when the defendants, philip morris, lorillard and others, when they knew by the early '50s that cigarette smoke contained carcinogens and could cause cancer, why did they choose to not tell the american public, including fred? why did not they do that? you deserve an answer to that question. you need the defense to come up here and explain to you we knew about it but we did not tell the american people. instead, we created this controversy that did not exist for 50 years and never told the truth until 2000. why did they do that? is that fred's fault that they did that? absolutely not. when they knew that smoking caused cancer, why did they choose to not use nonflue-cured blends of tobacco that would make inhaling difficult? after all, if they had the wherewithal to do it, if you did not have to bathe your lungs with all those bad chemicals, why did not they do that? you are owed an explanation to apportion fault. they knew way back when that they could do that and they chose not to. is that fred's fault because they made that choice? absolutely not. the reason that they did not do these first two things is because they value profit over safety. that is the reason. when they knew, the defendants, by the '50s that nicotine was an addictive drug, as we saw in their internal memos, why did they choose not to tell the american public, including fred? after all, if they had told the american public, perhaps enough people would not start smoking knowing they faced possible addiction to the cigarettes and possible disease from smoking their cigarettes. that would affect the bottom line of the tobacco companies, and they did not tell the american public. is that fred jacobson's fault? no, it is not. why? the defendants knew that nicotine was an addictive drug. why did they choose not to take the appropriate amount of nicotine out of their cigarettes so they would not sustain addiction, so people could actually smoke cigarettes to enjoy that smoke bathing their lungs, so they could sit and chat with people over a good meal with their cigarette? and the answer is because people did not smoke for enjoyment. they smoked for the nicotine, the tobacco companies knew it, and they did not want to let on that they knew that, and there was no way they were going to tell people like fred and the american public because it is profit over safety. when the surgeon general's report was issued, and despite their cooperation and the fact that they were thanked by the surgeon general, why did they ridicule it? why did they publicly ridicule the surgeon general's report, all along privately knowing that what the surgeon general said was right? why did they do that? because they did not want people like fred to know from the cigarette companies that their product was dangerous and it was addictive, because they valued profit over safety. is that fred's fault? no, it is not. when the surgeon general's report was issued, why did they privately advocate providing a psychological crutch for people to continue smoking instead of giving them the choice to quit if they told them what they knew? the same answer, ladies and gentlemen. they valued profit over safety. let them respond to you. let the defense respond to these questions. maybe i'm wrong. maybe there was some other reason. we need to know. why did the defendants respond to the strong evidence linking cigarettes to cancer, which they already knew, with a campaign designed to create doubt about the health risks and addictive nature of cigarettes for the next 50 years? this was not something that lasted a month. this was not some campaign of denial that lasted for a week. this was a campaign of denial that was calculated to create doubt, calculated to create a controversy that did not exist for 50 years. that is a lot of responsibility. that is not fred's fault. did the defendants want fred -- did they want him to believe their message they were putting out there: that more research was needed; that there was no proof that cigarettes were dangerous; that bad things would be removed in cigarettes if they were found and they would close their business if it was found that their cigarettes were dangerous to health? did they want fred to believe that message? they absolutely did want him to believe that message because they were spending lots and lots of money to get their message out to the public. sure, they wanted fred to believe that. sure, they wanted fred to continue smoking. sure, they did not want fred to quit. sure, they wanted fred to be a longtime user of their cigarettes. and, so, if they wanted fred to believe their message, and if he did believe their message, why is he blameworthy? why? if he did everything they wanted him to do, if he bought their product, if he smoked their product, if he smoked their product for a long, long time, why is he to blame? and finally, why did the defendants -- and you heard dr. proctor -- this is advertising dollars alone. from 1940 to 2004 they spent $250 billion advertising their product. now, that does not even include how much they were spending to fund their denialous campaign. why were they spending billions and billions of dollars on a message that was not working all the while congratulating themselves for their success? and the reason is because it was working. it was working. despite this evidence you heard about reader's digest having articles over the years about smoking being bad, and columbus in 1492 and john adams writing a letter and things like that, they got their message out, they knew they got their message out, and they were congratulating themselves for their success. these are questions that you need answered. and you know what fred jacobson's fault is in this case? you know what it is? and this is what we take responsibility for. why was fred jacobson born too weak to be able to be motivated to quit smoking? why did he have the constitution that did not allow him to quit successfully until 1996? why did not fred try hard enough? we know he tried to quit in the '70s, in the '80s, in the '90s, and he was unsuccessful. we knew at some point he had to realize that smoking was bad. his loved ones wanted him to quit. he tried to quit. he was unsuccessful. he got irritable when he quit. he was not fun to be around. that is what jeffrey testified about. did he try hard enough to quit? well, maybe he did not. maybe he did not. and for that, ladies and gentlemen, we take responsibility. we take responsibility for that. but i'm going to make myself clear. we do not take responsibility for any, any of the actions of the tobacco companies. and so, you have got ten reasons why they are responsible here and one for fred. that is a ten-to-one ratio. i submit to you, based on the evidence, the apportionment of fault is 91 percent for the tobacco companies and 9 percent for fred. put 9 percent on him. put 9 percent on fred to say you just did not try hard enough. you believe them. after all, tobacco companies want you to believe that smokers should have been smart enough to believe the other information out there and should have known we were lying. they trusted us. well, that message is not acceptable. 91 percent and 9 percent for apportionment of fault. next for your determination is reliance. you are going to be asked -- reliance is necessary for you to resolve as to the concealment fraud and the conspiracy to conceal. and you are going to be asked the following question: please state for each defendant, philip morris and lorillard, whether mr. jacobson relied to his detriment on representations made by that defendant on or after may 5, 1982, that concealed or omitted material information concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes, and, if so, whether such reliance was a legal cause of his lung cancer and death. that is reliance for the concealment fraud. let us talk about reliance. we know that the tobacco companies went on their denialous campaign for 50 years. you heard about that. i just discussed it. we know that they responded vigorously to any negative information about their products. as i told you, they responded by press releases, by their executives telling people, look, we will take all this bad stuff out if we find anything in our cigarettes. they went on television. they were on news shows. they were in front of the waxman commission. they were in newspaper articles. they made speeches. they advertised their products. they spent billions and billions of dollars to get their message across. we know that fred jacobson was a smart man. we know that fred jacobson was an intelligent man. we know that fred jacobson was well read. we knew that fred jacobson was up on current events. the defendants would have you believe that his intelligence and his being well read and up on current events is only applicable to the information that he was aware of dealing with the risk of smoking and the addictive nature of smoking. that is what they want you to believe. when it comes to their response with the white papers and the newsletters and everything i discussed, they do not want you to believe that he was so well read. they do not want you to believe he was up on current events. they want you to believe at that point he was stupid. mr. geraghty: your honor, i would object to that statement. the court: it is overruled. mr. kaiser: the fact remains you cannot have it both ways. if he was smart and up on current events, to be a recipient of the bad news about smoking, he was equally intelligent and up on current events to be exposed to the information that was being put out by the tobacco companies. and there was no doubt that fred jacobson was exposed to the good. he was exposed to the bad. he was exposed to the tobacco companies' information that they were putting out for 50 years. he was exposed to all of it. we do not doubt that. and we also do not doubt that at some point in team he knew that cigarettes were bad, at least in the late '70s or early '80s, because he tried to quit. what we also know from the engle findings is that the tobacco companies knew more than fred did and they were concealing information that fred was not aware of. and that is why one of the findings is that defendants concealed or omitted material information not otherwise known or available, knowing that the material was false and misleading, or failed to disclose a material fact concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes, or both. now, we know all this information was being put out in the public domain up until 2000, when they finally admitted that smoking was addictive and smoking cigarettes could cause cancer. and we know specifically in 1988, philip morris ridiculed the surgeon general's report, not just 1964 but 1988, and we know in 1994, all the major executives of the tobacco companies under oath told congressman waxman's committee that their cigarettes were not dangerous to health and that nicotine in their cigarettes was not addictive. we know that. the question that you have to answer is do you think fred jacobson was exposed to that. this is big news. if it is in the newspapers, it is on television, by all accounts, fred jacobson saw that information. he saw a lot of the information that was being put out by philip morris and lorillard during this time. after all, they were putting out information in the billions of dollars of ads and statements. so the question needs to be, if fred jacobson had learned the truth from the tobacco industry, would he have acted differently, what he have maybe tried harder to quit? and this is how to resolve the question. remember, from 1964, when the tobacco companies realized they needed to give a psychological crutch to smokers to continue smoking, how would a smoker like fred jacobson, who i submit to you was addicted, react to the information about cigarettes being bad and, on the other hand, the information from the tobacco companies that we are doing all we can to research this issue and we will let you know? do not you think it is more likely than not that the addictive smoker is going to grab on to the information that gives him that crutch to keep on smoking? mr. geraghty: your honor, this misstates your honor's instructions. the court: it is overruled. mr. kaiser: do not you believe that the smoker wants to hear information to rationalize his smoking as opposed to quitting? and so the question becomes, if the tobacco companies -- if the information came straight from the horse's mouth between 1982 and 1994 that their products were dangerous, that their products could kill people, and that the addiction, that the nicotine in their cigarettes was addictive, and it is coming from the horse's mouth, perhaps maybe fred would have quit sometime during that time or at least tried harder to quit. that is something you need to answer. i submit to you, based on the evidence, he would have quit. and then it becomes whether or not his reliance was a legal cause. if fred jacobson had be given that truthful information sometime during '82 to '94, what is the likelihood of him, if he had quit, of developing cancer? if he had quit for 14 years before he actually got the cancer, there is a likelihood he would never have gotten it, because you heard testimony that most smokers do not get sick. most smokers do not get sick. so that is the reliance element on the concealment fraud. and it is basically the same evidence on the conspiracy. and you have the engle findings on the conspiracy, that defendants agreed to conceal or omit information regarding the health effects of cigarettes or their addictive nature with the intention that smokers and the public would rely on this information to their detriment. now, on your verdict form you are going to be asked as to each defendant whether mr. jacobson relied to his detriment on any act undertaken by any of the defendants in the engle case after may 5, 1982, in furtherance of their agreement to conceal or omit information regarding the health effects and addictive nature of cigarettes and whether such reliance is a legal cause of his lung cancer and death. this just opens up the door to the universe of statements between 1982 that were put out by not just lorillard and philip morris but by all of the defendants in furtherance of their agreement to conceal. so, necessarily it is not just their appearance before 1984, the waxman commission, the response by philip morris to surgeon general's report; it is any number of statements that dr. proctor talked about, this flood of statements that went on until 2000 in furtherance of their conspiracy, and that is reliance. and again, this is a person who has had over two million doses of nicotine, who we submit is addicted, who we submit is going to grasp on to information that allows him to keep smoking because there is hope that maybe the product is not so bad. and maybe, if he had known from the horse's mouth that it was in fact bad or addictive, he just would have quit and tried hard enough to do so and been successful earlier and avoided cancer and death. i want to talk to you about damages in this case, because i've told you in my opening statement that we were going to be asking for a significant amount of damages to compensate ronnie jacobson for her loss, for her loss of companionship, for her mental pain and suffering. you heard the evidence in this case that is undisputed, uncontradicted that she had a fabulous relationship with fred. no witness said anything differently. ronnie told you it was the best 17 years of her life, from the first night she laid eyes on fred until he died in her arms on february 22, 2001. theirs was a special relationship and everybody that testified said so. they were made for each other. they loved each other. and you could see from the videos that we played without sound, even without the sound, you could see the love that they had for each other, without even knowing what they were saying during those times on the videos. you could see that. and you heard ronnie. you heard people talking about what they liked to do. they liked to entertain. they liked to go out. they traveled. you saw pictures. you saw the photographs of them. they were always together. in fact, ronnie said there was only one night that they slept apart from each other and that was only time that happened for 17 years. they were in love. and in june of 1997, the worst news that she could possibly hear is when fred was diagnosed with lung cancer from smoking cigarettes. and you heard -- and i do not need to go over it in as much detail -- but you heard this was a tragic, a terrible thing to go through. nobody would want to go through what ronnie went through, from the time of diagnosis till his death. she went to every one of fred's doctors' appointments. she wanted to make sure that things were positive and not negative. she went around tearing the pages out of books so that fred would not look and see that he was going to die. even in the back of her mind, when she thought that she might lose him, she never let on to fred that there was not hope. she always gave him hope. and fred was the kind of guy who he cared more about ronnie when he was having this cancer, when he was dying, than caring about himself. on his worst days he would say how are you instead of how am i. when ronnie was diagnosed with breast cancer in 1999, when they got radiation together, it was fred who was in the throes of his lung cancer who was caring more about his wife's decease than his own. that is the kind of man that fred was. and as much as she loved fred in life, she grieved for him in death. she has not remarried 12, almost 13 years after he died. and you know what? it is very possible that she will never remarry. she thinks about fred every day. she grieves about fred every day. when she does go out on dates, she always compares these people, unfortunately, to fred and they never equal up to fred. no one ever will in her life. hers was a special relationship. and, so, ronnie jacobson in a million years never asked for this, in a million years would never have taken on this task, this full-time job, if you will, from the day that he was diagnosed with this illness until his death. this became a job thanks to the tobacco companies. thanks to philip morris and lorillard, this became her full-time job to watch her husband suffer and die from lung cancer. this is not television suffering. this is real life. this is real life, and you heard it. there were ups and downs. there was remission of the cancer when everyone's hopes got up, and then there was a spread to the liver. there was the hope where there was remission, then there was the spread to the brain. there was hopes after the remission, then there was spread to the liver. and it was up and down and up and down, and all during this time ronnie made sure to keep fred active, to keep his lifestyle the same, not to let him become bedridden. and they tried to go on trips. they did things like that until the cancer finally invaded his brain and he no longer knew where he lived. so, in order to compute damages in this case, it is almost as if ronnie got a full-time job, a job that no one in their right mind would ever ask for, a job that no one would apply for, a job that no one would want, a job that ronnie would give up in a heartbeat if she could have had fred back. but that was her lot in life. she got a job and she needs to be paid for that job from the time that fred was diagnosed until her grieving right now to this very day. she deserves to be compensated for that, because she does not have fred's companionship and she has suffered tremendously. what did she tell you? she was stricken with what is called the widow's curse, where since fred died she has not had a good night's sleep in 12 or 13 years. and as we sit here, she still grieves for fred. no money could ever really compensate her for fred's loss, but she is entitled to be compensated, nevertheless. she would much rather, if given the choice, forego any money and have fred back. but that is not going to happen and she knows it. so, what i have done is i have computed based on an hourly wage, if you will, and the way to do this i suggest -- mr. geraghty: your honor, may i preserve my objection? the court: yes. mr. kaiser: i suggest the way to do this is the defense called their expert witness, dr. frazier, who gets paid $1,000 an hour to deny responsibility and to say in this case that -- mr. geraghty: i would object to that statement, your honor. the court: just a second. yeah. it is sustained. i think that is improper argument. mr. geraghty: i'd make a motion, your honor. the court: no. your motion is denied. the jury is instructed to disregard mr. kaiser's last statement. mr. kaiser: they bought in their witness to testify as an expert witness who got paid $1,000 an hour. how much do you think someone would take as a wage and have a job of watching their husband suffer and die? a thousand dollars an hour? a million dollars an hour? how about if we take a tenth of $1,000 an hour and say how about a hundred dollars an hour? a hundred dollars an hour might compensate her, one-tenth of what they paid their expert in this case. and what do we have? if we base it on a 24-hour day, because this woman has not had a decent night's sleep since her husband died, and we base it on a number of days up till today, this is what we end up with at a hundred dollars an hour. this to compensate for a hundred dollars an hour ronnie jacobson for her grieving, for her loss of companionship and for her mental pain and suffering. you might decide that is too high; lower is appropriate. so you might decide, no, we think $50 an hour is fair. that is what you arrive at for $50 an hour. you might say, you know what, i understand what you are telling us. you might decide it is higher. it is whatever you decide. you are free to play with these numbers. you are free to calculate any way you wish. but based on the evidence, i suggest to you, i submit to you that this is the appropriate monetary figure to compensate ronnie for her loss in this case. this is money to compensate ronnie. now, there is another aspect to this case, and that is punitive damages. that is to punish in this case. and you need to determine whether or not we have proved by clear and convincing evidence that the defendants in this case deserve to be punished, whether we are entitled to punitive damages to punish behavior and to deter behavior of the defendants and others in like circumstances so this is not repeated. that is what the role of punishment is for. and there are a number of reasons that we have laid out in this case to support entitlement to punitive damages, and i'm going to go over them. entitlement to punitive damages. by clear and convincing evidence, we are going to show you that the defendants knew, they intended the consequences, they acted with knowledge, so that they knew about the health risks of smoking their product and they chose not to tell people, including fred jacobson. that was their choice, not fred's. that was intentional, not accidental. that was calculated, not mistaken. we showed you, they wanted smokers to become addicted to their cigarettes and they were giddy about it. they were happy that their product addicted people because they did not want people not to become addicted because they would not smoke their cigarettes. they acted with intention, not by mistake or accident. we proved to you through dr. proctor, they marketed their cigarettes to youth, to children. that is who they targeted during the years. and is not it happenstance that fred started smoking when he was 13 years old and alan weidberg started smoking when he was 14 years old, that people start smoking when they are teenagers, like the surgeon general has said? that is intentional. that is not accidental. they engaged in a conspiracy to create doubt -- we know about that because that is an engle finding -- to create doubt about the health risks and addictive nature of smoking. that was their decision, not a mistake, not an accident, and it lasted not for a day, not for a week, not for a month, but for 50 years, 50 years. they lied to the public about the health risks of smoking up until 1994, when they went on television and six years after that until they admitted it. they lied. they did not tell fred. they concealed that information. that was not accidental. that was willful. that was intentional. that deserves punishment. they lied to the public about their nicotine not being addictive while we know privately they were well aware. they were happy about it. they knew that people needed satisfaction from cigarettes, and that is why they did not sell cigarettes; they sold dosages of nicotine. that, ladies and gentlemen, is action by intent, by intentional acts, and not accidental or mistaken acts. and finally, fredric jacobson and others, countless others, died because of their intentional acts, because of their decision made all the way back into the '50s when many, many more people were starting to smoke than do today, when most people smoked then as opposed to not many now. they consciously made the decision back then, when they knew full well about the dangers of smoking not to tell people. they made a conscious decision, when they could use different tobacco so people would not be able to inhale their cigarettes and die of lung cancer, but they chose not to do that. they knew full well they could take nicotine out of their cigarettes so that people could smoke and not be addicted, but they realized people would not smoke if they did. so they did not do that. and they knew full well that from the time they knew about the dangers of smoking and how addictive it was, all they had to do was tell people, warn people, and they did not do that. and so people like fred jacobson, when he started smoking cigarettes in 1956, or those whereabouts, was not informed, not by his fault but by theirs, lorillard and philip morris. that is acting with intent. that is not acting by mistake. that is not acting by happenstance. that is acting with intent, and by clear and convincing evidence, ladies and gentlemen, we are entitled to seek punitive damages to punish them and deter them in this case. i ask you to consider the evidence, consider the testimony, consider all of the exhibits that you have seen that are part of this trial, ladies and gentlemen, and we have proven by the greater weight of evidence such that on every one of your questions you could be satisfied in answering yes. and i ask you to compensate ronnie jacobson for her loss accordingly. thank you very much. mr. finger: may it please the court, counsel, and members of the jury. now it is my turn. this portion of the trial i will have the opportunity to respond to some of the comments you have heard from the defense. i guess i would be remiss if i did not thank you, too, because everybody else thanked you. so i will thank you too on behalf of ronnie jacobson, co-counsel, and for affording ronnie her day in court and for your attention of this throughout. i suspect when you walked into the courtroom for jury selection, and we know when judge ungaro questioned you, all of you were of a mind that the decision to smoke is an individual choice of every smoker. indeed it is. we have heard much of fred jacobson's choice to smoke, and, indeed, he did. this case, ladies and gentlemen, and i will respond to their remarks because they keep talking about his choice to smoke. the case is not about fred jacobson's choice to smoke. there is no issue that he chose to smoke. there is no issue that he made that decision. it was a fatal decision; it cost him his life. this trial is about why he made that choice, because it was a very, very bad choice. it was a choice that generations of americans made. the question for you, ladies and gentlemen, is not whether or not fred jacobson chose to smoke; he did. the question is what did they have to do with that choice. and when little fred jacobson, 13 years old was in that schoolyard and he took that first cigarette, what free choice did he have, and are they responsible for the choice he made? they would lead you to believe they had nothing to do with it. you know, there is a saying, it takes two to tango. they would have you believe fred jacobson danced alone. there was a reason why that little boy took that cigarette. there was a reason why it was the thing to do. there was a reason why everybody did it. there was a reason why they spent $5 billion in 1966 on advertising. that was proctor. $5 billion i believe was his testimony in advertising. that was in 1966 when a dollar meant something. so why did fred jacobson make that choice and what did they have to do with it? he made that choice because they knowingly, intentionally, coldly, and calculatedly after a meeting at the plaza hotel in 1953 got together and decided we have to mold public opinion. we have to create doubt in people. that meeting at the plaza hotel in about 6 weeks will celebrate the 60th anniversary of the meeting of those conspirators of all the tobacco companies. they met -- these were competitors. they were fierce competitors, and yet they got together, and they had a meeting at the plaza hotel the middle of december of 1953 because they knew that they needed to band together to fight a common enemy. what was the common enemy? the common enemy was the truth. the truth about their product was coming out, and they knew that if the public became aware of it, sales would fall. and they hired the leading public relations firm in the country, hill & knowlton, who devised, by their own documents -- i'm going to spend this time talking to you rather than -- for the bulk of my time rather than putting up documents that you have been seeing, documents probably until it comes out of your ears, so let me take this opportunity to talk to you and give you the overview of how we see the evidence. they put and they got together and they came up with a campaign, an advertising campaign, that they described 20 years later as brilliantly conceived and executed. that plan was to create doubt. mr. pedrosa: objection, your honor. repetitive and not rebuttal. the court: i do not know that this is rebuttal. i will give you a little latitude, but we are not going to go over all the same things we went over in the opening close. mr. finger: the strategy was to create doubt so that people would not exercise free choice. their choice would be influenced by the ads, by the media. defense counsel says who was in control? who was -- let me respond to who was in control. they were in control. they controlled the media, they controlled marketing, they had an impact on congress. they were in control. was fred jacobson in control of his smoking? sure. but was it a free choice or was he guilty of fraud? the engle findings after you determine that he had copd and that he was addicted, after you make that determination, and i will spend time on that, you will then have the opportunity to decide if that choice was a free and informed choice or was it the victim of fraud. mr. geraghty gets up there and says fred jacobson was the type of guy that accepted responsibility. well, indeed he did. responsibility if it lies with him. but if he made these choices because he was uninformed because they did not let the truth out, then i submit to you he is not responsible. we accept responsibility for that 9 percent that kaiser talked to you about because, yes, i cannot look you in the eye -- maybe he should have tried the patch, maybe he should have tried the gum. we accept no responsibility for the fraud. now let me go back and let us talk about copd. because, folks, that is the key to their responsibility. if you do not find that he had copd by 1996 when dr. schneider said he did, or you do not find that he was addicted to cigarettes, or you do not find that his addiction caused the copd, then, indeed, they are correct, that is the end of the trial. you never get to reach the issue of their responsibility. case over. he needs to be a class member. copd, addiction, and addiction causation. if any of those are no, you go home and they are never answerable. you do not reach their responsibility. indeed, that is why so much emphasis has been placed on this, because they do not want you to look at what they did. kaiser put up ten points for them to answer. they told you they are not so much as 1 percent responsible, it is one hundred percent the fault of fred jacobson. mr. kaiser put up there ten questions for them to answer about what they did; they did not address one of them. ladies and gentlemen, before you decide that it is one hundred percent fred jacobson's fault, should not they at least address what they did for 50 years before you decide zero percent on them? would not you like to know their explanation for what they did for over 50 years before you decide zero for them and one hundred percent for fred jacobson? i submit you should and you will. mr. geraghty says there are four key points. i will address each of them. first, fred jacobson knew it was dangerous and addictive. he did. we are not here suggesting that fred jacobson lived in a cave and did not know smoking was bad. certainly by the end of the '70s, early '80s he knew smoking was bad. he was informed, he was educated. he knew it was bad. why else would he try to quit? ronnie jacobson told you he tried to quit repeatedly. why else would he try to quit unless you knew it was bad? if he was not addicted, he would have been successful. so in answer to that question, of course, he knew it was bad for his health. no one is suggesting otherwise. the question is was he free to quit or was he addicted, because if he is addicted and he cannot quit, even though he wants to, then is it his fault? now, we suggest 9 percent fault. you know, what fred jacobson is guilty of is he did not come out of the womb strong enough. he should have quit. they were quick to criticize him. made a free choice, he could have quit. they suggest to you that he tried to quit repeatedly. mr. geraghty: i would object to the comment on criticizing. the court: it is overruled. mr. finger: ronnie jacobson testified that he tried to quit many times while she was with him over the 17 years. the defense points to the notation in the insurance forms where he said he had quit. a reasonable -- now, you can believe he quit or you can believe ronnie. a reasonable inference that you can draw, i submit that you draw, is fred was not telling the truth. now, defense counsel says is he going to lie over a few hundred bucks? well, we do not know that he is going to save a few hundred bucks. we know that if it is an insurance form, and they ask are you a smoker, if the answer is no, the rates are lower. now, we may not like the fact that he was not honest on this form, but not one penny of the money you award is going to go to fred jacobson. he died 12 years ago with his lungs and brain rotted out by cancer. you do not have to like fred jacobson. whether or not he was honest on that form or he was not honest, she does not miss him less. she does not love him any less. and the value of this case is not diminished by whether or not fred jacobson was not up front on that form. did he have copd? the answer is of course he had copd. of course he did. how do we know that? because two different doctors and three different pulmonologists all said he had copd. these were five physicians. we have the medical records of the three pulmonologists, and we have dr. schneider and dr. feinberg all said he had copd. was he diagnosed with copd? the word "diagnosis," do not be hung up on that, the word "diagnosis." was there a literal diagnosis of copd? the answer was no. he was being treated for a big tumor in the middle of his chest. the copd was important only insofar as feinberg needed to know what his condition was in order to treat him. the first question you are going to ask is did he have copd, and the answer to that question is yes. now, you may say, well, he could have had asthma. you know what? maybe he did. the evidence suggests he did not because not one doctor gave him so much as an aspirin for asthma. they bring in their doctor from mississippi that tells you, oh, it was asthma all along. is not it something that all of these doctors are treating him presumably it is asthma. i guess the doctors down here do not know the difference between asthma and copd apparently, of course, and not one of these doctors are giving him any medication for this asthma that they claim he had all along. he had childhood asthma. every indication in every record is childhood asthma. they want you to believe that these episodes later on is the asthma. and they seize on the term "asthmatic bronchitis" because it has the word "asthma" in it. do not be mislead. asthmatic bronchitis is not intermittent asthma. both dr. frazier and dr. feinberg told you what asthmatic bronchitis is. it is exacerbation of chronic bronchitis, and it manifest itself like an asthma attack. asthmatic is an adjective that describes the type of attack. he was not on medication for asthma. and how do we know he had copd? because asthmatic bronchitis is an exacerbation of chronic bronchitis which is a component of copd that everybody agrees. chronic obstructive pulmonary disease is emphysema and chronic bronchitis. asthmatic bronchitis is an exacerbation of chronic bronchitis, the component. do not be mislead by that term "asthmatic bronchitis." it does not mean he was having an asthma attack. no witnesses said that, but it sounds good because the word "asthma" is in it. dr. gidel, and i want to focus on that last one. this is just an excerpt. dr. gidel says, "asthmatic bronchitis the patient has some wheezing, he does have a history of smoking, and likely has some underlying chronic obstructive pulmonary disease." now, if asthmatic bronchitis is intermittent asthma, as they would have you believe, why is he saying that fred still has copd? obviously what he is describing is exacerbation of the copd. it cannot mean anything else. they bring in dr. frazier to say gidel is wrong. they are using the wrong test. if you believe that, fine. we come back to the initial '96 report of schneider. schneider's report in '96 is mild copd. therein lies -- here is the '96 report. this is the one that schneider was able to retrieve. mild copd. now, let me deal with the notion that maybe dr. schneider has brought up. he said he was able to retrieve these records and that the backup documentation, the pulmonary function tests, were in the computer that crashed; it was lost. and they make a point in closing argument of consider that. consider how those documents are not there. ladies and gentlemen, you heard dr. schneider. if you think that he phonied up these records, and he came into a federal courthouse and decided to perjure himself about what he said happened 17 years ago on behalf of the widow of a patient of 17 years ago, and you think he is going to commit perjury in a federal courthouse, answer the question no. if you think dr. schneider was telling the truth about what he said, that he had copd there. and that was confirmed the following year by dr. feinberg, dr. krieger, dr. hernandez, dr. prager, dr. ziffer, and dr. gidel. prager says emphysema, gidel says copd. hernandez in 1997 says, "the present pulmonary function test reveals a moderate obstructive process." they talk to feinberg, and feinberg says but he also had copd. let me refresh your recollection about what dr. feinberg said. defense counsel said no doctor ever said he had copd, that we did not bring in any doctor. here is the question to feinberg. "will you explain what you mean when you say is contributing to it?" this is dr. feinberg on video. "there was obstruction to the upper airways because of the mass, and that was a contributing factor to what was see on his initial pulmonary function test. however, there was also diffusion capacity markedly reduced which was not secondary to a mass which was reported on a pulmonary function test assay that day, and that is consistent with what the conclusion was of the pulmonary physician that that was moderate obstructive lung process going on." what was he saying? there was a mass pressing on the wind pipe. there was copd going on as well. that is dr. feinberg's opinion. because the diffusion capacity was diminished, that is not caused by a mass. that is caused by chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. interestingly, the next test is done by pulmonologist prager in october of 1997. that is the doctor that found emphysema. emphysema and copd are one and the same. dr. frazier said we use the terms interchangeably. what is interesting about that is when prager diagnoses emphysema, the mass is gone. no excuse now. you see the excuse before was, well, it is a mass, that is why these results are off. feinberg says, no, still copd. in '97 the mass is gone, it is in remission. what does that pulmonologist say? emphysema. not asthma. nobody says asthma. he has childhood asthma. ladies and gentlemen, i submit to you that dr. schneider, dr. feinberg, dr. krieger, dr. hernandez, dr. prager, dr. ziffer, and dr. gidel are not all making a mistake, that they are not all overlooking asthma, that they know the difference between asthma and copd. i submit to you we have satisfied our burden of proof that he had copd on or before november 21, 1996. those doctors confirm schneider's earlier diagnosis. let us go to addiction. was he addicted? you heard the family talk about addiction. the flaw in their argument, the defense argument, was he could quit. he can quit, therefore, we want you to conclude if somebody can quit, they are not addicted. in fact, the surgeon general's report that is in evidence talks about this. assume now ronnie said he never quit for any extended period of time, but i'm going to go with their contention. i'm going to go with that. let us say he quit for those long periods of time. let us go with it. evidence is to the contrary, but let us assume it is true. what does the surgeon general say? "relapse is the principal limiting factor in the transition from smoking to nonsmoking status." we do not have an expert. we brought you the surgeon general of the united states. here is the interesting part: "findings and studies of long-term outcomes suggest that relapse ultimately claims 30 to forty percent of smokers who stop smoking for one year." does that -- let us assume he stopped for a year. does that mean he was not addicted? it means when he starts up again it is a relapse. thirty to forty percent of people who stop for a year start again. it is evidence that it is a relapse of the original addiction. that is the nature of addiction. you fall off the wagon. sometimes you fall off the wagon a year later. sometimes you fall off the wagon 7 years later. for instance, yudkin and his colleagues, this was a 2003 study, found that about one half of the smokers who had stopped smoking for one year relapsed to smoking within the subsequent 7 years. seven years later you can start smoking again, and you are still addicted. it is a relapse. so the notion that he started and stopped proves he was not addicted simply is not the case. what it proves is it was relapsing and it is an addiction. that is the nature of it, and that is the surgeon general of the united states. i submit to you the answer to question number 2 is was he addicted to nicotine? the answer is sure. sure, we have proved that. it is interesting they say he smoked for enjoyment, which is interesting, but he was not addicted. so i think a lot of people do a lot of things for enjoyment. some people enjoy eating pizza. you know, someone eats pizza for dinner one night, and then they eat it a second night and a third night. they are not addicted to pizza, they just enjoy it. let us say they eat pizza for dinner every night for months. you would think if they are not addicted, they might get sick of that pizza after 3 months and have a hamburger, if they are not addicted, if it is just enjoyment. at some point it stops being enjoyable. he smoked a pack and a half for 40 years. out of enjoyment? if he was not addicted, it was just enjoyment, why did not he quit? why did not he get sick of it and take a month or a few months off? why did not he stop and have a hamburger? he was addicted. now, if you are addicted to pizza, you will eat it every night for dinner for 40 years. you never get sick of it. so the notion that he -- did he enjoy it? i'm sure he did. the notion that if somebody enjoys an activity that is addictive proves it is not addictive simply defies common sense. you have also heard of people that are addicted to heroin and they beat it, they overcome the addiction. they beat addiction. does that mean they were never addicted because they were able to beat the addiction because they were able to quit? that is absurd. that is what they are suggesting. the answer to question number 2 is yes, of course, he was addicted. the third question is did the addiction cause the copd, and the answer is of course. what was he addicted to? the cigarettes. what caused the copd? cigarettes. did the addiction cause the copd? of course. the copd did not come from anything other than the cigarettes that he was addicted to. the answer to question number 3 is yes. now we get to their responsibility. now that he is a class member, now we get to look at what they did, and now your focus can turn to them because you have unlocked it. he is a class member, you are through the door, and the engle findings come into play. the judge is going to tell you that the product is defective, they were negligent, that they conspired to cover up the truth. we know from proctor they did that for 50 years. mr. geraghty: this is all repetitive and not rebuttal. the court: it is true, mr. finger. i cannot really dispute that, so you are going to need to not repeat what mr. kaiser talked about in his opening close. mr. finger: let me go right from my notes. the court: is that going to improve things? mr. finger: yes. the court: very well. mr. finger: i want to touch on a couple of little themes. this case is not about -- and let me go back. this case is not what was written down on those forms. defense counsel spent a lot of time showing you the forms. the question that you are going to be asked is not did fred jacobson note on any forms that he had copd? did fred jacobson note on these forms that he had emphysema? that is not the question. the question very simply is did he have copd. whether fred jacobson wrote it down on a form or not does not answer the question of whether or not he had copd. we have the doctors to say he had copd whether fred wrote it down on those forms or not. this case is not about what is on the forms. it is on about whether he had copd. he only needs a little tiney weeney bit of copd. that question about copd does not say was he diagnosed with copd? did he have demonstrable copd? just did he have copd? did he have asthma? it does not matter. he just needs a little tiney weeney bit of copd that answers that question yes. ronnie jacobson's testimony, her credibility. they suggest ronnie was not upfront with you, she was not honest with you. why? because she does not remember having a conversation with fred about warning labels on cigarettes? do you really expect her to sit down, and maybe she should have had a roundtable and brought some friends to talk about the caution on the cigarettes. who does that? people do not do that. of course, there was no discussion. how is she going to remember a discussion with fred about the warning label? that is not how human beings act. they suggest to you that it is the reason she is not being upfront with you. if she told you, yes, ladies and gentlemen, i specifically remember a conversation, it was at some length fred and i spoke for several hours about the warnings on those cigarettes, that would be preposterous. fred jacobson is responsible for his choices. we heard that over and over again. he was always in control. he was always in control. was he in control when he was 13 in that schoolyard? was he in control then? did that little 13-year-old-boy -- what was so cool about smoking? was he in control? why did he make that decision? was it their marketing, the billions they spent? was it the brilliantly conceived and executed strategy conceived years earlier? no, fred jacobson was not in control. when he finally became an adult, when he finally got to the point where he was in control, it was too late, he was addicted. the defense would have you believe that everybody always knew smoking was bad, it was a free choice. everybody knew. and they put up the front page of the new york times, the big news on the surgeon general's report. ask yourself this: if everybody knew since christopher columbus and john quincy adams how bad smoking was, why was it such big news? why would it be front page on the new york times if everybody had known that for 500 years or several hundred years? christopher columbus was 1492 he sailed the ocean blue. if everybody had known since christopher columbus, what would be the big news? the surgeon general was telling people what they did not know. nobody knew how bad it was. what happened? they started pouring millions into this disinformation, you heard from proctor, to dispute what the surgeon general said. they ridiculed what he said. mr. geraghty: this is repetitive, your honor, and not rebuttal. the court: it is. mr. finger: why did cigarette consumption increase in 1975? proctor said it peaked in 1975. they talked about everybody knew. they talked about reader's digest. that was spoken about, that was mentioned in their closing argument there were thousands and thousands of articles. the evidence was 30 of them were about the hazards of smoking. we do not even know that fred read reader's digest. they talked about the poll. ninety percent, they addressed this in their closing, ninety percent of the people had heard that cigarette smoking causes lung cancer. they had heard it. well, i dare say you might have heard about a flying saucer landing in roswell, new mexico. you might have heard that, does not mean you believe it. when those people were asked what they believed, only or 3 percent believed it caused cancer. while they may have heard it, that does not mean they believe it. they were pouring billions of dollars into this disinformation so the public would not believe it. comments by weidberg. you might recall alan weidberg said you need to quit, and the response was you need to lose weight. his daughter said you need to quit, and the response was do not hock me. they would have you believe what that means is he does not want to quit, he does not care. that is not what that means. what he is saying is i do not need to be reminded. you do not need to remind me i need to quit. he knows. that is why when i asked weidberg he told you that you need to lose weight, i said did you need to lose weight, and the answer is yes. so when he says you need to lose weight, that is not because he is not acknowledging the health hazards. he does not need to be reminded. he knows that is all that means. the caution, 1966. we are dealing with somebody who is addicted. they call it a warning. in 1966 what was on that pack is, "caution: cigarette smoking may be hazardous to your health." they would have you believe from that point until 1970 when the warning changes everybody is on notice. now, ask yourself this, again, bring your common sense about human nature to bear: someone is addicted to cigarettes, and they see a caution that says it may be hazardous. may be. it does not say it is. it says it may be. what is an addictive person going to want to believe? maybe it is, maybe it is not. i think i will have another cigarette. those warnings were worthless, and the federal trade commission report, which is in evidence, tells you nobody pays attention to them. they are ineffective. that is why they changed 4 years later, because nobody paid attention to it. weidberg's testimony was that after the surgeon general's report you could not bum a cigarette for a week, then everybody went right back to it. the number of people who quit, 13 million quitters as of 1970; 30 million americans between '64 and '90; 55 to 60 million americans by 2013. they talk about that in their closing argument. you know what records we do not have? how many people have tried to quit and could not. they do not keep those statistics. what else we do not have is we do not know of those 60 million people that quit how many of them are addicted. some of those people quit because they died; proctor told you that. they are in the statistics too. when somebody dies they stop smoking. now i dare say if somebody quits and they smoke one or two cigarettes a day or maybe a few cigarettes a week, those are in there too. do not be mislead by that statistic unless you know these 60 million are people that smoked a pack a day like fred jacobson, then you are comparing apples and apples. do not be mislead by those statistics. lots of people have quit. lots of people have not quit. schneider's tentative report. they made much of the fact that at one point in his deposition dr. schneider said his conclusion that it was mild copd was tentative. what they do not mention in their closing argument is what else dr. schneider said. and what he was asked is he was asked, "it would be speculation for you to tell this jury today in 2013 that you did anything other than simply make a tentative diagnosis in this case?" "answer: i do not know because according to what i said, i had the results, and that is why i would have said copd." "but today in 2013?" "answer: i do not have the data." "today you just do not know, is not that right?" "answer: because i do not have the data, but according to my note i would say he had copd." mr. kaiser on redirect of dr. schneider asked him this: "do you recall later on in the deposition you were asked a question about whether there was anything tentative about your diagnosis?" "answer: i think you asked me that." "question: what was your answer then?" "answer: nothing tentative." he does not have the pulmonary function tests. all he can tell you now is i had those results then, at that point it was copd. is it tentative? without those reports that he does not have, he said it was in the computer to look at, that is the best that he could do. there was nothing tentative about that diagnosis of copd. we know it was confirmed by feinberg and the pulmonologist a year later, so we know it is right. he was not diagnosed with copd? it was not a problem, he was asymptomatic. somebody can have an illness that does not bother him. because he was not clinically diagnosed does not mean he did not have it. people can walk around with the herpes virus, they do not have an outbreak, but they have got the virus. they do not have an outbreak they feel fine, but they have it. if the question was did somebody have herpes, the answer would be yes even if he has not had a problem in years because the virus is there. the copd was there. feinberg explained it was not diagnosed clinically. i did not mention on the disability application he did not mention copd. he was not seeking disability benefits for copd. copd was never a problem. so why would he indicate he had copd on the disability form? the disability was a big giant tumor in the middle of his chest, not copd. how does that prove that he did not have copd that he did not put it on that form? the court: five minutes. mr. finger: thank you, your honor. you are not going to get a definition of addiction; that is true. you apply your common sense to addiction. you have heard the evidence. we do not need to trot some doctor in here. you heard he smoked all the time, that is what he did, you have the surgeon general's report. they would lead you to believe that we need to bring you a doctor. you apply your common sense. that is what we are counting on. they did not bring you a doctor to say he does not have it. they hired somebody from mississippi to come down here and say our local doctors are wrong. mr. geraghty: that is repetitive, your honor. the court: it is overruled. mr. finger: i will go on. maybe dr. weiner does not know if he is addicted, but you folks do. let me finish. did he rely on their fraud after 1982? i submit to you he did. if you are going to hold these corporations responsible for punitive damages, you must answer either of these questions, 6 and 7, yes, one or both, if you want to hold them responsible for punitive damages. and i submit to you he did rely on it. every time they denied that it was addictive, every time they got up there and they told the american public that it did not cause cancer or the jury is still out, that is the psychological crutch. fred jacobson maybe his brain told him that it was not true, but in his heart of hearts he wanted to believe it. that is human nature. he wanted to continue smoking, and he wants to believe it is true. that is why he relied on those statements after '82. they perjured themselves in front of a congressional committee in 1984. we have their documents they knew in the '50s and the '60s nicotine was addictive, their own documents. they swore under oath before a congressional committee it was not, and that was 1994. we know that fred jacobson was aware of current events, he read current events. now, did he believe those ceos that testified? i do not know. he is not here to tell us. you decide who you want to give the benefit of the doubt to on that. mr. geraghty: i will object, your honor. argument. the court: it is overruled. mr. finger: we talked about free. you are right. fred jacobson was free to make his choices. they are free too, and they were free to tell the truth. they were free in 1953 to tell the american public the truth about their product instead of getting together at the plaza hotel and hatching this conspiracy to mislead people. that is their freedom. and they have the right to get together and meet, and they are free to hire hill & knowlton, and they are free to do whatever they wanted. you are free to hold them responsible, and you will return a verdict which speaks the truth. the word verdict is from the latin. speak the truth, verdict. veritas, truth, dict from diction. verdict speaks the truth. i will ask you to answer all of those questions yes because we have carried our burden of proof. and let your verdict shine like a beacon of truth and illuminate their boardroom and every boardroom that would get together as they did at the plaza hotel, and let them know by your verdict that you will not stand idly by and let so much as one person's life be sacrificed on the altar of corporate greed.