mr. biersteker: thank you, your honor. may it please the court, counsel, mr. jewett, and ladies and gentlemen of the jury. together with jonathan engram i'm happy to be here. i think other folks have mentioned this, but it bears repeating. i know jury service is a burden and takes you away from your families, from your jobs, and from your daily activities. but as others have already said, you know, jury service is also important. it is part of your civic duty, and we appreciate your commitment and your patience. i'd have to say, i think you have performed your duty well. i can see y'all a little not well all the time, but you have been paying attention, and you have taken notes, and some of you have taken a lot of notes, and it is been obvious that you have been listening, and listening hard, and that you have been thinking about what you have been hearing. so we appreciate that, and on behalf of everybody here i want to thank you. okay. let us get down to business and let us talk about the verdict form. there are basically three questions you guys are going to be asked to answer at this point. i know you cannot read them now. we are going to go through them individually. did mrs. jewett know, or by the exercise of reasonable care should she have known before the magic date of may 5, 1990, that she had copd and that there was a reasonable possibility that her copd was caused by smoking? that is the first question. second question: was barbara jewett, mrs. jewett, addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, and if so, was cigarette smoking because of such addiction a legal cause of her copd? and the last question: did mrs. jewett's copd cause her death? and i'll tell you up front -- we will go through them one at a time, but i'll tell you up front that the defendant's position is that the answer to the first question should be yes, and as to the last two, no. all right. let us start with the first question, the magic date of may 5, 1990. and the first part of that is -- it kind of has two parts, and i've split them up here just because that is the way i think about it -- did mrs. jewett know, or by the exercise of reasonable care should she have known before may 5, 1990 that she had copd? and let me be clear about one thing at the start. the defendants do not, do not need to prove that mrs. jewett was actually diagnosed before may 5, 1990. look at the question: did mrs. jewett know, or by the exercise of reasonable care should she have known that she had copd before may 5, 1990? so, for example, if mrs. jewett had been diagnosed before may 5, 1990, then plainly she knew. and we think that is what the evidence shows, and we are going to talk about it. but let us say you disagree. let us say you find she was not diagnosed before may 5, 1990. you are not done with this first part of this question. you have got to look at the should-have-known part. and, for example, if mrs. jewett was symptomatic, and with the exercise of reasonable care, going to the doctor, for example, should she have known that she had copd before that date of may 5, 1990? and i submit that the evidence that you have heard in this trial is that mrs. jewett both knew that she had copd before may 5, 1990, or in the exercise of reasonable care should have known that she had copd before may 5, 1990. okay. let us get down to the evidence. what is the evidence? and i'm going to try to do what mr. matthews did. i'm going to try to present the evidence on both sides. first i'm going to try to present the evidence that the defense believes established that the answer to this question should be yes, and then i'm going to try show the evidence that i think the plaintiffs have already talked about some of it, and then there is some additional things i want to mention, because again they get another shot at the apple, they get another bite, they get to go last. i do not know what they are going to say when they go last, but i'm going to try to anticipate, try to talk about it all. i might leave some stuff out, and if i do, i apologize. that is not what i'm trying to do. okay. let us look at the medical records. let us start with them. see if we can do this pretty quickly. we have got this one from february of 2001. this is in bloomington, indiana, and it is 15-year history of copd. that puts it before 1990. next one, please, steve. dr. ottaviana in clearwater, florida. bronchitis, emphysema. yes. how long? 15 years written on the side there in mrs. jewett's hand. next. this is february 2002, the notes of the nurse: 47-year-old female, history of copd times 15 years. again before 1990. again in clearwater. september 2002. by this point the jewetts had come back here to jacksonville. copd 14 years. mrs. jewett's handwriting. dr. alvarez. next one please, steve. okay. here we are. this is october 2002 with elaine gustetic. i'm going to mispronounce that. she was accompanied by mr. jewett, and she said, copd diagnosed 13 years ago. again before may 5, 1990. next one. this is dr. vasquez. october 2002. this is what the patient is describing, and here the patient says, mrs. jewett, first diagnosed with copd 15 years ago. again before may 5, 1990. next one, please, steve. dr. pajaro. october 2002. he talks about meeting with her face-to-face for 40 minutes. let me just say, i probably ought to interrupt right now just to say that each side has prepared a little binder, and if you look in the defense binder, the exhibits that have been introduced in the trial, you will be able to take them back with you to the jury room, and what we did is instead of giving you all the big stack of medical records we took those medical records that have been discussed here in the courtroom and we put them in the binder for you. and plaintiffs did the same thing. they have got a binder and they have got a set of medical records that they want to bring to your attention that they talked about that were important too. so you will have this in the jury room when you go back to deliberate. i'm sorry i interrupted. okay. face-to-face he spent 40 minutes with her and said, diagnosed with copd approximately 14 years ago. again before may 5, 1990, our magic date. next one, please. this dr. crossfield. this is part of the lung transplant, you know, when she was getting interviewed for it, and so the patient reports -- this is again from mrs. jewett -- first diagnosed with the disease -- again, first diagnosed with lung disease age 34. well before may 5, 1990. next record, please. this is in 2004. the patient states -- again this is mrs. jewett -- that she was on prednisone for about 25 years. next record. last one. again this is 2005. not another year. mrs. jewett is a 50-year-old white female with a history of emphysema diagnosed at 25 years old. okay. and of course we also have the pbs video, and i'm not going to play it, but you saw mrs. jewett where she said in her own words that she had copd for 26 years, which would have put it back to 1979. she did that with mr. jewett sitting right next to her. and you will remember i asked him when he was up on the stand, you know, why did not you correct her, and he said, ah, it was trivial. but you will remember when you watch the video that he leans over and corrects her on the important fact that the lung donor was from orlando. and also remember this. you saw in a number of these medical records that mrs. jewett was often accompanied by her husband, mr. jewett, and he never once corrected anything that she told her healthcare providers about when she was diagnosed. all right. what the medical records and mrs. jewett's own words, either on the videotape or the words that she said to her healthcare providers and are captured in these medical records, tell us fits. what does it fit with? well, first of all, it fits with the medical science that tells us about the progression of copd. we know that in january of 1995 mrs. jewett had severe or very severe emphysema. you saw from dr. frazier the calculation that she had 24 percent of the normal lung capacity, and under the standards that are used that actually be just barely into the very severe category. but it was severe or very severe emphysema in 1995. and that did not happen overnight, it happened over years. and nobody here disputes that. nobody here disputes that. dr. frazier did the math, and mr. matthews alluded to that in his closing. and what did dr. frazier do? well, he looked at the pulmonary function tests, those pfts where you breathe in and then try to breathe out as fast as you can, and he looked at the loss in function of mrs. jewett, not the general population, but mrs. jewett specifically experienced from 1995 forward, and he found that she was losing 72 cubic centimeters of lung capacity each year. that was the rate at which she was losing it. and that was faster than most smokers. but smokers, as you heard from dr. frazier, lose it at about 50 or 56 -- i cannot remember -- it was 50. so she was losing it almost fifty percent faster than most. and what he did is he said, well, i'm going to take that 72 percent loss and i'm going to go backwards and i'm going to try to figure out what was her lung capacity compared to normal back in 1989. back in 1989. and he said in 1989 she would have had severe copd. and he said, i've never seen a patient with disease at that level of severity who did not have significant symptoms. then there was this question and answer with dr. frazier: what is your opinion, dr. frazier, about when mrs. jewett's copd manifested itself and was diagnosable? and he basically said early, mid, late 1980's. okay. and there is not really much dispute about that. i mean, the other doctors agreed. dr. wyzan and even dr. feingold both said that mrs. jewett must have had copd before may 5, 1990. dr. wyzan. it would not be surprising if mrs. jewett had copd in 1987. and dr. feingold. i think it is reasonable to take that position -- that was five years before -- like dr. wyzan said because it is intellectually defensible. and not only did she have copd before may 5, 1990, but even as dr. feingold allowed, it was medically plausible that it could have been diagnosed by a pulmonologist like himself, like dr. fraizer, like dr. alvarez, like dr. wyzan, you know, before may 5, 1990. indeed he said at least by 1988, was the concession that dr. feingold gave. okay. mrs. jewett's statements both in her medical histories and on the pbs videotape also fit with her treatment and symptoms. okay. we have got done talking about the biological processes. now let us talk about the treatment and symptoms. and you heard mrs. jewett herself describe, again in the pbs videotape, that she had been on prednisone for about 25 years, and again without a peep from mr. jewett who was sitting next to her mrs. jewett told her doctors the same thing, that she had been on prednisone for about 25 years, well before the magic date of may 5, 1990. mrs. jewett told her doctors that she had symptoms of copd for years prior to 1990. there is this record. you know, have you ever noticed any wheezing, whistling, or tightness in your chest? uh-huh. and at what age did your wheezing, whistling, or chest tightness occur? age 34. age 34. that puts us in 1988, again before may 5, 1990. and you also heard from some witnesses who observed her. you heard from jeanette wilson. actually you did not actually hear from her, and we did not read jeanette's wilson's deposition, but dr. feingold talked about it, how mrs. jewett had coughed and used an inhaler before ms. wilson graduated from high school, which was in 1989. now, ms. wilson was a little confused about whether or not the cough was before she graduated from high school or not, and you heard both portions of that deposition. but she was not confused when she was talking about the inhaler. mrs. wilson also testified about mrs. jewett being kind of hunched over or bowed over before she graduated from high school in 1989. and you heard from dr. frazier, it is like the athlete. you know, you bend down because it helps your diaphragm work, to do the work to breathe. okay. and some emphysema patients sometimes are bowed over and hunched over like that because the same physical mechanical factors are at work, it helps them to breathe when they are having a hard time. and you heard ms. wilson in dr. feingold's comments about her testimony say that she was hunched or bowed over in 1989 -- by 1989 when ms. wilson graduated from high school. now, as to coughing, you heard from the children of leo powers. they knew mrs. jewett. and there was some confusion about the dates, but they knew mrs. jewett before the jewetts moved to florida in 1984, when they were living in virginia. there was a stint in new jersey, but from the late 70's i believe until 1984 they lived in virginia, and that is when -- that is when mrs. jewett met the children of leo powers, who you heard from ms. thorn and kevin powers. and what did they say? she had a hacking cough, a hacking cough and a bronchitis cough. and finally you heard from mr. jewett. and what did mr. jewett have to say about his wife's symptoms? well, he said that in the 1980's she had repeated bouts of bronchitis and pneumonia for which she was going to see navy doctors. navy doctors. okay. so what it is in effect showing you, i submit, is a mountain of evidence. this was not an isolated slip of the tongue. there are ten different medical records from ten different medical professionals recording mrs. jewett's patient history over a four-year period when she lived in indiana, and in clearwater, and in jacksonville, in mrs. jewett's own words, two are in her own handwriting, and others say: the patient describes, the patient reports, the patient states. and i want to make two important points. all of the records that i've shown you so far, all of them, put the date of the first diagnosis before may 5, 1990. and not once, not once in all of her medical records is there a statement by mrs. jewett that she was first diagnosed in january of 1995. in fact, there is not at statement that she was first diagnosed in 1995. not once. now, what are plaintiff's responses? my belief is that they do not hold water. i want to walk through them with you. i want to talk about the things that mr. matthews mentioned, but i'm also going to talk about some additional things that i suspect might be mentioned after i sit down and i do not have a chance to talk to you again. okay. here goes. in december of 2002 -- you heard this through dr. feingold -- there is a letter stating mrs. jewett was diagnosed since january 1, 1993. now, this letter was addressed to whom it may concern. you heard the context in which this letter was written. it was a letter to try to justify some transportation expenses. one of the signatories is carey smith, who is a clinical respiratory therapist, the other is dr. alvarez. we do not know if dr. alvarez actually wrote the letter, or if ms. smith did, or somebody else did. but whoever drafted the letter actually wrote that mrs. jewett was diagnosed since january 1, 1993. that is new year's day. nobody, not even dr. feingold, believes that that really happened. and there is no history that mrs. jewett gave to dr. alvarez or to carey smith in december of 2002, the date when this letter was written, or even in november, that supports the statement that is made there. but -- but mrs. jewett did give a history to dr. alvarez three months earlier, two months earlier, september 2002, and as we showed you then, in her handwriting, that is when she said copd 14 years. before 1990. there is another document. this was one that mr. matthews touched upon. it was david solomon, dr. david solomon wrote a letter to dr. ottaviana in july of 2002, and it had that statement, about 15 years ago because her husband's job caused him to move to jacksonville, florida she was seen by dr. wyzan. well, the jewetts did move to jacksonville, florida about 15 years earlier. this is a 2001 record. we know that the jewett family moved to jacksonville in 1984, about 15 years earlier. actually 16, i guess -- actually 17. do the math. but it was about 15 years earlier. and so the first part of that sentence is right. and it is kind of hard to see if the second half of the sentence has anything to do with the first half. and let us look at the rest of the letter. you see the statement there: the patient was initially worked up by a former fellow from this program who has his practice in bloomington, indiana. well, we know the jewetts did not go to bloomington, indiana until 1999. the doctor in bloomington, indiana could not have initially worked up the patient. that is wrong. we at least know that dr. wyzan saw mrs. jewett in 1995. and finally, the letter is not signed by anybody. not signed by anybody. okay. mr. matthews also displayed to you in his closing a september 10, 2010 entry by gracie -- dr. gracie hercl that mrs. jewett had a history of copd times ten years, which of course would put it in 1991. but you will remember, look at that date, it was september 2010, actually it was september 10th, one day before 9/11, and this was the hospital admission when mrs. jewett was in distress and lapsed into a coma. that was the three-week coma visit. and so not surprisingly -- there are two versions of this, there is a handwritten one and a typewritten one, but both of them say the same thing: all history obtained from the husband. mrs. jewett was in distress. all the history came from mr. jewett. this is not mrs. jewett at all. okay. so much for the medical records. what other response do plaintiffs have to this? well, they say look at the testimony of dr. wyzan, who did -- who did see mrs. jewett in 1995, and who also said when he came in here and testified that mrs. jewett was shocked. okay. let me make a couple observations. there is nothing in dr. wyzan's medical records that said this was the first diagnosis. it is not there. dr. wyzan's medical records also do not say that mrs. jewett was shocked. and when dr. wyzan testified that mrs. jewett was shocked he did not say that she was shocked to find out that she had copd or whether she was shocked to find out how severe it was. he did not say. and dr. wyzan also agreed that the -- given the severity of her disease in 1995, and the medical progression of copd, she would have had to have had it before may 5, 1990. he further agreed that mrs. jewett, in addition to having emphysema, also had a chronic bronchitis condition that went along with it. and finally he said it would not surprise him -- it would not be surprising if she had copd in 1987. that is what dr. wyzan said. okay. one thing that plaintiffs have not brought up yet, but they may, is what about mr. jewett's testimony? okay. i want to talk about that a little bit. mr. jewett, as you heard, was in the navy and was gone for months and months at a time in the 1980's, often without the ability to even call home. they did not have as much cell phone technology as we do today. indeed, when he was up on the stand and i asked him whether mrs. jewett could have been diagnosed earlier his answer was that she had not been, to my knowledge. to my knowledge. he also said that mrs. jewett would be the best person to know when she was first diagnosed with copd or emphysema. and he agreed that mrs. jewett would have no reason to do anything other than to tell her healthcare providers the truth, and that she would have been candid with them. and we have already talked about this, but mr. jewett also failed to correct his wife ever about the statements she made that she was diagnosed before may 5, 1990. now, mr. matthews did talk about this, which was the life insurance application filed in 1986, and i want to make a couple observations about that. first, this was in a string of about a dozen no, no, no, no, no's where she checked the box next to the question about lung disease. and i would also observe that this is april 1986, over four years before our magic date of may 5, 1990. and this means little, because most of the time when mrs. jewett was asked and she told her healthcare providers when she was first diagnosed with copd she said it was in the mid to late 1980's, after the date of this insurance application. okay. i want to talk a little bit about another anticipated response, something you heard here in the courtroom, that plaintiffs might have. and it came from dr. feingold who said there is only one standard, that is to seek the truth in every situation no matter who retains me, and no matter what the issue. and i would submit that judged against his own standard dr. feingold's opinions came up short. let us talk about how they relate to this issue, our may 5, 1990 issue. dr. feingold is, beyond dispute, a handsomely paid professional witness. he is been paid $20 million for what he calls medical/legal business since 1993. he is testified as an expert 750 times, maybe a little more. he is been joined at the hip to mr. wilner professionally since 1982, and he is been pursuing the tobacco industry, not just as a witness, but in seminars, the object of which is to help plaintiffs' lawyers win these cases. now, dr. feingold is a pulmonologist, but that did not stop him from talking about just about everything under the sun. and he says, well, you know, you can ignore all the medical records in which mrs. jewett said she was diagnosed before may 5, 1990. and why? he said, well, they are not primary records. that was his answer. i do not know if you remember that or not. they were not primary records. and what did he mean by that? records that were made contemporaneously with the treatment. and then dr. feingold's view, that there is no record from before may 1990 showing that mrs. jewett was diagnosed with copd, it never happened. that was basically what he was saying. and i do not really know where to begin. as dr. feingold knows full well, there are virtually no medical records from before 1995. period. this case was filed in 2007. all medical providers, you heard, usually keep records for about 7 to 10 years, and by the time the parties got together and went out and tried to find the records most of them were gone, through no fault of anybody. we just could not get them. but there are multiple instances where we know that mrs. jewett went and saw a healthcare provider. for example, she was born, she gave birth three times, she had routine physicals. she mentioned one in her april 1986 insurance application. she was treated for the black widow spider bite which had complications. and indeed, she was referred to dr. wyzan by a doctor named beethoven ruedas. we do not have any of those records, but we know it happened. we know it happened. all right. dr. feingold also dismissed the ten different records where mrs. jewett told ten different healthcare providers in different areas of the country over a period of years that she was diagnosed before may of 1990. and why did he do that? well, first, he said she did not give specifics. she did not give specifics. well, what did he mean by that? well, like she did not mention a pulmonary function test. baloney. who does that? who does that? what people say is exactly what mrs. jewett is recorded as having said in these medical records: yeah, i've got copd. i've had it for 15 years. i've had it since age 34. i was diagnosed, first diagnosed in the late 1980's. that is what people say. they do not say, oh, i had a pulmonary function test. and dr. feingold echoed of course mr. wilner's comments from opening that mrs. jewett misremembered or was confused, or as mr. matthews put it in his closing, that she made a mistake. dr. feingold's speculation though is laid to rest by mr. jewett himself. mr. jewett was in a much better position to know, and mr. jewett flatly contradicts dr. feingold and the suggestion that because of her weakening condition, or something else, mrs. jewett was getting it wrong. and what did mr. jewett say on the stand? his wife was intelligent. she understood and saw -- she understood what she saw and read. she could grasp any topic. and this is the one that is critical. except for the three weeks when she was in the coma right before 9/11, in 2001, she was always mentally able to answer questions about her health completely and accurately. and in this case we are in an unusual position. we have a videotape of mrs. jewett from 2005, and it will be in evidence, you guys will have it back there, you can watch it again if you want to. but i submit that mrs. jewett did not sound like she was very confused in that videotape. all right. there was also a suggestion, again not one that plaintiff has so far mentioned, but it came from dr. feingold, that you should not believe mrs. jewett because she gave different dates for her diagnosis of copd before may 5, 1990, over the years to her many healthcare providers. golly. a couple points. the defense has the burden of proving that mrs. jewett had copd before may 5, 1990. that is it. does not matter if it was 1989, 1988, 1987, 1986, or some other year, as long as it was before may 5, 1990. and as i've already mentioned, the defense does not even have to prove that mrs. jewett was actually diagnosed before may 5, 1990 by a medical professional. again the issue was -- is in addition, you know, should she by the exercise of reasonable care have known. that is what the court's instruction says. it is also what the question says. and the court's instructions -- you will have them back there. the court's instructions are the law that you guys have got to follow. it is sort of like a roadmap to filling out the verdict form. you cannot just go back there and check off boxes. you have got to read to roadmap to go along with it to guide you through the process. and the court's instructions do not say a word about the defense needing to show there was a diagnosis. okay. let us come back to these records and the fact that mrs. jewett did give dates. you can calculate it back from her age, or from 15 years ago from the date of the record. there is a range. you know, most of them in the late 1980's, but there is a range. and ask yourself a couple things. what are the odds that decades later mrs. jewett was going to identify the same exact year on each and every occasion that she was asked by her multiple healthcare providers how long ago she was diagnosed with copd? what are the chances she is going to get the same year every time? what are the odds, for example, that she would never round: about 15 years instead of 13. i think they are probably pretty high. if anything, the variation in the years underscore that this was information coming from mrs. jewett. this was not just one doctor copying over what another doctor might have said or that was in an earlier record. each time it was mrs. jewett. in contrast ask yourself this: if the plaintiff were right, if mrs. jewett was first diagnosed with copd in 1995, what are the odds that mrs. jewett would never say 1995? in sum, the evidence i submit, ladies and gentlemen, has been that mrs. jewett knew, or by the exercise of reasonable care should have known that she had copd before may 5, 1990. okay. let us turn to the second part of the first question. and that is, did mrs. jewett know, or by the exercise of reasonable care should she have known before may 5, 1990, that there was a reasonable possibility that her copd was caused by her smoking? i submit the evidence here has been overwhelming. mrs. jewett knew, or at the very least, should have known before may 5, 1990 that there was a reasonable possibility that her copd was related to her smoking. okay. the evidence takes two forms. first, there is specific information that she received that smoking causes copd, and she received it before may 5, 1990. and, second, there is general information out there that smoking is not very good for you and causes breathing problems. what evidence have you heard that must have been received by mrs. jewett before may 5, 1990, about smoking and emphysema or copd? well, first, there is the warning. you heard his honor read it, and it specifically says smoking causes emphysema, among other diseases. it is been on the packs of cigarettes since 1985, more than five years before may 5, 1990. it is been on every single print ad since 1985, more than five years before may 5, 1990, a warning that mr. jewett testified when he was on the stand mrs. jewett must have seen. okay. all the medical doctors agree it was standard or common practice of doctors, at least by the 1980's, if not earlier, to ask their patients about smoking, to warn their patients about smoking, to encourage patients who smoke to quit, and to especially tell patients with copd who smoked that their copd was related to their smoking. mr. jewett said it was common knowledge by 1984 when the jewetts moved to florida that smoking was bad for you. and remember, mr. jewett's knowledge, he testified when he was on the stand, he said, golly, coffin nails, cancer sticks, i did not really think that had anything to do with the health risks of smoking, as if the coffin part and the cancer part were somehow accidental. but even says by 1984 it was common knowledge. and he further testified that he never talked to mrs. jewett about the health risks of smoking. why was that? it was because she already knew. and she did. apart from the warnings, apart from all the surgeon general's reports and the news, there were warnings from family and friends. you heard testimony that the coles warned, said do not smoke, starting when the jewetts were down here in florida and mrs. jewett was working with mrs. cole at the hallmark store. you heard about the children who came home from school and told mr. and mrs. jewett about the health risks of smoking, and you heard about the warnings that mrs. jewett, herself, was giving back to the kids: do not smoke. you heard that from sarah among others. but mr. jewett went even further. he said that when mrs. jewett displayed symptoms of copd that anybody on the planet would have attributed them to her smoking. and he went on to say that mrs. jewett in fact attributed those symptoms to her smoking. now, to be fair, mr. jewett protested that his wife never had any symptoms of copd before may 5, 1990. that was his testimony. but you will remember that mr. jewett is the same person who had a hunch that that pbs video was not going to be very helpful to his case, did not produce it for three years, only produces it after it was disclosed by sarah in her deposition, and then said, well, the reason i did not produce it earlier was because the engineer, bachelor's degree from florida a&m, an electrical engineer, and a master's degree from smu in systems engineering in dallas, thought subsequent meant before not after. further, as we have already discussed, mrs. jewett did have copd symptoms in the late 1980's. there is the medical records, there is the deposition testimony you heard from a number of folks about different symptoms, there was mr. jewett's testimony, for example, about the repeated bouts of bronchitis and emphysema for which she saw navy doctors in the 1980's. there was dr. frazier. all of them put her symptoms back before may 5, 1990. and, indeed, some of them put her symptoms back a long ways before may 5, 1990. so the evidence as a whole was powerful on the second part of the first question. mrs. jewett knew, or at least by the exercise of reasonable care -- i mean, after all, all she would have had to do is look at the warning on the pack -- at least by the exercise of reasonable care she should have known that there was a reasonable possibility that her copd and her breathing problems were caused by her smoking. so if you look at this, the defense submits the first question, which is: did mrs. jewett know, or by the exercise of reasonable care should she have known before may 5, 1990 that she had copd, and there was a reasonable possibility that her copd was caused by smoking? the defense submits the evidence supports a yes answer to that question. all right. let us turn to the second question on the verdict form. and that question is: was mrs. jewett addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, and if so, was cigarette smoking because of such addiction a legal cause of her copd? now, i was not even going to do this. i do not have a slide. i'm going to have to use the elmo. there was some discussion about what legal cause meant. and you are going to get the judge's instructions. you can take them with you. again they are your roadmap. you ought to look at them when you are filling out the verdict form. all right. mr. wilner focussed on the natural and continuous sequence produces or contributes substantially. that is fine. that is in the definition. but one part i wanted to draw to your attention to, is that a legal cause is something that it could be reasonably said that but for. but for. it is a but for clause. it does not have to be -- if it is just a factor floating out there, that is probably not good enough. it is got to be a but for clause. in other words, but for. that i think is the simplest way to understand that instruction. and let us talk about a number of issues related to addiction. you heard this i think from mr. wilner when he put up -- he displayed something. but what does it mean to be addicted to cigarettes? and he was candid. he said, there is no consensus. there is no consensus as to what that means. another issue is, was mrs. jewett addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine? and last: did her smoking because of addiction cause, was it a -- did it cause her copd, a legal cause? okay. you have heard the court's instruction. there is no definition of addiction there. that is what i told you in opening. that is true. so what definition are you guys going to use? there is no consensus among the scientists, legal definition provided to you. you have got to come up with one. what is it? well, common sense, i would suggest. dr. wyzan and dr. kaplan all suggest the answer. addiction is something that controls the smoker. it prevents somebody who genuinely wants to change their behavior from doing so. that is the issue of control. well, maybe not literally, because people can and do quit. loss of control really means it is hard to quit. hard to quit. regardless of the definition, can some people be addicted to cigarettes? yeah, sure. is everybody who smokes addicted so that they cannot quit if they want to? absolutely not. as dr. feingold confirmed, smokers are not robots -- that was his words -- and anybody can quit. now, dr. feingold talked and mr. wilner talked in his closing about nicotine impacting the brain, and receptors, and dopamine, and i'm not going to try to address all that. and here's why. notwithstanding all of that, 1.5 million smokers quit each year. 50 million smokers have had enough control to quit. ninety percent of them did it without any assistance at all, no nicotine gum, no nicotine replacement, no hypnosis, no acupuncture, nothing, they just did it. and there are as many former smokers in this country today as current smokers. and mr. wilner in his closing talked about eating. it is not the same thing. all of those former smokers i'm sure are eating. they are eating. dr. feingold talked about addiction for a long time. he talked about compulsion, he talked about the dsm-iv, he talked about fagerstrom, he talked about five cigarettes a day. he talked a lot. and i got to say, a lot of it did not make sense to me. for example, i asked him: what distinguishes people who smoke five cigarettes a day who are addicted in your view, doctor, from those who are not? his answer. it may not be possible to distinguish. so i asked him, i said: well, okay, let us say somebody is smoking five cigarettes a day and they can quit. and i snapped my fingers like that. and i said, they quit, no problem, are they addicted? his answer: i do not know. i do not know. and he insisted that nobody, including mrs.(sic) wilner's hypothetical petunia, who i think smoked two packs a day for a long period time and quit like that, no problem. was she addicted? he said: absolutely, absolutely. and i said, why? why? if they can quit like that, no problem, why are they addicted? and he says he refused to believe that anybody who smoked a significant number of cigarettes for a long time could quit without having withdrawal. that was basically his answer. he just does not think there is such a person. and so the real question here, i submit, is whether or not because of the effects of nicotine a particular individual smoker, in this case mrs. jewett, experienced withdrawal symptoms that made it hard to quit. that is the bottom line. and if mrs. jewett was addicted, was her smoking cigarettes because of such addiction a legal cause of her copd? and it is important to look at her addiction therefore in time. and you have got to look at the time period before she had copd, whether or not it was diagnosed or even diagnosable. only her smoking before she had copd could have caused her copd. that is just common sense. okay. so that is what the -- the doctors, drs. wyzan, fraizer, feingold, pretty much all agree that she had to have had copd before may 5, 1990 in the 80's. what evidence did you hear about whether or not mrs. jewett was addicted in the 1970's and the early to mid 1980's? not much. you heard that mrs. jewett enjoyed smoking. you heard that she had no trouble not smoking where it was not permitted or she chose not to do it. you heard about new year's resolutions from mr. jewett, but at the end of the day he said that they were not very serious, that they were not very serious. and i've got to add that sarah, when she was on the stand, also seemed to recall mrs. jewett using nicotine gum or patches in the 1980's. it was a little bit ambiguous, but i think she was pegging it to that time period, which would have been about the time that mrs. jewett repeatedly told doctors that she had been first diagnosed with copd. then we come to the 1990's, and we will talk a little bit about that evidence. there was the evidence that mrs. jewett cut down her smoking dramatically from one and-a-half to two cigarettes per day in 1995, and that then she quit, and then later on again she started, not heavily, but on and off, then she cut back down to three cigarettes per week, and then she quit. mrs. jewett never once said to any of her doctors that she was experiencing withdrawal symptoms. and she really was not observed as having withdrawal symptoms. not during this period. for example, mr. jewett testified that he did not notice anything that was different about her when she quit for good. you would think that if anybody was in a position to observe whether mrs. jewett was having a hard time quitting smoking it would have been her husband, but he did not see that there was anything different about her. now, dr. wyzan. let us talk a little bit about him. she(sic) was, as you know, mrs. jewett's treating physician, and he said at the time he was treating her he could not tell whether she was addicted or just a social smoker. that was his testimony. and plaintiff tried mightily to get dr. wyzan to say that mrs. jewett was addicted because she started smoking again later. okay. and they asked him that question when he was on the stand, and i've heard different characterizations of that testimony, but these were his words. what he said, was that her restarting smoking later was consistent with addiction. he never said she was addicted. then you heard from dr. kaplan, and he said, you know, this is a really highly personal and individualized issue. and i do not think anybody really disputed that. he said about half the smokers are addicted, half of them are not, and there are various statistics, but the touchstone is control. and the evidence is that mrs. jewett was strong-willed and that she had not lost control of her smoking. mr. jewett put his finger on the button. i confronted him when he was on the stand, and i said, you never asked your wife to quit, you never helped her to quit. why not? why did not you do that? and his answer was: she was a mature woman who could make up her own mind. yep. and it was her personal choice. it was her personal choice. okay. last point on addiction. the internal company documents supposedly showed secret knowledge about nicotine and addiction, and there was dr. feingold's opinions that the defendants designed cigarettes to make them more addictive. this is a complete red herring. look at that evidence and ask yourself, what on earth do they have to do with mrs. jewett? they do not have anything to do with the questions that are on the verdict form that you guys are going to be asked to answer. and last, there is no there there. do not forget the cross examination of dr. feingold. let us walk through it. first, mr. wilner showed you a bunch of documents primarily from the 1960's where the documents show that there were tobacco company employees who used the word addictive to describe smoking, and who said, yeah, nicotine is important, maybe even the most important reason why people smoke. that is the first thing he tried to use these documents for. my response is, big deal. big deal. because you heard from dr. feingold when i cross examined him that the fact that nicotine is an important reason why people smoke was not a carefully guarded tobacco industry secret. it is not a surprise to anybody. dr. feingold agreed that the central role that nicotine plays in smoking behavior has been known for decades. he agreed that in the 1964 surgeon general's report, way back then, it was observed that people did not smoke cigarettes that were not made out of tobacco and that were made from other things that did not have nicotine in them. nobody bought them. and, in fact, these defendants and the cigarette industry in general manufactured cigarettes that did not have any nicotine in them. not truly analytical, but sort of like decaffeinated coffee, you try to take the nicotine out, made cigarettes that way, and nobody bought them either. okay. nicotine is important to smoking. yeah, sure it is. sure it is. but was that a secret? no, absolutely not. nor was it a secret that it could be hard to quit. nor was it a secret that it could be hard to quit. the surgeon general's report in 1964 talks about it. talks about it. and why did you hear all that testimony about those -- the research that the company who is not in this courtroom, british american tobacco company, had conducted by battelle, a research organization geneva, switzerland, they had that research done, and, you know, there is this big show about how, gosh, that research was not given to the surgeon general in 1964. you had to wait for our cross examination to find out why that occurred. why did it occur? it is because they had the research reviewed. the people who reviewed that research at the time said it was not publishable. so they went back and did more research on rats and nicotine, got it right, fixed the problem, and they published it. there is no there there. second, mr. wilner and dr. feingold, and again in closing, all talked about cigarettes being designed to be more addictive instead of less. and they had two examples of what was done. first was the tar to nicotine ratio; keep the tar the same, increase the nicotine, lower that ratio. the second was ph. and i want to talk to you about that. i want to talk to you about both of them. let us do them one at a time. let us talk about the cigarettes that were relatively high in nicotine and low in tar. all right. as dr. feingold conceded when he was on the stand, the public health officials said that because tar is dangerous, it is what makes you sick, and because people smoke for nicotine, gosh, maybe a safer cigarette would have less tar compared to the amount of nicotine that is in them. and they said, go and research it. it sounds like a good way to make a safer cigarette. and that is what they recommended. and the tobacco companies tried. they tried to do it. but it turns out that when the nicotine and tar get into -- get out of whack, when they get -- depart from the ratios that are there in tobacco naturally, when that happens the cigarette tastes different, in fact, it tastes awful. and so they could not make a commercial cigarette. they tried in the labs. was it technically feasible to do it? absolutely. was it something they could sell? no. and they never did. so far from being an attempt to make cigarettes more addictive, it was an attempt to make a safer cigarette, and it was one that failed, it was never marketed, and it has nothing to do with whether mrs. jewett was addicted. nothing. that is one point. mr. wilner showed you documents primarily documents from the 1970's when the tobacco companies were discussing ph. ph, which is a measure of how acidic or basic a particular substance is. and there was this notion that, gosh, if it got more basic you would have more free nicotine in it. free nicotine. and that might make cigarettes more addictive. and indeed again he talked about the surgeon general commenting on this. but what he did not tell you, and what dr. feingold did not tell you, and you had to wait for my cross examination here is potentially, possibly. okay. i said to dr. feingold, let us have the rubber meet the road here. let us talk about this. and he agreed. he agreed on cross examination that all commercial cigarettes have ph in a narrow range, and that in that narrow range there is no free nicotine, or very little of it, and there is no evidence that any -- that the ph of any of the brands that mrs. jewett smoked were somehow manipulated or altered in order to try to make them more addictive. absolutely none. again, this is a sideshow. it is a sideshow that makes me a little steamed, because i think it is an attempt to distract from the issues that you do have to decide in this phase of the case, and to get you mad. but when you think about the story and you understand the context in which these documents are written, there is nothing even to get mad about. all right. we are in the home stretch. last issue. did copd cause mrs. jewett's death? the evidence was no. let us start with the death certificate. the death certificate could not be any clearer. and you will see that identifies a single cause of death. ttp. and i think i heard mr. matthews say -- maybe it was mr. wilner -- that ttp was the immediate cause of death. but, you know, you have got to go look at this, and it is going to be really hard to read. the death certificate is back there, but believe me i've strained my eyes more often than i care to count trying to read the death certificate. it is hard. you will probably need a magnifying glass. but the instructions to the section where ttp occurs commands doctors who fill them out to list the chain of events that directly caused death. and how many links are there in this chain? one. one. ttp. ttp. nothing else is listed. and there is a comment in the death certificate about bronchiolitis obliterans, or bos, but it was not the underlying cause of death. now, how do we know that? well, this is consistent with dr. wyzan's testimony. he was asked this not by defense counsel, but by mr. matthews, i think, whether bos was a contributing cause to mrs. jewett's death, and he says it is hard to say whether bos directly contributed to her death. that was his testimony on redirect by mr. matthews. and let us go back to the death certificate. it excludes tobacco. did tobacco use contribute to death? no. no. the plaintiff forgot to raise that with you in their closing. now, the death certificate. this -- was this some clerical person who filled this out? was this somebody who did not know anything? no. you heard the testimony. it was dr. alvarez. he is the pulmonologist. he treated mrs. jewett for four years. he has over 70 medical records for her. he was on her transplant team, and he was responsible for her care in her last days. is there anybody out of all the doctors who treated mrs. jewett, of all the doctors who appeared in this courtroom, is there anybody who would know better than dr. alvarez what caused her death? dr. ambinder was perfectly clear. he said, do not listen to me, listen to dr. alvarez. but not dr. feingold. he wanted to rewrite the death certificate. despite what he called dr. alvarez's incredible quality of care, and how expertly handled her treatment was, dr. feingold testified that dr. alvarez, like mrs. jewett, somehow got confused, misremembered, or made mistakes. and when it came to filling out the death certificate he called him silly and foolish. what was dr. feingold's theory? it is the same one plaintiffs are playing for you in their closing, immunosuppression and rejection of the transplanted lung. let us take them one at a time. first let me start generally, not about mrs. jewett, generally. it is true, immunosuppression can cause ttp. they can. generally true. it is true that lung transplant patients are at higher risk of ttp than the general population, in part because they are taking immunosuppressants. that is true. it is true that lung transplant patients do not have a good long term prognosis. the body can reject the transplanted lung. but this case is not about lung transplant patients in general, it is about mrs. jewett. so how do these general theories, these general truisms play out in this case? and i submit that dr. feingold's theory and data based on the world at large again do not fit mrs. jewett. let us talk about it. first, fact number one, what is the fact? mrs. jewett was not immunosuppressed. how do we know? you saw the hematology records. from them you know mrs. jewett did not have ttp when she first was admitted to the hospital in september of 2006. you know that the levels of immunosuppressants in her blood during the entire time she was in the hospital were below the therapeutic dose. you know that her white blood cell count, part of your immune system, the white blood cells, fight infections. they were measured each day, sometimes more than once. and you know that her white blood cell count during that hospital stay was normal 13 out of the 14 times it was measured. and crucially, you know that her treating hematologist ruled out immunosuppressant drugs as a cause of her ttp. was not the drugs, they said. and you know that dr. alvarez did not list tobacco use as contributing to her death at all. end of story. end of story. well, another fact about that sequence of treatments. you know that when she was in the hospital and they ruled out the immunosuppressant drugs, i think it was tacrolimus at the time, they kept her on it. if she had ttp that was caused by immunosuppressant drugs would they have done that; would that make any sense? no. they kept her on it. okay. only dr. feingold said otherwise, even though he is not a hematologist. so who are you going to believe, dr. feingold, a professional witness who was testifying outside of his field, or mrs. jewett's treating physicians and her medical records? as his honor has made clear in the instructions that he is given you and that you will take back with you, it is entirely up to you who to believe. who to believe. fact number two. mrs. jewett did not die of lung rejection. again, you saw the medical records. when mrs. jewett was in the hospital and was being treated she had 16 bronchoscopies to check for lung rejection. only two of them indicated some mild or minimal issues, and that occurred two and-a-half years before she died. there was no evidence of lung rejection from the bronchoscopies from may 2004 through september of 2006 when she passed away. and, importantly, none of the treatment that she received when she was in the hospital in her final stay was for lung rejection. ask yourself, if lung rejection caused mrs. jewett's death, do not you think dr. alvarez, who was on the transplant team and who was caring for her in that final hospital stay, would have known about it and would have put it on the death certificate? it is not there. if there were a shred of doubt, and i submit there is not, it was dispelled by drs. ambinder and frazier. and i want to draw a contrast between them and dr. feingold. they limited their testimony to the subjects in which they are expert. now, in cross examination mr. matthews got dr. ambinder to try to talk about everything, including stuff he was not an expert in. and he kept saying, you know, i'm not really an expert, but if you are asking what i think, here it is. okay. and, you know, as part of that testimony he probably got some things wrong, but when it came to hematology he was rock solid. and both dr. ambinder and dr. frazier, they do not make their living testifying all the time. they are busy treating patients. they did not have big egos. they were straightforward with you. they gave short and understandable answers. they did not prattle on and fight all the time. and, importantly, their answers confirmed what you already knew from mrs. jewett's treating physicians and from the medical records. the evidence on this last issue strongly favors the defense. mrs. jewett's copd did not cause her death. again i'm getting ready to sit down. i hope there is not a round of applause this time. but i do not get to talk to you again. plaintiff's counsel do. and so as you listen to their final closing think about the evidence, and as you do think about how i might have responded. let me close again by thanking each of you for being here. we really appreciate it. thanks a bunch. mr. geary: ladies and gentlemen, good morning. on behalf of dan weiner and lorillard, i want to thank you for your participation in this process and for your service. we know it is not easy, and we know you have worked hard, and we appreciate very much your service. you cannot be thanked too many times. now, when you were -- when you began the process you were 1 of 150 or so people who might have been jurors, and you are the ones who were selected because you said, i can be fair, i can be impartial and treat both parties the same, i can apply the facts to the law and make a decision. and one of the things that you said was, if it is not proven that mrs. jewett is addicted, not proven, then can i can return a verdict for the defendants. and if it is shown that her claim should be time barred i can return a verdict for the defendants on that issue as well. so this is about applying the facts to the law. and you heard from his honor what the law is in this case. and the form of verdict which you will get really guides your decision making. it is sort of a roadmap, and i want to talk about a few of the questions on that verdict form. now, the first question is about copd and the second question is about addiction. now, i'm going to talk about the addiction question first. and the addiction question has really two parts to it plaintiff has to prove: was mrs. jewett addicted? and if so, did smoking during the addiction cause her copd? now, i want to talk about whether she was addicted, because that is really what you look at first. and if you find she was not addicted you do not have to worry about causation on that question. so i want to go back to the beginning of the case though and say this. what -- what -- what is this case about? okay. it is about mrs. jewett, and it is about what she knew and her experiences. it is not about what mr. jewett knew or thought, and not about what the children knew or thought about her copd. it is about what she knew and thought, her experiences. and indeed it is about control. and that is the point about addiction. and what is the standard? what determines if someone is addicted? you heard it over and over. the 2010 surgeon general's report, the primary criteria is highly controlled by the cigarette. and we will talk about that more in just a minute. but control is the issue. she was not controlled by cigarettes, and she was not addicted. now, one thing that i think is important to note here is this. you have heard about warnings on the packages of cigarettes, and there are some questions in voir dire about when that started. in mrs. jewett's situation every pack of cigarettes that she smoked from had a warning on it. she never smoked a cigarette from a pack that did not have a warning on it. now, let us go to a2. was -- was mrs. jewett addicted to cigarettes? and again we heard some talk about, well, causation and so forth, and what contributed and what was a factor. the first question is, was mrs. jewett addicted? what is the standard? the 2010 surgeon general's report, the 1988 surgeon general's report said the same thing, the common element of all the definitions is control, and did the substance control the user? did the cigarettes control mrs. jewett? and even dr. feingold on power point 41, which he did not see, but he talked about, said the same thing, the primary criterion is control. so who is -- who is in control of mrs. jewett's life decisions? i'm going to back up a little bit. independent of smoking she made some very serious decisions throughout her life; where to live, when to get married, raising her children. and she did so much of this while mr. jewett was gone working. she took care of business. she worked hard. she took care of her family, and she made a lot of decisions, and smoking was no exception. you heard from dr. kaplan about how she controlled her smoking regarding places, around certain people, and how she reduced her smoking, five cigarettes a day, quit at intervals with no problems. she was in control. cigarettes did not control her. and the burden of proof on this issue is on the plaintiff to prove that she was controlled, and she was not. now, you saw some statistics earlier about 5 percent of people quitting on the first attempt. sometimes it takes more than one attempt, and that was the case with mrs. kaplan -- excuse me -- mrs. jewett. what were the statistics here? 50 million people have quit. and you have heard some talk about cigarettes. what did they quit? the cigarettes that have been talked about. 50 million people have quit, and mrs. jewett indeed was one of them. she quit the same cigarettes. now, what is the burden of proof? it is not just to bring you evidence or someone talking about things. it is to bring you evidence that is more persuasive and convincing. now, what have you heard here? in the opening so far on the other side you did not hear anything about mrs. jewett's choices or the choices that she made about her cigarettes. what you heard about was, well, she smoked for quite a while, for many years. that is not the standard. there is much more to it than that, and dr. kaplan told you about that. now let us go to a3. and we saw this from the 2010 report, we put it up on the screen, and the criteria -- the primary criteria is highly controlled. highly controlled. did cigarettes highly control mrs. jewett? they did not. dr. kaplan at a4 said this, said she was not controlled by cigarettes. and then at a5 he talked about why not. well, her pattern of use. able to reduce to five cigarettes a day with no problem. dr. wyzan explained that. three to four cigarettes per week with no problem, no withdrawal symptoms, no difficulties because of that. how did she smoke her cigarettes? not all the way down. she left a quarter to a third unsmoked. and if the question here is was she controlled by the nicotine in cigarettes, i say that is important. she was not controlled. she made her decisions as to how she smoked, when she smoked, and how she stopped. and when she stopped she stopped because she wanted to and because she was motivated. and you heard that motivation is important. now, i want to talk a little bit about witness credibility, and dr. feingold on the one hand and dr. kaplan on the other. and indeed, dr. feingold has testified for many, many years, and he is made a lot of money doing it. $20 million. dr. feingold said basically she was addicted because she smoked a lot. he really ignored the 2010 surgeon general's definition and what the 1988 surgeon general's report said was the common element of the definitions over time, control. he did not really talk about that. he did not talk about really the facts of the case. dr. kaplan did in great detail, and with no outline in front of him, because he had studied the mass amount of medical records and the depositions. now, when you think about the witnesses, think about this. today dr. kaplan is probably seeing patients, that is probably what dr. frazier is doing. dr. ambinder is working in his field. dr. feingold probably is testifying. you are entitled to put whatever weight you want on the experts. i would submit to you that what dr. feingold brought to was not convincing, and it was not -- it was not persuasive when you take all that into account. now, dr. kaplan explained that under the current scientific literature about half of regular smokers are addicted and half are not, and that he sees the same thing in his clinical practice, half are, half are not. in his opinions for court cases it is half are and half are not. and his opinion about mrs. jewett was that she was not addicted because she was not controlled, not by cigarettes. now, you saw -- you saw references in the medical records to opinions by other physicians -- and we asked dr. kaplan about that -- other physicians who said, i think she is dependent, she may have tobacco abuse. what about that? well, you saw a lot of depositions, you heard about them, mr. jewett's, the children, friends, thousands of pages of medical records studied by dr. kaplan. we are not expecting all the treaters to have done it, and do not know what standard they are using. in jury selection we asked you, would you be willing to consider a serious definition of addiction in a case like this, and everyone said yes. and that serious definition is highly controlled. we do not know what standard the treaters were using when they made those references, but we know what standard dr. kaplan used, because he explained. now, what about fagerstrom? you have heard a lot of talk about that. okay. dr. feingold said this: it is not designed as a diagnostic tool to diagnose whether a person is nicotine addicted. well, that is why we are here. that is what that question is. that test is not designed for that, and dr. feingold said, i did not use it. i, dr. feingold, did not use it. the dsm-iv, the big book about how to diagnose, dr. kaplan explained it. and the requirement under the dsm-iv to be addicted is this: does the pattern of use cause a clinically significant impairment of the way the person lives their life regarding their work, families, important activities. it is a measure of impact on behavior. it is a way of looking at control. are you losing control because we are seeing some problems in the rest of your life? not so with mrs. kaplan -- not so with mrs. jewett. excuse me. she was able to work and take care of her family day in and day out, and take care of business. she was not impaired in the way she lived her life when she smoked. medical impairment is an entirely different issue. it is not about whether a person gets a disease, it is about whether they are controlled. now let us go to a6. let us talk about mrs. jewett's symptoms. dr. wyzan said this, and again it is 1995, and she is cut down to three cigarettes, five cigarettes a day, and dr. wyzan says about mrs. jewett, no problems, no lack of concentration, irritability, frustration, anger, no insomnia, no restlessness, no problems. that is dr. wyzan. what did mr. jewett say about mrs. jewett? let us go to a7. no serious attempts to stop before 2001. and when she quit, no withdrawal symptoms, and nothing different about mrs. jewett after she quit because she quit. no withdrawal problems noticed by mr. jewett about mrs. jewett. again the issue on addiction is control. mrs. jewett was able to control. she was not proven to be addicted, and in fact, she was not. now, i want to shift gears a little bit and talk about question one, and that is -- and that is the question about copd, the statute of limitations question. and again the question there is whether before the date, may of 1990, mrs. jewett knew or should have known that she had copd, and whether she knew or should have known that her copd could possibly, could possibly have been caused by smoking. so it is two parts. it is about the disease and what mrs. jewett knew or should have known about it. okay. on the first part -- and let us go -- let us go to b2. and you have heard this before. the defendants do not need to prove that mrs. jewett was diagnosed at all. there is no dispute about that. if -- and this is if -- it was not this way, but if mrs. jewett had only symptoms of emphysema back in the 80's, was aware of them, ignored them, did not want to go to the doctor, did not want to find out about it, and had reason to know the symptoms could have been caused by smoking, the result is the same. that is a claim that is barred as well. we do not need a diagnosis to win on this issue, because it is about what she should have done and should have known. well, here there is much more than that. we have her medical records where she says repeatedly, i was diagnosed before 1990. confused? one time on an er visit, but not the rest of the time. she was not a confused person. you saw it on the video, you see it in the medical records, you hear it when people talk about her. and these statements were made over many, many different years. she was not confused when she told her doctors when it was that she was diagnosed. now, when daughter, sarah, watched the pbs video she said, she looks good, she looks good in the video, and she was not confused. mrs. jewett made impressive and impactful decisions throughout her life, including -- including the last decade. she was not confused. now, in the pbs video she said she was diagnosed 26 years before, and mr. jewett is sitting right next to her and did not make the correction. and it was not a mistake. let us go to -- it was not a mistake because just a couple weeks later she said the same thing in a different way to dr. wyzan when she said -- it was not dr. wyzan, it was dr. weiss, excuse me, when she said, i was diagnosed at age 25. that is 1979. she is saying the same thing in a different way. so it was not a mistake. okay. now, the pbs video. i do not want to make too big an issue about this, but mr. jewett said he had a -- he had a hunch that the video might be harmful to his case. what i would say is this. the case does not turn on the video. the limitations issue can be proven with dr. frazier's testimony all by itself when he did the math and said based on how bad it was in 1995 she must have had it back in the 80's, and it would have been symptomatic, and she would have known about it, and it could have been diagnosed. and, in fact, dr. feingold said the same thing. dr. wyzan said the same thing. you can subtract all the statements and all the medical records, and just based on what dr. frazier says about the mathematics, how bad it must have been back in the 80's, the result is the same. the statements in the medical records add to it, the pbs video adds to it, but the point is this. she did have copd back in the 80's, it is clear, because she had a lot of symptom of it, and that was explained by -- by a lot of folks. now, let us go to -- let us go to b8. all right. again dr. wyzan. he said it would not be surprising if she had copd in 1987. he agreed with that. that is fine. and let us go to the next one. dr. feingold said this. he said a physician could have diagnosed mrs. jewett with emphysema in 1988. let us go to the next one. dr. frazier. he said this: by the mid 80's she would have had moderate to severe copd -- and this is really undisputed, it is just the mathematics of going backwards -- based on the very severe pft data that was obtained by dr. wyzan in '95. what about the '89? severe copd, and he had never seen a patient who would have had that severity who did not have significant complications. now let us go to b11. okay. what about doctors? during the 80's mrs. jewett went to doctors, and we know that because the witnesses have said that. we just do not have the medical records. we also know this oldest daughter, jeanette, said that she played medical information close to her vest. she did not want to worry the family. she did not talk about it. she did not talk about it with her family. and daughter, sarah, said she would keep a lot of things from us about her health. okay. so what did mr. -- what did mr. jewett say? let us go to b12. he said -- he said, well -- he said, it is possible she was diagnosed by a doctor before dr. wyzan and she did not tell me. and that is understandable because mrs. jewett did not say much about those things. and that is in response to a question by mr. jewett's lawyers, and he agreed with that; yes, it is possible, and that makes sense. dr. wyzan said he recalls her being shocked during the visit. and it was put to you earlier, shocked for what reason. shocked because of the very severe pft data, and learning that now you have got very severe emphysema? we do not know. but here's something that does not make sense. if mrs. jewett is shocked by that information in 1995, in early 1995, would mr. jewett have taken a job in 1995 that put him in the middle east for two and-a-half years? no, he would not. now, the second part of question 1 is did mrs. jewett know, or should she have known that smoking might have caused her copd a reasonable possibility? it does not require us to prove it that she knew it for sure. it only requires that we prove that she knew or should have known that there was a reasonable possibility of it being caused by smoking. should have known. a reasonable possibility. that is not a diagnosis. now, so what is the evidence in this question? we know that mrs. jewett was smart and capable and very intelligent. let us go to c3. and mr. jewett said this. he said, well, when she had symptoms of copd he attributed it to her smoking, which makes sense, and he believes she attributed it to her smoking as well. that also makes sense, because she is a smart person. so what -- what were those symptoms? let us go to c4. so these are people who saw mrs. jewett. mr. jewett said she had coughing and wheezing and shortness of breath. and c6 -- actually c5. and mrs. -- mrs. jewett, what did she say to dr. ottaviana in 2001. she said that she had wheezing and whistling and coughing and chest tightness back in the 80's. this comes from mrs. jewett. these are her symptoms. and when she had these symptoms she attributed them to smoking. and that makes all the sense in the world. it really does. what else? let us go to c8. daughter -- daughter, sarah, said in the late 80's -- in the late 80's -- and this is before 1990 -- mrs. jewett had a deep nasty recurrent and persistent cough, and she was concerned about it. she asked her mom about it, and her mom said, i'm going to go see the doctor. did not say what the outcome was, but went to see the doctor. there were doctors' visits. so what else? let us go to again friends of the family. kevin powers and debra thorn at c7. before '84 -- and again they are in virginia, the jewetts are in virginia. debra thorn says a bronchitis-like cough back in the first part of the 80's, and kevin powers, a hacking cough with phlegm throughout the day. and that is the same thing that mrs. jewett said to dr. ottaviana in that handwritten note, in her own handwriting from mrs. jewett. so what are doctors saying back then? let us go to c8. okay. if someone goes to the doctor in the 80's and they have got problems with emphysema, what are they told by the doctor? you need to quit smoking because smoking is what causes it. should she have heard that? would she have heard that? of course. of course. because -- let us go to c9 -- in 1985 that was on the packs, smoking causes emphysema. doctors knew that, patients were being told that smoking causes emphysema. and mrs. jewett was no exception to that. now, i'm just about finished. on the verdict form, the second question is about addiction, and mr. biersteker has already told you about, well, if she was addicted then did that really cause something? the answer to that is no. but was she addicted? that is really the first question. the answer to that question is no. okay. the first question is did she know about her copd? that is that question. the answer to that question is yes. and if the answer to question 1 is yes, you are done. now, plaintiff -- the plaintiff has rebuttal and the chance to talk to you one last time, and we do not, and that is fine, those are the rules. the plaintiff has the burden of proof on a lot of issues. when you are hearing rebuttal i want you to think about what dr. kaplan might say and what dr. frazier might say, what mr. biersteker, what ms. luther, and even what i might say. and i also want you to think about this. what did mrs. jewett say in the medical records? and would she say something different -- i just want to just play the very first part -- would she say something different from this? (the following video clip was played as transcribed by the reporter as follows.) let us talk a little bit about your medical history, barbara. you were sick for a while before your transplant. yes, i was sick 26 years. i was diagnosed 26 years ago with copd. (following the video clip the following further proceedings were had.) mr. geary: and indeed that was before 1990. i thank you for your patience. i thank you for your hard work. i ask that your verdict be for the defendants on these questions. thank you.