mr. matthews: good morning. i'm going to be giving you the plaintiff's side of this case on two points. the first would be the statute of limitations, it is the time deadline to file the case, and second will be the cause of death and then mr. wilner is going to talk about this addiction thing that i do not understand. i'm not going to -- i'm not going to really do a whole lot of arguing, even though i do that to present mr. jewett's side of the case. i'm not going to try to twist any words or use any artful language as has occurred some in this trial, and i'm just trying to go logically, step by step, see where that -- where we wind up when i do that. i do not think i'm going to change your mind, to tell you the truth, but we got to do this. i think you already know what is going on, and i'm not going to be able to cover everything, but you have heard everything, and i'm sure if i leave something out, somebody will let you know or you will remember. and this is my -- this is my first go at one of these tobacco trials, so this has kind of been interesting to me. kind of learning as i go along kind of like you are. and it is kind of been an interesting eye-opening experience. so i hope it has not been boring for you. i do not think it has, to tell you the truth. mr. jewett does not get to speak, even though he wants to, so he asked me to thank you. he is ex-military, kind of stoic guy, as you saw on the stand, but he asked me to thank you because he knows this is inconvenient. and it is inconvenient, but it is also a civic duty that is unique to the united states, and you could have lived somewhere else and you would not have to do this, but it is probably better off that you are here and have to do this every once in a while. him being a military guy, he wanted to make sure i told you that. this is a serious, serious case. you know what this lady went through. you know what some of these issues are and -- go ahead and put up the first one. so let us just get to what you got to decide. and the first question you have got to decide, which the defendants have the burden of proof on is: did barbara jewett know or should she have known before may 5, 1990 that she had copd and that it was caused by smoking cigarettes? of course, in brackets we put "no" because that is what we want you to say. they are going to want you to say "yes" to that. but, in this case, that is the defendant's burden of proof. that is a defense that they have raised. they have got to show you enough evidence, the greater weight of the evidence has to play for them on this issue. now, on the other two issues, the plaintiff will have the burden of proof, but we will get to those in a minute. skip the next one and go to the third. so, to win on this statute of limitations issue where they have the burden of proof, the defendants have to show that mrs. jewett knew or should have known before may 5, 1990 that she had copd, that is the first thing. did she know or should she have known before may 1990 that she had copd? and then they also have to prove in addition to that that if she knew it or should have known it, that she knew or should have known that there was a reasonable possibility it was caused by her cigarette smoking, and she had to know that before may 5th, 1990 also. so let us look at -- you already heard the differing sides, but let us look at -- let us look at both sides of the evidence in this case. and they say that she was diagnosed before may 1990 because she says she was, the doctors and on the pbs documentary. but they say but if she -- if she was just mistaken or confused then, well, that is okay too because even then if she was mistaken or confused, she should have diagnosed herself. she should have figured this all out before may 1990. so let us look at both sides and see where we wind up. so what i've done here is i went through everything i could find where the evidence about whether she knew or should have known before may 1990 was favorable to the defense and -- because of course it is or we would not be here talking about it. it is a legitimate issue. and the first one that i came up with, and i think i got all of these, but you took notes -- some of you took a lot of notes. and if i did not come up with them all, i'm sure the defense will point them out to you. but the first is there was mr. [power's who deposition was read and he said she had a smokers' cough in the mid-'70s, and of course we know that in the -- he must have had his dates mixed up because he lived in virginia in the mid-'70s and the jewetts lived in new jersey during that period of time, so there must have been some time after that. but he did say that she had a smokers' cough back then. and then she said in the pbs film that it was 25 years ago, and that would have put her back to 1980 or 1979, so you saw her say that, she -- had a deposition with deborah thorne. she said she remembered barbara having a cough after she moved to florida in 1982. barbara actually moved to florida in 1984, but that is still before 1990. and it sounded like a bronchitis cough, so she had a cough. that may have had something to do with it. then dr. frazier, he said that according to her pulmonary function test, that from 1995 on, that she must have had severe copd in the mid-1980s, and i'm going to come back and talk about that later. he basis that on the rate of progression of the disease. but we are going to talk about that opinion in a little bit. and then there is some testimony from janet dioguardi, barbara jewett's sister, about moving to -- i really did not follow this, but moving to south carolina in 1991 and maybe sometime before then when they spoke, that she used to get bronchitis a lot. of course, they read part of that deposition. we read the other part where it said it was after 1991, which i'll show you in a minute, but that is some evidence that they cited is favorable to them. in her deposition, sarah milliken, who you saw here who did a pretty courageous job, in my opinion, even though they tried to make her look a little bit bad. she testified in her deposition that was taken back in october 2010 that her mother's breathing difficulty started after a trip they took to new york, niagara falls, when sarah was 12. that is what she said in her deposition. that would have been before 1990 because that was 1989. later sarah thought about it and said, "you know what, tommy drove when we went and that means he was 16, so that means we did not go to niagara falls until 1992." but she did say that in her deposition. so they brought that up as favorable to them. go to the next one. and then, we get -- starting in 2001, we will get to these questionnaires that she filled out or maybe it is some things that she told doctors, and there are several of these. she -- dr. ottaviani said, "how many years have you had this cough?" now, of course, a cough does not mean that you have copd, but it could be evidence of it. so they bring that up and she said she had a cough for 15 years, which means she would have had a cough in 1986, for whatever that is worth. and then they said to dr. ottaviani, "how many years have you raised phlegm or mucus?" she said ten years, which of course would have been 1991, which is after 1990. and then, "when did you have wheezing and whistling in your chest?" and she said at age 34, so that is another thing that was brought up. dr. ottaviani also stated in his records -- go to the next page, please -- that she was diagnosed 15 years ago, which would have been 1986, with severe copd, she told him that, and that she had a cough, that she relates the cough productive of sputum, that would have been 15 years which would have been 1986. so she told dr. ottaviani that she had severe copd since 1986. go to the next. and then she told a social worker that she got copd in 1989. she told a psychiatrist, it was 1987. she told a thoracic surgeon it was 1988. she told dr. crossfield, i think he is at the mayo clinic, that it was 1984, and then she told another doctor at the mayo clinic she had been on prednisone steroid for about 25 years everyday which means she would have been on steroids everyday since 1979. so that is -- that is what they say, they say that because of all these things, that shows that she knew about copd or she should have known about it before 1990. now, let us see what the evidence is that is favorable to the plaintiff. well, deborah thorne, they read her deposition and she said she did not remember barbara having a cough in '76 when kevin powers said she did. of course, she was mistaken about the date too because the jewetts actually lived in new jersey when all this was going on. next is the life insurance questionnaire that i'll probably show you a little bit in a minute, but you remember the life insurance questionnaire that barbara filled out in 1986 where she essentially says she did not have anything wrong with her and she was a normal, healthy woman. when you fill out a life insurance questionnaire, it is a pretty important document. that is something she did in 1986, not in 2001, not when her memory may have faded. then sarah testified that her mother had a cough in the late '80s and used an inhaler for seasonal allergies. and, again, that is -- this cough thing comes up. you know, just because you have a cough does not mean you know that you have a severe lung disease. sarah also said that her mom was normal, healthy mom. they went on vacations all up and down the east coast, and that she was not sick during that time, and she did not show any symptoms until they got back, after they got back from niagara falls in 1992. in fact, she talked about her mom pushing her aunt around who was in a wheelchair, pushing her around in a wheelchair at niagara falls. it does not sound like somebody who is severely impaired at that time from copd or should know that she is. so, of course, we cite that as being favorable to us. and that is direct testimony from sarah. that is not a medical record written down a few years later. in janet dioguardi's deposition, she talked about how there was this bronchitis or she felt like she had bronchitis. she talked about that that was -- eventually, as you got down the question, we find out, well, that was not until after 1991 when barbara talked to janet about bronchitis. so it was not before 1990. it was after 1991. and then sarah testified some more that -- and we talked about the breathing difficulties started on a trip that she took to new york. this is when she said she was 12, which would have put it in 1989, but we know that trip to new york did not occur, as you can see later down there, until 1992 because tommy drove and he was 16. slide it down a little. barbara saw dr. wyzan for the first time. and dr. wyzan is probably a pretty important witness in this case. there is one witness in this case who was not biased, and that is dr. wyzan. he was a treating doctor. these other experts and doctors, some of them are paid by the plaintiff, some of them are paid by the defendants. sarah is the daughter, thomas is the husband, but dr. wyzan is just the doctor. and i would think, you may not, that his testimony should be given pretty good weight since he is her doctor, saw her 34 times, and said that she was shocked when he told her about copd. let us keep going on. you know, we are going to look at this again briefly, but you remember that dr. wyzan's records showed that she told him she had been having breathing problems for about three years and that was 1995. the only pulmonary function test -- and that is how you diagnose copd, a pulmonary function test. the first one is 1995. that is dr. wyzan's. dr. wyzan said she was shocked. he said she had very severe emphysema. and sarah testified that she -- she never knew about her mom having copd until her mom told her in march of 1995 after dr. wyzan had diagnosed her. so, in order to believe the defense case, you have to believe that barbara jewett knew before 1990 or should have known before 1990 that she had severe -- she had this severe copd but she just did not tell anybody. she did not tell her own husband, she did not tell her daughter. she just kept it a secret. which, of course, probably is not really the case. dr. ottaviani's questionnaire, she put her copd in -- or cough in 1986, her phlegm in 1991, after 1990. and then dr. ottaviani's questionnaire said that she was diagnosed 15 years ago with severe copd. well, where did that come -- that severe copd come from? that is because she heard it from wyzan. she told dr. ottaviani six years after she had been diagnosed by dr. wyzan with severe copd that she had been diagnosed 15 years ago. and, of course, we say she got her dates mixed up because people get their dates mixed up. the lawyers in this trial got their dates mixed up numerous times on both sides. her questionnaire to dr. solomon when she was now going to be fitted for a lung transplant or worked up for a lung transplant in 2001, "how many years have you had this cough?" "eight years." well, that puts it back to 1993, that is after 1990, of course. "how many times have you raised phlegm?" "eight years." that would be 1993. "when did you have this wheezing and whistling and chest tightness?" "1990." we do not know if it was before may or after may 1990, but that is on the solomon question. and then he says, "about 15 years ago, because her husband's job caused him to move to jacksonville, florida, she was seen by dr. wyzan." of course, we know she was not seen by dr. wyzan 15 years before 2001. she had her dates mix up. just like she did when she talked to these other doctors. she told dr. hercl, the internist, that she had had copd for ten years, which would have been 1991. so the reason i bring up the evidence as favorable to both sides, and i'm going to go through a little bit more of it again, is that is not there evidence on both sides, but is not the greater weight of the evidence, the testimony and the commonsense? does not that not favor the defendants? they did not meet their burden of proof. it is iffy at best, but it is probable that she made a mistake when she was talking to these people. and it is interesting that she made these mistakes starting about 2001 in the records, not before then. 2001, after six years of having severe copd, eventually going on oxygen, being debilitated, having respiration problems, having hypoxemia, which is lack of oxygen according to dr. wyzan, and going through all of the things she went through, it is no wonder she could not remember exactly what these dates were. she made a mistake. and then she gets on the pbs thing and says 25 years ago. with her severe copd, if she would have been diagnosed that long ago, she would not have made it to dr. wyzan in 1995. i'm going to go through some of these things that we have already mentioned pretty quick and -- next slide, please. first of all, we are going to hear this, but if you cough, you may have acute bronchitis. acute bronchitis, when you have periodic episodes of bronchitis, is not chronic bronchitis, when you are just doing it all the time. and you may hear about that later on so i will not bring that up. this is the insurance application you have seen -- keep going -- where she says she is a normal, healthy woman and no emphysema. next. the questionnaire for dr. wyzan, she is not on prednisone and she is not got any illnesses. she filled that out in 1995. he says she had respiratory problems starting three years ago, 1992, and that she had had this cough for 40 days back in 1995, that is when it had started being persistent. there is the questionnaire that we have talked about. keep going. this is the dr. wyzan 15 years ago thing which, of course, she did not move to jacksonville 15 years before that. so remember that, you know, people make mistakes with dates. now, today it is easy to come in here and criticize her and say, well, she messed up her own case back then because she just misremembered these things. but she did not really. she knew exactly what she was talking about and she knew she was diagnosed back then. that does not make sense. dr. frazier testified about the rate of progression -- keep going -- and dr. wyzan diagnosed her with severe premature emphysema. she had severe emphysema. dr. frazier, i kind of like dr. frazier. he was not one of these expert on being an expert. he is first time so he actually tried to do a pretty good job, i think. he said there is this rate of progression and so he thinks she probably had this disease back in the '80s because of the progression of the disease, and she probably did have it some back in the '80s. the question is should she have known she had copd back then? dr. wyzan said, if you will remember, this was severe copd and that she had progressed rapidly. so she could have gotten it in the '80s, but by the time it started progressing, it does not mean that she had it in 1979 or the mid-'80s or something like that. and dr. frazier admitted, he conceded that different people have different rates of progression. so the fact that she may have had it does not mean that she knew she had it or that she was diagnosed with it. it just means it was there, it had not come out yet, and nobody had figured it out yet. so i bring this up because she had these respiratory problems and went through comas and things like this, and then she had to start telling people and remembering dates. no wonder she could not remember. okay. we are going to talk really quick about this cause of death thing. and what i want to do is go to the death certificate. now, you remember that -- can you pull it up a little bit? you remember that -- i'll read it. i forgot where i'm talking about. you remember that dr. alvarez stated in the mayo records that the ttp was caused most likely by the infections, and so how do you connect the dots? let us do that. let us skip this and keep going. all right. here we go. now, you know you get a lung transplant, you got to take antirejection drugs, you have got to depress the immunity system, your body cannot fight infection, you heard all that ad nauseam. so she smoked cigarette. that caused her to have copd, that is undisputed. that caused her to have a lung transplant to try to prolong her life, which means she now could not cough. she would aspirate things, get them in her lungs. sometimes she had episodes of that that can damage the lung. she developed this bronchiolitis obliterans syndrome, bos. that is irreversible. it is eventually going to get you. and she had these antirejection drugs which depressed her immune system and by the time she got there in august or september of 2006, she had pancreatitis, kidney dysfunction, severe headaches. she had thrombocytopenia. remember, she had had thrombocytopenia severe before in 1995. it just had not tipped over into ttp at that time because she was not so worn out then, back in 2005. by 2006, she was just worn out. she had been through so much that she could not fight off these things and the ttp developed. she had bleeding ulcers, esophagus ulcers, stomach ulcers, and then she got these viral infections. and it is the infections that everybody said caused the ttp, except dr. frazier, but then he conceded that he would defer to the hematologist, dr. ambinder, who i'm not a big fan of, but he said it was caused by the infections, and dr. alvarez at the mayo clinic said it was most likely caused by the infections. and so these infections that caused the ttp that led to her death were all caused because she got copd and had a lung transplant, that is the end result of that. and we see who said that. let me put this on the overhead. this is going to be the last thing. there is a difference -- and you will have the death certificate with you. there is a difference on the death certificate's definition of cause. and i wrote this down. i did not have a -- i'm not a computer guy, i'm sorry. but the immediate cause on the death certificate is what is listed. the immediate cause was ttp. and it was the immediate cause, that is the straw that broke the camel's back. but that is not what you have to decide. the judge instructed you on legal cause. and legal cause is, was it naturally or -- was it directly connected to her death in natural and continuous sequence? did it contribute substantially to producing her injury or death? in a natural and continuous sequence, there is no doubt that the ttp is related back to her getting copd. i really said i was not going to argue, now i'm going to. i do not think this cause of death thing is an issue. the ttp was related to the whole thing. it just did not crop up all of the sudden and kill someone who had been through everything she had went through. it was related to her infections. it was all in the medical literature and all the witnesses told you. so three is an easier question. on the statute of limitation, it is the defendants who have the burden of proof. and when you weigh both sides and you -- one side is relying almost totally on a debilitated sick lady's memory and the other side is relying on testimony of her treating doctor and her family. and i think even if the plaintiffs had the burden of proof, they would have carried it, but i would not think the defendants would have carried it on that issue. now mr. wilner is going to talk about addiction. and i wish i could, but he is more of an expert on that. thank you very much. i appreciate your time. mr. wilner: thank you, your honor. well, it was nice to see barbara jewett back sort of, and counsel makes this dramatic thing about it, but, you know, the interesting thing, there is a couple reasons, i'll start with this -- with the diagnosis business, but -- because it is -- it is pretty clear when you put this together it is a bunch of -- it is a bunch of snipits here and there, and it is a lady who got her dates wrong pretty clearly, but... all right. item 1. if -- people get their dates wrong all the time. look at what barbara jewett -- and this is no problem, there is nothing wrong with her except she was sick as could be. there was a lot wrong with her. what she said about her -- her smoking history -- and you will have this in the records -- is it jumps all over the place too. like she tells dr. wyzan she was a smoker for 22 years in 1996, which is not quite right, because she started earlier than that. but okay. then she tells dr. ottaviana she smoked for 32 years in 2001. well, that is not quite right either, but it is closer. but they both cannot be right. and then she tells at the usf pulmonary disease -- this is dr. solomon -- 20 years again. so she is made a 12-year error in smoking history, you know. but the fact is that was not that important. she was a long-time smoker. you know, i mean, they are not going to go, was it 20 years, 30 years. it does not matter because you know by that time the damage is done. then there is an indication of 30 years from the same institution in 2001, another ten-year difference. and it goes on. so here's another one in 2002, says smoked from age 14 until 47. that is even a different estimate. here's another one in 2002, octavia pajaro: she has a long history of smoking, she started when she was 13 and smoked 35 years. so along with these various estimates of when she says she was diagnosed are wild estimates about smoking, which is not unusual, because people have a hard time remembering back, and she had been through so much. she had been -- she was at death's door by that time. so that is number one. it is just more fodder for lawyers than it is for anything else that people are not challenged, of course, when they give these diagnose -- when they say, i was diagnosed a long time ago. but i have some really good proof of why -- why this -- this thing is all a -- all a big nothing, and dr. wyzan was the one who diagnosed her. and, incidentally, we totally disagree. as you might imagine, we disagree with the tobacco companies a lot, you know. she did need to be diagnosed. you cannot be -- you cannot walk into court -- you know what this is like, you know, all the -- all the experts and the digging into everything -- and, and just claim that you have got a cigarette-related disease and never get diagnosed. they are saying she should have filed a case on cough, because she felt bad, or coughed one day and did not cough the next. and remember, all the doctors have said emphysema is permanent. it is the air sacs in your lung is gone. and so, yeah, sure she had coughs. i do not know. everybody has coughs, i guess, at times with colds. big deal. she is supposed to go into court and -- and, you know, whenever that was, have this thing in 19- -- before 1990, i have a cold, i have a cough, and go through this? ridiculous. ridiculous. all right. but here's -- here's some -- here's something else. here's something to think about. in 1987 they were living here in jacksonville. now, this is really interesting, because the more we thought about it the more we realized this is really -- there is no answer to it. i'm trying to find a blank piece of paper. sorry. all right. so in 1987 the jewetts are here in jacksonville where dr. wyzan is, and dr. ruedas -- r-u -- help me -- r-u-e-d-a-s, beethoven ruedas, what a great name beethoven ruedas. anyway, he did see her. i mean, he did not have any records, but he saw her. so they jump on that, oh, dr. ruedas must have diagnosed. no. wait, wait. hold on. dr. ruedas is the one who referred her to dr. wyzan, because he is just a gp, and he refers her to dr. wyzan, and dr. wyzan's letter back to dr. ruedas says thank you for, you know, referring ms. jewett to her. and guess what? she is got emphysema. so if dr. ruedas was on top of that, knew about it, and diagnosed it, well, dr. wyzan would not have sent the letter like that that says she is got emphysema, and he would have had the records from dr. ruedas at that time, or something, or he would have called dr. ruedas. there would have been some communication there that ruedas had diagnosed her. in all, what had happened is he followed her, she was getting worse, she was not responding, she was on the decline, and he went, over my head, go to a lung specialist. dr. wyzan will take care of you. and she did. and she was a lot worse than anybody thought. and i'll talk about that decline in a minute because that is real interesting. the decline, this mathematical thing. look, frazier was a good doctor, he was fine, but this little mathematical thing, that -- we did not go into that in any detail. i'm going to go into it a little more. that is not the whole answer to things. believe me. all right. so what they are trying to say is -- and jacksonville is a small medical community. they are trying to say there is a phantom doctor out here. so we do not know who he is. he is never been mentioned. never been mentioned. nobody's said a word. nobody knows who -- who is this? i should say she. you do not always say he with a doctor today. it is she. there is just as many female doctors, so i apologize, i should not have said he. so in 1980 -- in 19- -- in the late 80's, '87, '88 in jacksonville, who diagnoses emphysema. all right. now she goes in to see dr. wyzan. dr. wyzan says, thank you, dr. ruedas, you have been following her. now i'll take it over. it is serious. wait a minute. remember, this was only -- if this is 1988 or '89, and this is '95, those records existed. if they -- i mean -- i mean, they did not, because there were not any, but, i mean, those records would have existed, and dr. wyzan would have needed them. he is not stupid. he would have said, oh, you have been seeing dr. smith, you know, the phantom doctor, and i'll call over and get the records so i'll know what your history has been, because that is vitally important. i've got to know how fast this is happening. you know, he was surprised. god, you are sick. you are sick as a dog. and i -- there is nothing. i'm getting a history here. i'm sure he would have loved to see it. but it is one thing to say, oh, old records are thrown away. they are not thrown away in -- in 1995 they were not old records, and they were right next door. they were in jacksonville. so it is nutty. it is nutty, nutty. the fact is she was doing better than you could expect from someone with this bad of disease, and it was -- it was accelerating. she hit that point in her life for genetics, god knows what, where things were really starting to go bad. and they went bad on dr. ruedas, and he sent her to dr. wyzan, and that was -- and dr. wyzan diagnosed her, and that was it. and all this talk about, oh, there could have been some other doctor, ain't true, and all this talk about coughing back here in god knows when, is not true, because dr. ruedas did see her. if she had this copd thing that would have been something that would have been noted there and sent to dr. wyzan. i mean, it is simple, simple, simple. all right. a couple things on the overhead. thank you, laurie. hated to surprise you. you were all set to run a power point and i said overhead. okay. all right. item number 1 -- or maybe number 10. i do not know. and you have seen it before, but i love it. i think it is so interesting, because it kind of explains it. we talked about it before. i will not belabor it, but here it is. this is -- this is dr. solomon. this is 2001. he is in tampa. he is a good doctor. he is a lung doctor. he cares about the history a lot. and he gets it totally wrong. he says, well, she went in to see dr. wes ratliff, who is an old friend of dr. solomon, because they trade at the same place. so he says, well, she was worked up by him. well, we know that is wrong. where did that come from? he did not make it up. he got it from poor barbara, that she was first seen dr. -- she must have liked him -- wes ratliff in indiana. she did not see him until '99. so a little bit -- a little bit of confusion. and then comes the next part. and i'm sorry to have blocked you if i did. then comes the next part that lays bear this -- this fog. you know, 15 years ago her husband's job caused him to move to jacksonville. she was seen by dr. wyzan. you know why? because wyzan's name, wyzan emphysema, wyzan diagnosis, has never been changed. that is it. she just got it wrong when she saw him. she just got it wrong. and i understand that. do understand it. she put jacksonville, wyzan. they had moved several times. they would been up to indiana, they would been back. no other doctor. if there is another diagnosis where is it? i mean why did not she mention it? forget the records. why did not she mention it ever in anything? all right. one other interesting thing, then i'm not going to, like, go on an on about this stuff. dr. ottaviana -- you heard of him -- 2001 down in tampa working her up basically for a lung transplant. this is kind of the time when it is the end of the road. and it is a joke to say, oh, yeah, she managed to cut down. no lungs. you cannot smoke without lungs, and she did not have any lungs by that time. so here we go. this is fascinating. so what happens here? you saw the record, but i did not point it out before. all right. so he works her up, blah, blah, blah. this is one of these 15-years-ago things: 15 years ago diagnosed with severe copd. the words came from dr. wyzan. flip -- i think go down to the bottom, please, and flip it over. it says continued. and go down to the bottom. recommendation. we need to obtain records from dr. wyzan. well, yeah, because that is where it all starts. she evidently did say dr. wyzan that time, or else he would not say we need to get his records. if -- if she had said something else at all, or even something that led this doctor -- this was a lung doctor, solomon was. he was interested. she -- we do not have a tape-recorder, but he must have said, uh-huh, you were diagnosed when, 15 years ago, and by whom, dr. wyzan. so he says, well, we need to get the records. now, i'm sure they did, but it did not matter. she was being seen in extremis. it did not matter whether it was 15, 10, 8, 6, 2, she was there for her last chance at life, and they were trying to help her, and they almost did. they ended up doing the transplant up here at mayo. i think it was for reasons that -- you know, financial reasons, or something. all right. one more interesting thing. all these lawyers have been saying, oh, my god, look at this, this particular consult, a 60-minute consultation note with 40 minutes of face-to-face, as if they sat there and tried to dissect, well, now, was it 10 years, was it 15 years? you want to know what they were really doing? here's what they were doing. this patient, 48-year- old woman with severe chronic obstructive lung disease started smoking when she was 13. and here's what they say -- go to the next page. i'm going to have to read it here, because it is just too far for me to read: i had a long discussion with her and her husband. this is -- this is not about when you were diagnosed. this is whether you are going to live. i had a long discussion with her husband. the transplant evaluation is still not complete. as you are sitting there wondering are they going to even accept you in this program. there is no hope if you do not. can you imagine the discussion? this is not about, you know, a lawsuit, it is not about when you were diagnosed, it is about whether you are going to live. she is scheduled for right an left heart cath, because her heart is failing too. however, if they prove to show no significant pulmonary hypertension and no significant coronary artery disease i would be willing to list her as a lung transplant. i did explain to them that with her severe debilitation, wheelchair bound and oxygen dependent, she is a high risk transplant, as she would be weak. i'm not clear as yet as to whether she would be able to be done with a cardiopulmonary bypass -- because they have to take you off the -- they have to put you on that machine that breathes for you -- because it is not clear whether she would tolerate a single lung ventilation. that is the machine. this would make the operation risky, postoperative care difficult, the likelihood of lung injury higher. she understands this. i've explained to them -- and this is counseling -- about the end of life maybe for a risky procedure, whether you are going to do it or not. and they are making this into like, oh, yeah, we sat that and said, oh, what happened 15 years ago in jacksonville? that is just nonsense. just nonsense. all right. i've got more. whoops. i saw somebody deliberately do that just to get a rise out of people that time. somebody will have to come fix it. i will. okay. now i will ask you, if you would, to return to the power point, because i've sketched some things on some slides while i was waiting there. all right. a couple more things on this topic, then i want to get to the meat of it. so what i would like for you to do is put up number 4 if you would, and i'll keep talking. all right. so the next thing is, well, symptoms. symptoms. coughs and everything. and, look, it is on the pack. well, here's what i say about that. mr. jewett said, and also sarah, the daughter, we did not know what emphysema is. sure it is on the package. it says emphysema. i do not know. what is that? is that a cough? no. it is a serious irreversible disease that doctors diagnose because it goes on inside your lung. so it is one thing to say, oh, yeah, federal government makes us put it on the packs, so therefore everybody knows every time they cough they are supposed to file their case, or they come in here and they are too late. that is quite a game, quite a game. she was healthy. all right. let us go, yes, back one, i think. great. thank you. thank you. these are my notes, okay, so if i've misspelled anything, i apologize. she was healthy. she had a cough. she was pushing her sister around niagara falls. she saw dr. ruedas, which i might have misspelled, and he did not diagnose her. and before 1990, you know, where is the beef? where is the beef? it is their -- you know, it is their burden. it does not exist. there is no phantom doctor. oh, okay. here's the big mathematical thing about the loss of lung. and i need my -- here's my papers to prove this. remember they said 24 percent -- this is really interesting -- 24 percent lung capacity in 1995. i'm going to take on this little math business, because i ain't buying it. it was not worked out. there were no citations. it is not in the surgeon general's report. let us see if it even makes sense. here in 2001 -- can we go back to this? you need to clone yourself. all right. this is really something. remember 24 percent in 1995. in 2001 it is down to 8 percent, fev-1, forced expiratory vital capacity 1 at one second, and dr. feingold explained all that. 8 percent. am i right? says it right there. so what does this mean? well, how do you approach it mathematically? one way is to say she lost two-thirds of her lung capacity between '95 and 2001. just as valid as anything else. fine. and so if you want to back this up from 19 -- another seven years and assume she lost that same two-thirds, which i do not think, i think it got worse at the end, but fine, she would have plenty of lung capacity. she would have three times 24 percent, or 70 -- roughly 75 percent back seven years. because you know what? genetically this was a hammer. this was not a normal progression. this was early and powerful, and it was -- and she was genetically off the charts for early disease and bad disease. so that is baloney. and i like dr. frazier, but he had her progressing just a little faster than an ordinary cigarette smoker that is not even sick. that is crazy. her lung fell apart from 24 percent to 8 percent, and there were no more steps to go. that is why they had to transplant. so where was i? where am i here? oh, yes, okay. can we -- laurie, i'm so sorry. can we go back to the power point? thank you so much. so okay. and there is nobody else who is going to come in and -- i mean, this -- this is a game where we can play a lot of different things. there is no beef here, and it is their burden of proof. so where is it? and also, quit trying to put words in mr. jewett's mouth. he never said she had symptoms before 1991. he never said it. that was a game they played. they said, well, when she had her symptoms she knew it was due to cigarettes. but they never went back and said when were you talking about. and his -- and he was very clear later on to connect it up when these bullying lawyers stopped questioning him, and he cleared it up, he said after 1991, that is when she had her symptoms. so big deal. maybe i'm -- i'm just beating a horse here. i do not know. all right. next slide, please. and again, hindsight. can you imagine her coming in and filing this now with nothing? they have the burden of proof. no doctor but -- but dr. wyzan. i already covered that. next please. let us talk about addiction. this is really something. i guess -- i mean, i listened to the last argument by counsel for lorillard. i thought i heard him say something. i just went, what? but then i understood. he said you got to lose control of your life to be an addicted smoker. lose control of your life. and you know where that comes from? that is what mr. kaplan was saying. because remember, dr. kaplan is an old flat earther, a flat earther that used to work for the cigarette companies a long time ago when -- as i asked him, they used to come in and say nicotine is not addictive at all. mr. geary: your honor, i object to that. dr. kaplan has never worked for the tobacco companies. the court: rephrase. mr. wilner: well, he worked for the lawyers who represent the tobacco companies. pardon me, counsel. and so he would come in and say nicotine is not addictive at all. and it is just -- you just choose to smoke, and you choose to smoke, and that whole line. and then i realized this is what -- and if you get somebody like poor mrs. jewett, who smoked through oxygen in the last -- in the waning moments when she was facing a lung transplant, and she could barely get the cigarette to her lips, begging people to give her a cigarette, and you got to defend, you got to say she is not addicted, you got to defend, you call kaplan. and he -- you know, soldier to the rescue, because does not believe -- he says he believes people are addicted, but never has been. and so, oh, no, no, they did not lose control of their life. you do not lose control of your life at all until you get sick and die, or get your lung -- get your lungs -- until your lungs fail you. you can -- the difference is this. heroin intoxicates you and you cannot live a normal life. probably alcohol, maybe cocaine. do not know much about cocaine. cigarettes are legal, and as long as you keep the nicotine up in your blood you can work. why not? you got a smoke break. fine. come back. okay. you can do it. that is the difference. that is what they are not getting. they are trying to make it the old way and claim it is like heroin, and we never said it was. the disease in your brain can be a lot like it, but it does not intoxicate you. so how unbelievable can you be to say that you have to lose control of your life. an addicted smoker cannot be a perfectly functioning person. they can until something really bad happens to their lungs. then they are not. makes perfect sense. next, please. i think we covered all that. okay. oh, back to withdrawal symptoms. 8 percent of her lung capacity. oh, good. 8 percent of her lung function. and i'm beating a dead horse, but she is in a wheelchair, and these people come up and say, well, she did not have withdrawal symptoms. how would you even know? she was in a coma for three weeks. then she got out and they gave her a nicotine patch. and they are saying she did not have withdrawal symptoms. she was dying. no withdrawal symptoms. remember they go away hopefully. smoke -- all right. i'm beating a dead horse. i'm sorry. all right. let us go on to something else. next, please. oh, this was funny. counsel gets up here and says, oh, well, yes, there are all these documents, and he said -- said that they were not a secret. the documents were secret, not -- not the concept that nicotine is important. that was not a secret. what was a secret was what they were doing about it. what was a secret was how they are designing the cigarette to be that way. that is -- that is the secret. it is not the abstract concept, nicotine is important. we all know that. we also did not know that as you -- as you fool with these -- with these -- and it is not just ph. read the surgeon general report. you will have it. it goes into a lot of design parameters. we just skimmed the surface. and what we tried to show with these documents that we brought -- and there were thousands of them, but this is just a little subset -- is motive. they had the motive to design. now, who else controlled it? they knew how to design a cigarette. they had the motive to do it in such a way to get the addiction. that is the point. motive, opportunity. that is how you put things together. in terms of what -- where they poured the vial of this, no. i'm not even trying to go there. not at this point. what i'm trying to say is if you take companies that make these cigarettes and you expose from inside the company that they knew that their profits were related to whether they addicted people, and they knew how to addict people chemically, then by god is not that incredible that they -- and they had the means, because they know how to do it. and now we hear them saying, well -- well, we did not really -- i did not hear anybody hear say they did not do it. they had a lawyer say it. where was a witness from brown & williamson or reynolds to say they did not do it? mr. biersteker: objection, your honor. violates your honor's ruling on the motion in limine, and also to dr. feingold, but i can show the transcript if i have to. the court: ladies and gentlemen, y'all rely on your recollection of the evidence. the objection is overruled. mr. wilner: so it was not just a question of -- it was not a question of secrecy of the concept of nicotine. it was that now we know that it is part of a plan for this reason, to get -- to get and keep customers addicted, and the plan has worked. next, please. one last thing. i guess you can -- maybe we can evaluate the credibility of a whole side here. maybe the whole -- the cigarette side by their weakest argument, and this may be it. this whole ttp thing, it is so crazy. it did not even occur until, i think it says on the death certificate seven days -- it only occurred seven days before death. she was dealing with these life-threatening complications for over a year, and this is just a -- that is the last thing that happened. now, i'll go back to the death certificate, and then i'll show x-rays, and then i'll be done. all right. can we -- should we show the x-rays first? i think they are next. okay. really quick. at 2002 big lungs prior to -- prior to lung surgery. they look good, but really they are bad. there is no tissue up there in the top part of the lung. next. 2003 just before the lung transplant. again this does not look good technically. who knows the rest? let us go on. all right. one day after the transplant, a nice looking lung. nice looking lung. little bit of fluid in it, but not bad. this is really what you want. next. doing well. six months. what is that? hate windows. thank you. doing better. i mean, this is during the time when things were okay. next. now we are beginning to get some infiltrate here. this does not look so good. and this is 6 of 2006. so things are not -- are beginning, as dr. feingold said, to turn the corner. and, you know, slander him all he wants -- all you want. knowledge is knowledge. there is nothing wrong with -- with getting on a witness stand in this great country and saying -- saying -- explaining things and getting to the bottom of it. there is nothing wrong with that. so next, please. now a little bit of improvement, because maybe it comes and goes. next. uh-oh. now you see what is happening. so this is happening. what do you want to call it, bronchiolitis obliterans? does it include infection? it does. dr. feingold explained that. there is an infection going on and there is bos going on. next. here we are. no one said that you could live through that. now, dr. frazier said, well, her lung gases were okay. well, 8 percent of course is not good, and that was the best she had pre- transplant, and so this is not satisfactory. you cannot -- and remember this lung has no blood going through it, so it is finished. and common sense, anyone -- even -- even a nonexpert can see this -- the lung has failed through a combination of complicated things. and nobody even -- even tried to deal with it because it was over. they had given her the years. they knew the years were limited. next, please. the death certificate. if we could play that. or if we could show that on the overhead. thank you, laurie. it will be the last he request. thank you so much. and in conclusion, why this has been such an issue, i do not know, but it says this. it says it in real small print, maybe you need a micro -- a magnifying glass to see it, but it does say it, and it says it right here above the bronchiolitis obliterans, post lung transplant. i'll get up real close so i can see it. other -- i've got to read it. i cannot read it from there. that is what it says. all right. i'm going to get a micro -- thank you. i'm going to do it right here because i could not. my eyes were not good enough. it is really small. all right. other significant conditions contributing to the death that are not resulting in the underlying cause given in part 1. well, we totally agree. what is this? what is so silly. we agree that bronchiolitis obliterans was a contributing cause of death, but, no, it did not exactly cause the -- one more. go back. oh, well, that is what we do. so thank you. thank you, laurie. all right. and back up to where i had that little map, if you could. the whole thing put together, and that will be it. all right. thank you, laurie. we agree that you cannot draw a line from nicotine addiction directly to ttp, because that is not how it works. and doctors -- the immediate cause of death here, okay, fine, i mean, it does not matter. it is a combination, but fine. give it that. and was that due to cigarette smoking? maybe not in the medical sense, because you cannot draw that line. but the legal sense says natural continuous sequence. and so nobody -- and dr. frazier was on board with this too -- nobody said that these were not complications that all happened from this life- ending emphysema caused by 360,000 cigarettes, influenced by -- influenced by, not totally determined by, but influenced by nicotine addiction, nicotine addiction designed into the product, designed into the product intentionally and deliberately by the defendants. your -- we ask that your -- you fill out -- do we have a verdict form? thanks. and one more. i said no -- i said no more, but i cannot resist. i just cannot resist having you move around. so the verdict form. okay. i was a little -- when i showed you an earlier slide i had it worded a little backwards. i mean, i had it right, the first part, but then i had a question at the end that was worded backwards. did she know, or by the exercise of reasonable care should she have known that she had copd? no. so the rest of it does not matter. the reasonable possibility that it was caused, because if she did not know that she had it before 1990, then you then you would check no and go on. if your answer was no, please answer question 2. so was she addicted? yes. was cigarette smoking because of the addiction? yes, because it was contributed to a legal cause of her copd. so that would be yes, making her a class member, which she belongs. then next, and the last one is, did barbara jewett's copd cause her death? which is what we are talking about. and that is that whole thing about cause, natural continuous sequence. nobody really disputes that. it is just a word game. ladies and gentlemen of the jury, it is been a privilege, it is been a privilege to be here in this great country today deciding these things. here's where we decide them, not on the streets. it is the right thing to do. thank you very much.