ms. shamp: thank you, your honor. good morning, ladies and gentlemen. first i want to say thank you. i know this has been a long trial and there is been a lot of evidence, and i know that you have been paying attention. i see that you have been taking notes. so i want to thank you. other than serving in the united states military, service on a jury is one of the greatest services that we give to our country, and i know that each of you were plucked from your busy lives in order to serve on this jury and to do the work, and so i want to thank you on behalf of myself, my team, my client elaine jordan. but importantly, your service is not to us, it is not to the plaintiff nor to the defendant or even to the court. your service is to our country and to our system of justice. and in truth, it is service to the truth. so what i want to talk about today is where the truth lies and what the truth is based on the evidence that you have heard in this courtroom. not smoke or mirrors, but what the truth is and the evidence that was presented. we started this case three weeks ago with the shared belief that there are two sides to every story. and in fact, one of the jurors said in voir dire, potential jurors, said there might be more than two sides to every story. but i do not know if noticed, but when mr. cofer gave his opening argument and he put up the timeline there is not one event listed on his timeline that talks about any of the conduct or actions of his client philip morris. not one. we talked a lot about elaine jordan, about what she did, about her life, about what she said, about what she wrote down, about countless and countless, what she remembered about names of doctors, about things that happened 20 and 30 years ago. but what i want to spend some time this morning doing is to be sure that you do not lose sight of the other side of the story, the conduct, the statements the actions of the defendant philip morris. so i want to start my time with you today by reminding you of the witnesses who came before you during the course of the trial. and since it has been a long trial, three weeks, some of them happened a long time ago, so i want to talk for just a moment about each one of those witnesses and what the subject matter of their testimony was. the first witness that you heard from was dr. burns. and you will remember that he was the author and editor of 19 different surgeon general reports. he is triple board certified, and he is devoted his life to public health. he is a public health doctor. he actually wrote the chapter in the book that medical students all across the country study, harrison's textbook of internal medicine, on what nicotine addiction is. and you will remember he testified that smoking cigarettes causes 440,000 deaths per year, and that the vast majority of cigarette smokers say that they want to quit, would like to quit. the vast majority. that every year almost half, 45 percent try to quit, and that less than 2 to 3 percent are successful. imagine that for a moment. the defendant's product that he sells, the vast majority of people that buy it do not want to. they want to quit. half of them every year try to quit, and only 2 to 3 percent are successful. dr. burns also talked about copd. and you remember he talked about how smoking cigarettes causes that damage to the lungs. and he also talked about addiction, and he said what addiction means is that you do not have a free choice about the next use of the product, that you feel compelled, that you cannot not use the product, and therefore your use becomes one of compulsive use rather than a decision that you want to use the product each time you use it. that is a pretty good definition of addiction from the person who wrote the chapter on nicotine addiction that doctors study. it becomes a compulsive use. so it is not like the choice you make, where i'm going to go to dinner tonight, or if i want to have coke or pepsi. it is a compulsive use of the product, a driven use of the product, so that you do not choose anymore. that is how dr. burns discussed addiction for you. remember he talked about how powerful the drug of nicotine is when it is inhaled. and i thought this was very interesting. he talked about how the nicotine goes into the lungs. and we have heard a lot of testimony about lung tissue and how lung tissue works, and how what happens is the blood circulation actually goes through our lungs and that is how it picks up the oxygen. well, if you are a cigarette smoker while it is picking up the oxygen it is also picking up the nicotine, and because it goes into the arteries, our arterial system, it goes immediately right up to the brain. and how really impactful that nicotine is, and why that addiction is so strong, because of the way it is inhaled and the amount of doses of the drug that the brain is getting when someone smokes a pack, two packs of cigarettes every single day. and how that arterial system is getting that nicotine into the brain. he said that 89 percent of all smokers begin by the age of 18, and sixty percent of all cigarette smokers start by the age of 16. sixty percent are already smoking by the time they are 16 years old. he talked from the public health perspective what an enormous epidemic and tragic consequences of cigarette smoking in the united states. the next witness that you heard from was dr. lipowicz, and you will remember that dr. lipowicz was the senior scientist at philip morris that came in to testify. and he showed several documents with dr. lipowicz that i think were very powerful, maybe some of the most powerful in the whole trial. this one. and y'all remember this is the document about nicorette gum. now, because this is the first document that i'm showing in the case i want to point out one important thing, and that is that every document i'll be talking about today has a number at the bottom, and i'll try to mention what that number is, but it is p, that means plaintiff's exhibit 391. and you will have back with you in the jury room all of the exhibits which the plaintiff has admitted into evidence, as well as the exhibits that the defendant has admitted into evidence. and, ladies and gentlemen, there they are over in these boxes. and there will be an index that you will have in the front that you will be a able to find documents, in which box and which binder the documents are in. when i say it is plaintiff's 391 you can find it on here and then actually go look at the document, read the document, the entire document. and we put all those documents over there that will go back with you into the jury room, including this one. i think one of the most powerful. and remember this was about the nicorette gum. and what philip morris was doing was trying to put pressure on dow corning, who made nicorette gum, to try and stop them from introducing and marketing that product. and they stopped buying dow chemical products in their cigarettes to try to put pressure on them not to market nicorette. and remember, ladies and gentlemen, this is in 1982. this was one of the very first things, the very first real tool to come on the market to try and help the millions of addicted smokers to try to stop. it is mean-spirited. and you will have this document to read: since our becoming aware of dow's involvement with nicorette in 1982 we have conducted an ongoing dialogue with dow attempting to eliminate, or at least tone down the nicorette marketing and promotional activities. mean-spirited. 1982. before there were patches, before there was wellbutrin, before there were even drugs. this is the first one, and they are trying to stop it even though millions of americans are addicted and dying. remember dr. lipowicz also testified about whether it was reasonable for philip morris to be making the representations that they were making in the various documents that you have seen. they were making the representation that smoking has not been proven to cause lung cancer. they were making the representation that you should continue smoking because we will take out anything if we find there is anything dangerous. so we asked him in his deposition, do you think that is reasonable. and you will remember the way he looked when we asked him that. then we asked him, well, if it was reasonable for you to believe that it was not harmful and causing disease, was not it reasonable for a 14-year-old, for your customers to not know that it was harmful? this is what he said: and so to be clear, as the corporate representative on behalf of philip morris, it is philip morris' testimony that it does not think it was unreasonable for it to deny that the evidence was sufficient that cigarette smoking caused disease prior to the year 2000? you know, i think that is not exactly correct. what -- what i was trying to say is that, you know, at any given time, and certainly looking back, and with all the knowledge we have right now it is -- you know, i'm not sure how we would approach things, but at the time, as i've looked at the way we have evaluated the evidence up to 1964, '73, and so on, i think the company always thought that what it was doing was reasonable. so if philip morris thought they were reasonable at the time, is it philip morris' position that it was reasonable for its customers to think the same thing? well, i think -- you know, i do not think the company really had a position on that. my personal opinion is that consumers, smokers had access to a wide variety of information. information from the surgeon general, information from public health, information from, you know, doctors. you know, there was information from us, but i think consumers have to weigh that all in making the decision. well, you had a wide variety of information from all those sources, did not you? yes, we did. do not you think philip morris knew more about the evidence regarding smoking and disease than its customers. yeah, i think we certainly knew it in greater detail, but, you know, for us, you know, we knew it because we read the scientific articles that came out. and you will remember that testimony and the argument that philip morris was reasonable in saying it did not cause lung cancer, but that in 1963 a 14-year-old girl should have known that it was harmful, should have known that it caused disease. the next witness you heard from was dr. proctor. and you will remember dr. proctor and his testimony. dr. proctor of course is a professor at stanford university on the history of science, and he is read literally thousands and thousands and thousands of the documents with respect to what the tobacco company did. he is an expert all around the world. he was a reviewer on the 2014 surgeon general's report. you heard him say he was invited to the white house when the 2014 surgeon general's report came out. he is written books about smoking and health and about what the tobacco company did. and what he did was walk you through the history of the conspiracy. and you will remember we talked about many, many documents with him, about when the conspiracy began, and what the companies did, and how they joined together to do it, and the formation of the ti and the tirc, and that they were -- they created distraction science, and that they did press releases. you remember he went through all of that testimony, how the ti and tirc was established as a front and a shield for the tobacco companies. and you will remember those documents. but i want to touch on what he also talked about, and that was cigarette design. and he talked a lot about the history of tobacco, and he knew, of course, a lot about the history of tobacco, but also about how you make a cigarette. and he talked about how the tobacco companies design the cigarettes to create and sustain addiction; that these are highly engineered products that contain over 600 different additives in them, and that the different additives they put in there in order to give the additional nicotine kick, and how they monitor the amount of nicotine in every single cigarette, the purpose of which is to create and sustain addiction by its customers. perhaps most significantly, he talked about the great filter lie. he talked about how the tobacco companies knew that filtered cigarettes were no safer, and yet they marketed them as safer. and he talked about how they knew that their smokers compensate by smoking the cigarettes differently because they had holes in the filters. and they knew that their machines were being fooled, and so if the machine said it was lower tar it did not mean that the smoker was getting lower tar. and he talked about that in detail and showed you a lot of those documents. and he also talked about the surgeon general's report, and also the congressional investigation of it. and we showed you those documents and all of the documents with respect to the conspiracy. the next witness we called was dr. rothstein. and you will remember dr. rothstein. he is a pulmonologist right here in jacksonville, and he was elaine jordan's doctor. and that is important. he was the one who actually treated her. he was the one who diagnosed her. he is not a professional witness. in fact, he never testified in court before. and he saw and treated her for copd. and he told you that her copd was caused by smoking, and that he had no doubt about that. and he examined her lungs, and he did x-rays, and he did ct scans of her chest, and he did multiple pulmonary function tests, and he eventually referred her to get a lung transplant, and he told you what caused her disease. that it was cigarette smoking. and he told you that she did not have asthma, and that oftentimes people come in and think they have asthma because they have breathing problems. but she did not have asthma, and he told you that. and the defendant talked a lot about hypersensitivity pneumonitis and wood dust exposure. this is her doctor. it is her doctor who saw her. he never said she had hypersensitivity pneumonitis. never. and i asked him, any chance she had it, and he said no. i said why, and he said it would look different. she would come in different. she would come in with a fever because it is an allergic reaction that comes into the lungs, and what we would look at is, well, if she is exposed to something that is allergic you take them away from the allergic she gets a little better. you evaluate that. it is not what she had. it is just not. and her doctor came in to tell you that. he also testified that in his opinion he believed she was addicted. he talked to her, he counseled her. you look at those records for that. again you will have all of his records back there, and they are exhibit 10. all his records back there. and it said that he prescribed drugs for her, that he prescribed the patch for her, that he talked to her about counseling, and that every time she was in there he counseled her about how important it was for her to quit, and that she was trying to quit, and he believed she was trying to quit. you also heard from -- well, i think i'm missing one. gill spruance will also testify -- also testified. and he, you remember, is the economist. and he came in and told you about the damages that plaintiff has suffered, and he went through those lengthy calculations, and he calculated lost wages, and he gave you a range. and he gave that range based upon different criteria and different things he looked at. and he used charts. and you remember all that testimony. ms. speed put him on the stand and asked him all those questions about the calculation because she had to stop working in 1999 -- dr. rothstein, you remember, testified she was disabled from that time forward -- and how much income she lost because she was disabled up to the time -- and he stopped the calculation at 65 when she would have retired. and so that calculation ends up on the low end of $379,000, the high end at 436,000 and some change. and he also talked about future medical costs. and remember he talked about how he looked at exactly what she was going to need going forward based upon what dr. rothstein said she was going to need going forward, and based upon what we know copd causes as people move forward, things like oxygen, hospitalizations, medications. so the future medical costs for her, a range of 219,000 up to 844,000. then the minor category also, the loss of household services, the things she would not be able to do. he talked about how you put a monetary value on that because of her disability and her copd, and the way she was not able to do things, and was not able to do things based upon her inability to breathe. so the total range of all those between $670,000 and $1.3 million. and you will remember mr. spruance's testimony regarding those. and you will remember tonya spencer. that is mrs. jordan's daughter. and she came in and talked to you about her mother and what her mother had been through. and importantly, she talked to you about when she remembers her mother was diagnosed with copd. it was very credible testimony, i believe, based upon what she linked it to. and she linked it to her own daughter who was two years old at the time. her daughter was born in 1991, and she remembers her mother being diagnosed in 1993. so you remember tonya spencer's demeanor on the stand when she testified and how she linked the diagnosis of copd to 1993. and she also testified about how hard this has been for her mother, and how she watched her go through all she is been through. then we put up dr. susan blank, and you will recall dr. blank is a board certified addiction psychiatrist. and in fact, she actually wrote the chapter in the book for addiction psychiatrists on nicotine dependence. remember i showed you the chapter in the book. she is an expert in nicotine addiction, and a nationally recognized expert in addiction. and she talked to you about her belief that elaine jordan was addicted, and she went through all those criteria. and then the last thing that we did was i actually stood up and read some testimony. remember that, when i read the testimony from dr. william frazier, who was the defendant's expert. and i closed our first presentation in the case with that because it was extremely important testimony, because their own expert confirmed that elaine jordan had copd at least five years before dr. rothstein saw her. dr. rothstein saw her in '99. he said for at least five years she had copd. so it is undisputed, elaine jordan had copd in 1994 from there side and from dr. rothstein, all the witnesses. that is why i read that testimony to you directly from his deposition. and you will recall me doing it. then the defendants put up four witnesses. dr. tecson, you will recall they put up by videotape, who was her treating doctor. and you will recall dr. tecson testified about his record, and his own record which he saw her in october 24, 1998, and he wrote in his record that she told him then that she had emphysema, that she had an asthma attack and also had emphysema five years ago. and he talked to you about that in his testimony. then they put up dr. frazier. dr. frazier confirmed that, yes, that when dr. rothstein saw her her copd was severe. and we talked about that little small circle on the spirometry, and how in his opinion she had copd by at least 1994. then they put up dr. ticknor who was there psychiatric witness, and you will remember dr. ticknor was a general psychiatrist. he had no specialty training in addiction, he had no certifications in addiction, and, importantly, he testified that if -- and i was really focussed on this when i examined him. he said that of the people he has treated to stop smoking, ones who were treating with him to stop smoking, he only thinks 10 to twenty percent of those are addicted. what he said is that you have to have an extreme presentation in order for him to think you are addicted. and extreme presentation, i asked the question, means that you either lose your job, or are about to lose your job, or you are about to get divorced as a result of it. his testimony is it has to be an extreme position. but he even goes further than that, and i asked him. he testified that an addiction cannot cause a disease, which is what under engle the requirement is of class membership, unless the person has a mental illness and they cannot control their behavior, because everybody else can control their behavior and stop. and remember i asked him about those questions. so in your opinion you have to have a serious mental illness. then they put up dr. stonesifer. and you will remember dr. stonesifer looked at the slides and told you that there were some slides that showed these granulomas in them. and he said he thought that they exhibited a pattern. and he was very careful in his testimony. he said -- and he repeated many times, and i'm sure you have this in your notes -- there was a pattern of hypersensitivity pneumonitis. not necessarily that she had it, but that the little pieces of slide he looked at showed a pattern. and as you remember, you looked at the pathology reports, and there were a few scattered of these granulomas of hypersensitivity pneumonitis. but importantly he did not say that hypersensitivity pneumonitis caused what happened. he did not say that. in fact, what he said was that smoking could have caused it, this could have caused it, that could have caused it. and when asked he said, yes, the smoking contributed. dr. stonesifer did not say hypersensitivity pneumonitis caused it. in fact, he said, i cannot tell. that is all he said. now, we then put up two rebuttal witnesses, you will recall. dr. wright. and dr. wright showed you the pathology, and showed you the anthracotic pigment in the slides, and that is actual carbon spots that come from smoking. and you will have those slides back in evidence, pictures of them, and you can look at them. and the important difference between the slides that dr. wright showed you, and i'm not sure this was clear when he testified, and the slides that the defendant showed you, was what dr. wright showed you was not the hundred-time magnified, because what dr. wright was showing you was the airspaces in there, and if you magnify all the way down in then you do not see those enormous airspaces that is the emphysema. but you can see the anthracotic pigment throughout as well is the emphysema. then we also put up dr. susan -- i mean dr. sandra frazier, and dr. frazier again is an addiction medicine specialist, board certified in addiction medicine, and she testified that there is nowhere in the dsm-5 that says there has to be an extreme presentation in order for them to be addicted. and that dr. ticknor saying that, who is not expert in addiction medicine, is not proper interpretation of what the dsm-5 says. now, those were the witnesses that you heard from the stand. what i want to talk now for a minute about is the whole story. and i thought about the best way to do it, and i think the best way to do it is a timeline and sort of talk about how these events happened over the course of time. so start from the beginning, 1900 to 1950. and you will recall the testimony from dr. proctor that during that period of time smoking is a part of american culture. and we showed pictures of magazine advertisements, and we showed pictures of movies, and everybody smoked everywhere, that 50 to sixty percent of americans smoked cigarettes by the time 1950 rolls around, that it was a normal part of everyday american life. that is what the evidence is. there is no contradictory evidence to that. no contradictory evidence that in 1950 it was a normal everyday part of american life. and we even showed you a clip from the astronauts from the mercury program smoking while they were on television. the astronauts, our best and our brightest, the ones kids look up to, smoking on television. and we looked at the graph of how smoking increased from the beginning of the 1900's when almost no one smoked cigarettes all the way up to what happened in 1950 when half of america was smoking cigarettes. we talked about some of the reasons for that, world war i and cigarettes were put in mens rations, world war ii cigarettes were part of the men smoking when they were overseas. the advent of mass media, the advent of the bonsack machine that was able to roll cigarettes so much faster. all of those things contributed to this smoking becoming part of the american culture, up until 1949. and two things happened in 1949. elaine jordan was born. and right about that same time the evidence starts to come together linking smoking to lung cancer. we talked about the four studies that came out in 1950 from wynder and graham, doll & hill, levin, and schrek, that started saying why are we seeing this massive increase in lung cancer which had once been a rare disease in america. i remember how dr. proctor talked about how that they would call the medical students out of their dorms at night to say, here is a lung cancer autopsy, you might never see this again, to what became an absolute epidemic in this country. and they started looking at the increase in cigarette smoking, how it was on the rise, and how it tracked almost exactly the rise of lung cancer. so they did what -- these are called epidemiological studies, studies of a population, and started seeing these connections. then the next thing they wanted to do of course was animal studies, so they painted the tar on the back of mice and grew tumors on the backs of mice. that was published in 1953. and when that came out big tobacco was scared. so they had to decide what are we going to do, how are we going to respond to this mounting evidence that our product is causing disease? in fact, their own studies and what they had been reading showed was true, that there are carcinogens in our product, the smoke from our product. it is true. so what did they do? they called together a meeting of all the heads of the tobacco companies and they met at the plaza hotel in december 1953. that is an important date. it is a date you will see when you look at the jury charges. it is the beginning of the conspiracy. and we have the documents actually showing the very beginning. dr. proctor talked to you about why we have those documents, troves and troves that had to be turned over. he is been able to look at them and actually find a note from when that first meeting happened. there is a list of all the people that were there, including the president of philip morris tobacco company. and the notes from the meeting talk about what are we going to do. and they had a choice. they could have said what we need to do is stop the way we are marketing our cigarettes, we need to try and put warnings. we need to let the people know. we need to most importantly keep these out of the hands of kids. but what did they decide to do? it was the feeling of those present that the industry could most effectively face the problem by engaging public relations counsel. they hired a public relations firm to spin it for them. that is what they chose to do, and they did. and the first thing that they did -- well, the first thing they did was met with all the research directors. and this is how we know that they knew their product caused cancer then, because they indicated -- this forwarding memorandum, you will have that, p168, it is a very important document, plaintiff's 168, because the members of hill & knowlton, the public relations firm that they hired, hill & knowlton, sat down and met with directors of research at the company, and they said -- one of the men said, it is fortunate for us that cigarettes are a habit they cannot break. i probably put that document up two or three times now, but so the impact of it to sink in. we make money because it is addictive. it is fortunate for us it is a habit they cannot break. boy, would not it be wonderful if our company was the first to produce a cancer-free cigarette. what we could do to the competition. they knew their product caused cancer. but what did they do? the very heads of the great corporations themselves signalled the end of the old days, and they linked armed. it is a good visual image. they formed a united front against the truth. they linked arms. and what they did was they engaged in a campaign to reassure the public and still their instinctive fears. they are going to try and stop people from worrying so they will keep on smoking. this is what their program was. they were going to put out the message that you can count on cigarette companies who have obligated themselves to pour millions of dollars into cancer research to take anything out of your cigarette that is a health hazard if our science ever really finds such a hazard in the wonderful tobacco leaf. they knew that there were carcinogens in their products. and you will remember the testimony about the frank statement, which was a full-page ad. after that memo where they knew that it was addictive and caused cancer they gave this memo that went in every newspaper with a circulation of over 50,000 across the country. and what did they say? there is no proof that cigarette smoking is one of the causes. this is in 1954 when elaine jordan is four years old. we believe the products we make are not injurious to health. remember their goal is to still their fears so that they will keep smoking. we accept an interest in public health as a basic responsibility paramount to every other consideration in our business. smokers read it, they kept on smoking. elaine jordan was born in 1949. in 1950 the four major studies linking cancer to smoking cigarettes come out. 1953 the mouse painting studies. elaine jordan is four years old. december 1953 the plaza hotel meeting, the conspiracy begins. 1954 the frank statement is issued. and thus begins their campaign of denial and doubt that lasts for decades. lasts until the year 2000. it is hard to believe 2000 is the first time they admitted that cigarettes caused cancer. remember dr. lipowicz said that, not until 2000, and this campaign of doubt. and we put up a lot of documents about it, and i'll go through some of them. they put out white papers, and they actually sent those to doctors, because remember sixty percent -- in 1960 sixty percent of doctors are still smoking. this is a speech by the president of philip morris. if we had any thought or knowledge that in any way we were selling a product harmful to customers we would stop business tomorrow. fraud and deceit. speech by the president of philip morris in 1957: i'll merely assert there is not one shred of conclusive evidence to support the link between cigarette smoking and cancer. importantly their goal was to create doubt amongst smokers so that they will keep smoking their product. you will remember we played the clip from howard cullman from philip morris as he is smoking cigarette on television that said, we want to be detectives just as much as the surgeon general. people watched this and kept smoking. they put out press releases actually attacking the government officials that are trying to get the public health message out. that is part of their tactic. remember that we had showed the clip from bill dwyer saying joseph califano, who was then secretary of health and human services, putting out -- trying to get out the word, and condemning the actual public health authorities. they put out press releases. we believe the number one problem is the extent to which these officials knowingly mislead the american public. there he is, bill dwyer. and you remember you saw the clip. in fact, you will actually have the dvd with these clips. this is actually an exhibit too. p349. that goes back into the jury room. you remember the true magazine article. this was the number one men's magazine at the time, and they actually planted a story, and dr. proctor talked about that, by stanley frank, who they paid to write the article in the true magazine. the tobacco institute paid him to write the article, and then he writes article read in the number one magazine for men in circulation at that period of time. to smoke or not to smoke, that is still the question. then that is picked up and run in the national enquirer. cigarette cancer link is bunk, written by the tobacco institute. and the national enquirer was actually very well read. full page on the front page. 70 million smokers falsely alarmed in the checkout counter right next to the cigarettes. they continue to put out more press releases all the way up to 1979. you will remember this person who came out and said things go on in congress that you do not know about, that doctors still are challenging that link. who are the doctors? paid members of the tobacco institute. but this is not us or dr. proctor saying that they were utilizing the tobacco institute and ctr. their own documents say they were using it as a front and a shield. this document, which is actually from the committee of counsel, the lawyers. and you remember what dr. proctor said, it was the lawyers who were running the campaign, the committee of counsel. this memorandum, ctr, which is what tirc became, remember i put that up on the board, began as an organization called the tobacco industry research counsel that was set up as an industry shield in 1954. ctr acted as a front. these are their own documents. their own documents. doubt is our product. doubt. to still the instinctive fears. why? so americans will keep smoking, keep becoming addicted, continuing to get disease and illness and the burden that that causes on our society. doubt is our product. p486. their own document. they tried it to reassure people. this is their document saying we need to give people a psychological crutch so that they will keep smoking cigarettes. their own document. we need to give people a psychological crutch. this is 1963. we must in the near future provide some answers that will give smokers a psychological crutch and a self rational to continue smoking. p252. you saw the clip with joseph cullman in 1971 where he talked about if there is anything in the product we will take it out, but we do not think there is anything bad in our product. more documents that ctr was organized as a public relations effort. the industry told the world ctr would look at the diseases which were being associated with smoking. there was even a suggestion by our political spokesmen that if there was a harmful element that turned up the industry would try to get it out. then the distraction science. they paid a lot of money for people to do science about things other than smoking that caused cancer. let us face it. we are interested in evidence which we believe denies the allegation that cigarette smoking causes disease. let us face it. that is what we want to look at. p291. this is the kind of evidence and research that they put out. again the psychological crutch. lung cancer rare in balanced men. this is actually put out in tobacco health research and sent to doctors. it was a publication. march birth lung cancer link. lung specialist cites 28 reasons for doubting the cigarette cancer link. you will have all this evidence and all these documents back there. and you heard lots and lots of evidence about this timeline. 1955, the first white paper comes out. filters begin being added. there is the tar derby. dr. proctor talked about that, where people are talking about which cigarettes have lower tar. there is a speech from president weisman i just talked about. this is the document that dr. proctor talked about where they -- bat, british american tobacco company, visited all of them, all the tobacco companies and said in the document that they all recognize that smoking causes lung cancer. that was in 1958, the same year that elaine jordan moved to jacksonville when she was nine years old. in 1963 she started smoking at a carnival when she was 14. we showed you the wakeham report, research & development. that is a picture of wakeham. an internal ti memo showing that nicotine is addictive. we showed that in dr. proctor's testimony. in 1964 importantly the report of the advisory committee to the u.s. surgeon general. the first surgeon general's report comes out in 1964, six months after elaine jordan smokes her first cigarette. the psychological crutch. same year elaine jordan smokes her first cigarette. white papers. the conspiracy continues through this period of time. by 1965 elaine jordan was a regular smoker. and it is important that i do this timeline this way because i'm trying to show you how these stories are connected, the story of her smoking and what the tobacco companies were doing and saying, how those two stories are connected. 1966. president cullman saying if something is harmful we can remedy it. 1966, january 1st, the caution label goes on the packs, right after elaine jordan becomes a regular smoker. the ftc then comes out with their report saying how ineffective the warnings have been, and in fact there are more people smoking now than when the warnings first went on the pack. it had absolutely no impact on smoking rates. the internal memo you heard dr. proctor talk about saying we can certainly be accused of making false statements. the article in true magazine in 1968. the wakeham report in 1969. again, you will have all these documents back there with you. 1966 elaine jordan first tries to quit smoking. it is her first attempt when she is pregnant with her first child. her son timothy is born. 1969 her daughter cheryl is born. 1971 joseph cullman goes on face the nation. you heard that clip that he did. dunn planning memo regarding the product is nicotine. their strategy of creating doubt. all these happened in 1970. 1972 she tries to quit again while she is pregnant with her third child carmen. 1974 she divorces mitchell johnson, and the conspiracy continues all through the 70's. in the 80's -- she remembered 1983. this is an important date. 1983 she is moving into the new house and she is trying to quit. she tries to quit 8 or 9 times in that very year. and i put this on the timeline because that is exactly when philip morris is putting pressure on dow corning not to release nicorette gum. that very same time when she is trying to quit. and dow corning does not market its nicotine gum. she tries to quit again in 1986. there is a quit attempt in 1983. 1983 is the same year she started working at champion lumber company. 1988 the first surgeon general report on nicotine addiction. and that report is specifically directed just to nicotine addiction. you heard testimony about movie placements. you will have that, the documents showing where philip morris gave product to various movies and which movies they were. we showed you the clip showing the marlboro truck in superman 2. 1990 she tries to quit again. 1994 there is the surgeon general report on youth smoking. 1993 she first manifested and was diagnosed with copd. she began again to try and quit and importantly switches to light cigarettes. she is trying to quit, but she is testified, i was trying to quit, but i thought it would be better if i smoked the lights. she testified she saw on the packs that they were lower in tar and that is why she picked them up and started smoking marlboro lights in 1993 while she was trying to quit. the psychological crutch. 1994. they testified in congress, and you saw the clip. the president of philip morris raised his hand under oath in front of the united states congress and said cigarette smoking is not addictive. you will have that clip as well. then you heard testimony how she tried repeatedly to quit. 1993, 1994, then in 1998 her first visit with dr. tecson. 1999 she first saw dr. rothstein, and he diagnosed her with severe copd. in 2002 she is hospitalized and quit smoking for good. in october 2002 she had her first lung transplant. it was not until the year 2000 that philip morris and the other tobacco companies first admit that cigarettes cause disease and that nicotine is addictive. december 2012 she has her second lung transplant and the kidney transplant. now, what i want to do with the rest of my time is to talk about the verdict form and what you are going to be called upon to decide based upon the evidence. the first issue is the burden of proof, and you were instructed about that this morning. what the burden of proof is is that plaintiff must prove her claim by the greater weight of the evidence. and if you think about putting one evidence on one side and another evidence on the other side, which side has the greater weight. so as i go through each of the issues that are on the verdict form and each of the issues you have to decide i'm going to talk about putting the evidence on one side versus what is the evidence on the other side and where does the greater weight lie, where is the truth? and the evidence that you have is going to come in basically four forms: the internal documents that we have gone through some of them, the documents from the ti, and the documents from philip morris, and some of the documents from the co-conspirators. and you will remember you actually have a charge in there that you can consider the conduct of the conspirators, the other people who joined in the conspiracy. you are also going to have government documents, documents from the surgeon general. you will actually have -- we have put these on the elmo. you will have the surgeon general's reports in these boxes of documents. you can actually go in and look at what the surgeon general said in 2010 about cigarette addiction, what the surgeon general said in '94 about preventing tobacco use among young people, and what tobacco advertising has done with respect to the initiation of smoking by kids. monograph 19 from the national cancer institute you will have. the role of media in promoting and producing tobacco use. you will have all of the surgeon general's reports that we have talked about during the course of the trial. you also of course have the testimony of the witnesses. we have talked about that. and you will also have the medical records. and you have voluminous medical records in the case. and that is the evidence that you will have to decide the issues that you are going to be called upon to decide. so the first issue that you have to decide under question 1 is class membership. and just briefly we talked about that, that this action comes out of the engle class which was tried before a jury in 1999 and that jury made certain findings after hearing a year's worth of testimony. a jury sat in a box and listened to this testimony over the course of an entire year and came up with certain findings. so what you are going to be called upon to decide is whether elaine jordan is a member of the class. is she one of the people that this action was brought to benefit? and they define what a class member is, what class member definition is. it is simple and it is really not complicated as to what it takes for a person to be a member of the engle class. and if plaintiff is a member of the engle class then she is entitled to these findings. and the judge instructed you on them. you will have them in your jury instructions. so what does class membership entail? to prove that elaine jordan meets the definition and is a member of the engle class plaintiffs must prove by greater weight of evidence the following: 1. that she was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine. addiction. 2. that her chronic obstructive lung disease was caused by her addiction to cigarettes. cause. 3. that she manifested chronic obstructive lung disease by november 21, 1996. and that is the actual question on the verdict form. state whether elaine jordan is a member of the engle class. so that question really has three parts. so i'm going to talk about each one of those parts in turn. but importantly on the issue of addiction i want to talk about what the question is not. and i think all of the evidence supports that the question is not whether she could quit. that is not the question. because every person said addicted people can quit. so whether she could quit does not determine whether she is addicted. that is not the question you have to decide. whether she tried hard enough to quit, not the question. maybe later when you are talking about comparative fault you can think about that, but that does not go in this part of your consideration. whether she tried hard enough to quit is not the issue as to whether or not she was addicted. arguments about whether she did not try hard enough, whether she made enough effort, did enough things, that can be considered in the comparative fault. mr. cofer: objection, your honor. misstates the law. the court: overruled. you may proceed. ms. shamp: but this question is simply was she addicted. whether she was motivated to quit, not the question that you have to decide. whether she knew smoking was harmful, not the question. simple question. was she addicted. whether she chose to smoke, not the question. as all the experts said, of course smokers who are addicted choose to smoke. they walk in the door, they pick up the -- they pay their money. nobody has a gun to their head. but the question is whether the addiction compels that choice. simple question. was she addicted. the question is was she addicted. so we put on a lot of evidence about this, about what is nicotine. no dispute. nicotine a drug which means it has pharmacological effects. it creates a certain effect, and it is a drug. no dispute the drug is addictive. nicotine is an addictive drug. nicotine actually changes the brain. and both our expert dr. blank and dr. ticknor agreed nicotine changes the brain, causes these extra receptors in the brain. it actually changes the format of the brain. and dr. blank talked about how it affects the learning centers of the brain and our memory and how that is connected in the way that we learn how to do things in that very deep section of our brain, the survivor section, she called it the primitive brain, and it makes changes in the primitive brain that actually trick the brain into thinking that they need that product to survive. it is a very deep part of the brain. it is a very different part than the prefrontal cortex. the part of the brain that decides should i make this behavior, should i do this, should i decide. this is affecting the deep part. you will recall the testimony regarding dopamine and the pathways. i thought this was very interesting how nicotine affects two parts of the brain, both the part that stimulates and the part that relaxes. that is why people say it both stimulates and relaxes them. there are not very many drugs that affect both of those parts. and because it affects both of those parts it makes the connection to nicotine so much stronger. and you remember from the surgeon general's report, and this is an amazing statistic, and you will have that back with you, that one-third of all people who try cigarettes will become dependent. that is an amazing number. and you remember the statistic that 80 to ninety percent of regular daily smokers are addicted. also her testimony that the longer you smoke, the more you smoke, the greater the likelihood is that you are addicted. and beginning smoking in early teens increases the likelihood of addiction. so all of this evidence you have with respect to what is nicotine and addiction. so let us talk for a minute about -- this is the slide you will recall about how if you start initiation of tobacco in the early adolescents before the brain is fully developed, and what is the part of the brain that develops last, the prefrontal cortex, the part that is capable of making rational informed decisions. if you have got that deep brain with these strong connections being drawn between smoking and the pleasure that people feel, that creates a stronger addiction. so what is the evidence? and this is the part we talked about. which side has the greater weight as to whether she was addicted? 1. we know that nicotine is addictive and it changes the brain. we have elaine jordan's smoking history, how much she smoked, 2 to 2 1/2 packs per day for 37 years. a strong connection every day with this repeated dosing of the brain that much. she began when she was 14 years old, again in this preadolescent period when the connection is still stronger. what time of day she smoked. remember that was very important when the doctor was talking about the dsm. the first thing in the morning. she smoked first thing in the morning. and that was because when you are sleeping at night you go into withdrawal and the first thing in the morning you want to get that nicotine back to stop the withdrawal symptoms. she smoked throughout the day and she smoked at night right before she went to bed. so we have evidence of addiction, one. evidence about nicotine itself, two. evidence about the way elaine jordan smoked. these are both pieces that go to the evidence of whether she was addicted. and she meets the dsm-5 criteria for addiction severe. and we went through those entire criteria, and even dr. ticknor says she meets five of them. even dr. ticknor says she is meets five of them. and remember what the preview said, that if you meet 2 or 4 of them that is a manifestation of clinically significant impairment. now, dr. ticknor said you had to meet six in order to be addicted. she met five. and we talked about the three he said she did not meet. but dr. blank said she met nine. dr. blank said she met nine and that categorized her as severe, a severe addiction. we also have dr. rothstein's opinion. dr. rothstein said he uses a different category. what he said -- he put the four, and i put them on the board up there, the person wants to smoke -- wants to quit and cannot, they are trying and they cannot, that when they try they have withdrawal symptoms. the withdrawal symptoms, which are classic, irritation, agitation. he said she had those that. but when they smoke it then relieves the withdrawal symptoms. and that they crave tobacco. so those are the four criteria he used, and he says in my practice i see smokers every day. he is a pulmonologist. see smokers every day, and he diagnoses addiction. and his opinion was she was addicted. you have dr. blank's opinion. remember dr. blank. she is a medical doctor. she sought and obtained board certification in addiction medicine. she practices exclusively addiction medicine. remember she runs an addiction treatment center in atlanta. she wrote the chapter on nicotine abuse in the asam guidelines. she currently sees, treats, and prescribes for patients with addiction, including nicotine addiction, and she went through those categories with you. she is published on addiction, she speaks on addiction, and she came in and told you her opinion is that elaine jordan clearly was addicted to nicotine. we also brought in dr. sandra frazier in our rebuttal case. she is also a medical doctor, fellowship trained in addiction medicine, board certified in addiction medicine. again she is an addiction medicine specialist, unlike dr. ticknor. she is dean at the university of alabama school of medicine where she teaches addiction to medical students and residents, and has for 20 years. she is a diplomat of the american board of addiction medicine, past director of an addiction recovery program, and she also currently diagnoses professionals with addiction. and she testified that elaine jordan was addicted. this is the evidence. when you talk about the greater weight what is the evidence of addiction? and here it is, the evidence we put on throughout this trial. in addition, there are philip morris' own documents which we talked about where philip morris says we know it is a drug, where philip morris says we know people smoke in order to get that drug. this document. it is fortunate for us cigarettes are a habit they cannot break. they know it is addictive. well, what is on the other side? what is the evidence that she was not addicted? the only evidence is dr. ticknor. the only evidence the defendants put up that elaine jordan was not addicted is dr. ticknor. he is not an not addiction specialist, he has no certification in addiction, he is never written, never published, never written anything on addiction or nicotine. we bring in the person who wrote the chapter in the book and two addiction medicine specialists. they bring in a general psychiatrist. he testified that he taught, but remember i asked him. he was not a paid faculty member of any school. and he is been paid over $550,000 by tobacco companies, including $69,000 for his testimony just in this case. dr. ticknor testified it had to be an extreme presentation. remember he testified of the people he treats he only thinks 10 to twenty percent are addicted, when the national averages are 80 to 90 percent. and these are people who are actually seeking help from a psychiatrist to help them stop smoking. and he testified that she smoked because she liked it. so the greater weight of the evidence we think clearly shows that elaine jordan was addicted. the second part of question 1 is causation. ladies and gentlemen, there is been a lot of testimony and what i'll consider was rabbit trails. rabbit trails that we have to chase down. maybe it was hypersensitivity pneumonitis, maybe it was exposure to wood dust, maybe it was asthma. and we chased them down and stopped them off. right. but the weight of the evidence is overwhelming that this was caused by cigarette smoking. overwhelming. so this is what the jury instruction will be. in order to be regarded as a legal cause addiction to cigarettes need not be the only cause. even if -- even if the defendant succeeded in showing to you that you think there was evidence that hypersensitivity pneumonitis played some role, or even if her asthma played some role, the plaintiff's burden is to prove not that it is the only cause, but that it is the legal cause. an addiction to philip morris u.s.a.'s cigarettes may be a legal cause of injury even though it operates in combination with the act of another or some other cause. if some other cause occurs at the same time as the addiction and the addiction to smoking cigarettes contributes substantially. that is what we have to prove, is that the smoking contributed substantially. not that there were no other possibilities out there. and remember the two witnesses they put up, dr. frazier and dr. stonesifer both said they could not even say. they said maybe this, maybe that, maybe this. but none of them said smoking was not a cause. none of the evidence put up said smoking was not a cause. so what is the greater weight of the evidence? you will have the surgeon general's report who says that nicotine addiction is the fundamental reason that individuals persist in using tobacco products. it is the addiction that keeps people smoking. it is the addiction. their own documents. they know it is a drug. do we really want to tout cigarette smoking as a drug? it is of course. these are their own internal documents. i think this one shows, that shows that addiction is the reason people continue to smoke. we cannot defend continued smoking as free choice if the person was addicted. this is their own document. they know that when someone is addicted it is the addiction that compels the use and not a free choice. so what evidence did we put up? we put up dr. rothstein, her treating pulmonologist, practices right here in this town. her pulmonologist said smoking is what caused her copd. we put up dr. wright, and dr. wright showed you the emphysematous changes, and he showed you, when ms. speed was asking him questions, these slides. i want to show you -- you will have all of these back there. and he talked about these big airspaces are emphysema and they are all over. if you look these big old airspaces. look at them. they are all over throughout in the lung tissue. also these black spots, anthracotic pigment, throughout there. what dr. stonesifer said is there were a few scattered granulomas. simply common sense tells you that the few scattered granulomas could not cause this kind of emphysematous severe changes. in fact their own expert did not say that it did. common sense. you will have the pathology. but not just this, you will also have the surgical pathology from the pathologist who took out the lung tissue where he said severe emphysematous changes throughout the lung. severe emphysema throughout the lung. you also have the testimony that 80 to ninety percent of all copd is caused by cigarette smoking across the country. nobody disputed that. 80 to ninety percent of all copd is caused by cigarette smoking. think about that for a minute. the idea that a person who smoked for 37 years 2 packs a day, she is a heavy cigarette smoker, somehow falls in the 10 percent that get copd, that other than the ones caused by cigarette smoking does not make any sense, based on the fact that she was such a heavy cigarette smoker over the period. what is the evidence that cigarette smoking was not a cause, not a substantial contributing cause? what was evidence on the other side. none. no evidence that this was not a substantial -- not a substantial contributing cause. dr. frazier -- both their experts both testified that smoking contributed to her disease. they said they could not decide how much, but they both said it contributed to her disease. i briefly want to talk about hypersensitivity pneumonitis. you will have with you over 20,000 pages of medical records from some of the best pulmonologists in the world that practice at the mayo clinic. the best pulmonologists in the world. and philip morris came in and told you she had hypersensitivity pneumonitis, and nobody ever saw it. and one thing occurred to me yesterday when i was listening to mr.(sic) stonesifer's testimony. she still has a native lung. so whatever was happening in one lung was happening in the other. if she had hypersensitivity pneumonitis over there she is still got it over here. yet she is continued to see pulmonologist after pulmonologist, had another second transplant. the testimony being she has this disease, that in fact that disease somehow contributed substantially to causing her disease, and cigarette smoking did not, and no doctor ever mentioned it. hypersensitivity pneumonitis is an extremely rare disease. extremely rare. copd caused by cigarette smoking is not. and even that cannot explain the overwhelming emphysema throughout her lung. wood dust. you have heard countless testimony about wood dust. but what is the evidence? and dr. stonesifer said it yesterday. if it was kiln dried -- and the evidence was that it was kiln dried before it got to her -- then there could not be any spores in there of mold that would have caused any kind of disease. it was kiln dried. she worked in a whole different building from where they were cutting the wood. the sawmill is -- i showed you the diagram, showed you where the mill was, that u-shaped building, and her building was down here with the round roof on it. and she worked in an air-conditioned cab in that. again rabbit trails. and we chased them all down. but we think the overwhelming evidence of course establishes the greater weight of the evidence that her copd was caused by smoking cigarettes. manifestation. the jury instruction reads: ms. jordan had copd that first manifested itself on or before november 21, 1996, if she knew, or in the exercise of reasonable care should have known, on or before november 21, 1996, 1, that she had copd, and, 2, that there was a reasonable probability that her copd was caused by cigarette smoking. okay. now, you have heard countless testimony about what people remembered happening over 20 years ago, whether she wrote something down on a form while she was going through a lung transplant. so what i want to talk about is what we know. not based on somebody's memory, but what we know. we know she had copd in 1993. that is undisputed. we know that she had copd in 1993. dr. rothstein testified about it, and dr. frazier their expert agreed she had it. it is the natural course of her disease. we looked at her spirometry and we saw that tiny circle in the middle. that is her lung function compared to normal. that does not happen overnight. it is chronic obstructive lung disease. that does not happen overnight. she had copd in 1993, but clearly before 1996, which was 18 months before the spirometry. you are looking at november 21, 1996. the spirometry is done in 1999, 2 and-a-half years. clearly. and there is no dispute about that. that is the fact that everybody agrees to. she had it. we also have dr. tecson's records. okay. this is an important record, and you will have it back with you. i think i have the typed version right there, but i also have the actual -- and this is important. you are going to have both of these with you. this is his actual handwriting, which is very hard to read. but you will have this exhibit with you. and importantly the difference in here that i wanted to point out is that everybody talked about what is a soap note. soap note. s-o-a-p, soap. s-o-a-p, soap. and the first part is subjective. it is what the patient tells you, the history. that is up here typed up here and here handwritten, but they did not put the s-o-a-p on the typed version. that is why it is important to look at this one too, because this is the history that she related. and what she related was she had a history of asthma five years ago, had also emphysema. so we know that she told dr. tecson that five years ago she had emphysema. this is in 1998. that would have put it exactly when she said she was diagnosed in 1993. but regardless, we have this document. regardless of her memory and what she says, we have this document that shows that she had a history of emphysema, that she gave him that history in 1998. and we know of course that she had emphysema in 1993. these are consistent documents. this is what we know. that is the record that you will actually have there with you. it has the soap note, which is important. we also know that she was in baptist hospital in 1993. you remember she testified while she was working she had an attack and she fell out and that they came and they took her to the hospital, and she went to the hospital. that is when she was diagnosed with copd. we know from her testimony she was in the hospital, and from dr. rothstein's testimony that she was in the hospital. we know that she is got copd. that is undisputed. she is in the hospital in 1993. and she testified that is when they told me i had copd. but an important thing more piece of fact, that is when she switched to light cigarettes. that confirms that is when she knew she had copd. that is when she switched to light cigarettes in 1993. that is what we know, that her disease manifested before november 1996. we have dr. rothstein's testimony. and you remember -- this is very important because the judge instructed you that you are able to consider dr. rothstein's testimony. you will remember, you will have it in your notes, you are able to consider dr. rothstein's testimony that she was diagnosed in 1993. that is important. dr. rothstein testified she was diagnosed in 1993. tonya spencer, her daughter, ties it to her own child, being born in '91, when she was two years old, and elaine jordan's testimony, all said she had the diagnosis in 1993. all of the evidence lines up, all the facts line up that she had the disease before 1996. importantly there is no medical records before 1998. so we argue that this test was not run, or that test was not run. there are no medical records before 1998, because as dr. rothstein said, they were destroyed. so we do not know what tests were run before 1998 because there is no medical record from before 1998. what is the evidence on the other side? the evidence on the other side, documents that she filled out years later. but look at them carefully about what was filled out, and look at each one of them, because some of them i believe the defense put up which said she was diagnosed with severe copd. she was diagnosed with severe copd three years ago. in 2002 she said that, and that is completely consistent. then there is the disability form. and you remember dr. rothstein said, i do not fill that out, my assistant does. but importantly look at what the diagnosis is that he writes down. hemoptysis, which is coughing up blood, and copd, and she had that for the first time in june. completely consistent. she had hemoptysis and copd for the first time in june. the idea that dr. rothstein would write on a piece of paper that she had copd for the first time in june of 1999 when he saw that spirometry is absurd. he knew. that is absurd. every doctor would agree that disease did not show up in june of 1999. what did was the hemoptysis, the coughing up blood. that simply made sense. the greater weight of the evidence is clear that she manifested -- and manifested just means, the judge will instruct you, you have got the instruction there, shows up. mr. cofer: objection. misstates the law and the instruction. ms. shamp: your honor, i think i pointed them directly to what their instructions are. mr. cofer: same objection, your honor. may we approach? the court: yes. (sidebar outside the hearing of the jury.) ms. shamp: your honor, he interrupted before i finished my sentence, which was going to be that manifested means that it shows up and she recognizes it, as the instruction says, within the class period. mr. cofer: well, then i apologize. i was too quick to object. the court: thank you very much. (following sidebar.) ms. shamp: what manifested means, as i was saying, is that it shows up and she recognizes it within the class period. that is all it means. they have not put up one witness, they have not put up one piece of evidence that proves that she did not know she had that disease in 1994. mr. cofer: objection. it is the plaintiff's burden of proof. the court: it is argument. i'll overrule. you may proceed. ms. shamp: thank you. plaintiff has presented enormous evidence that she had it, that she knew she had, she was diagnosed in 1993, including her treating pulmonologist. state whether elaine jordan is a member of the engle class. we have chased down a lot of rabbit trails. so the answer to that question clearly, based on the evidence and the truth, is yes. now, as the court has instructed you, if you find she is a member of the class you are entitled to apply the findings in favor of her. and the findings are cigarette smoking causes chronic obstructive lung disease, cigarettes are addictive, philip morris placed cigarettes on the market that were dangerous and -- defective and unreasonably dangerous, philip morris concealed or omitted material information not otherwise known or available, knowing the material was false or misleading, or failed to disclose a material fact concerning the health effects or the addictive nature of smoking cigarettes, or both. philip morris agreed -- conspiracy -- agreed with other tobacco companies to conceal or omit information regarding the health effects of cigarettes or their addictive nature, or both, with the intention, intending that smokers and the public would rely on this information to their detriment. and that last word is important. to their detriment. to their illness. to their death. philip morris was negligent. importantly, the jury instructions you have in front of you provide that these finding may not be denied, questioned, and they must carry the same weight that they would have if you had determined them yourselves. the next question is the statute of limitations question. importantly there is a difference in this with the statute of limitations. that means that is a defense the defendant has raised, thus they bear the burden of proof. they have to prove it. the burden is on them by the greater weight of the evidence that ms. jordan knew, or by use of reasonable care should have known, before may of 1990. so in some ways the argument will be on both sides. they are going to try and argue i believe, and they have tried to put on evidence that she knew -- she did not know before 1990, or she did, she knew before 1990. by the reasonable care should have known before may 1990 that she had copd, and there is a reasonable possibility copd was caused by cigarette smoking. ladies and gentlemen, there is not any evidence -- i submit there is not any evidence that she knew she had copd before 1990. none of the evidence that you are going to take back there with you, none of the documents, none of the medical records will show that she had or knew, her own testimony. where does that evidence come from? where? ask yourselves when they are arguing what evidence do you have of that? therefore, we think the statute of limitations clearly does not apply. they have not met their burden. that is their burden to prove that before 1990 she knew she had copd. they have not presented any evidence to support that, so no should be checked on question 2. these are the fraudulent concealment and the civil conspiracy questions. state whether philip morris' concealment or omission of material facts about the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes, or both, were a legal cause of elaine jordan's injuries. same question, whether they are agreement was a legal cause of elaine jordan's injuries. now, the judge will instruct you what that means, and i'm going to read that. it is a little long. [#deleted recess#] ms. shamp: thank you, your honor. i think when we took a break i was just about to talk about the next question on the jury -- the verdict form, which is questions number 3 and 4, fraudulent concealment and civil conspiracy to fraudulently conceal. and this is essentially the fraud counts. this is the question of whether what the defendants did was a fraud, and whether that fraud -- there was a legal cause of harm to elaine jordan. and what the jury charge on that is, is that elaine jordan's reliance on such statements to her detriment is a legal cause of loss, injury, or damage if it directly, in a natural and continuous sequence, produces or contributes substantially to producing her loss, injury, or damage, so that it can be reasonably said that, but for elaine jordan's reliance, her loss, injury or damage would not have occurred. so, really, the question is here, reliance. was the conspiracy in fraud part of why elaine jordan smoked? did she rely upon what they said? and there is been a lot of evidence about that. the first thing that you have is you have the findings, because at this point, if you are at this point in the jury form, you have already been instructed that the findings apply. so we know that philip morris concealed or omitted material information that was not otherwise known, not otherwise known. so what we talked about was the campaign of doubt and denial. and i just put up these few little pictures to remind you of these various individuals that testified and their campaign of doubt and denial. and then we also talked about that cigarettes are the most heavily advertised product in america. and this is from the ftc, federal trade commission, investigation in 1981. the most heavily advertised product in america. so at the same time that they know that cigarette smoking is causing lung cancer and lung disease, they are advertising the product in all the ways that we put on evidence and showed: the marlboro man, the out in the country, the fresh and wild outdoors. so pervasive is cigarette advertising that it is virtually impossible for americans of almost any age to avoid cigarette advertising. and then we looked at what is the impact of that. and this is, again, in the ftc report: "the commission believes that the warning label on cigarette packages has not succeeded in overcoming the prevalent attitude toward cigarette smoking created and maintained by the cigarette companies through their advertisements." essentially, the warnings cannot compete with the massive amount of advertising that presents this product as being a natural, healthy part of an outdoor lifestyle. "particularly, the barrage of commercials on television which portray smoking as a harmless and enjoyable social activity that is not habit-forming and involves no hazards to health." their overwhelming advertising campaign, even in the face of (inaudible), made people continue to smoke. that was the point of it. that is the purpose of it is to keep people smoking. and, importantly, the data indicates that smokers are more likely to have incorrect beliefs about the relationship between smoking and lung cancer than non-smokers." and, "among all smokers, 28 percent," in the time this was done, "did not believe smoking caused lung cancer; while, among heavier smokers, a pack a day or more, nearly a third did not believe or know about the link. 38 percent of smokers believe that they still have not proven that smoking causes cancer." why am i putting up this evidence? (inaudible) that their campaign was working, that people did not believe. the campaign of doubt that they put out, the campaign was working. and it makes sense. they were spending millions of dollars to do it. they were spending millions of dollars. and, people, it worked. it worked. people did not believe that it would impact their own health. this, i think, is a very important document, the false and misleading advertising in congress. and you will see the conclusions from this report. "the cigarette manufacturers have deceived the american public through their advertising of filter-tipped cigarettes. without specifically claiming that the filter tip removes the agents alleged to contribute to heart disease or lung cancer, the advertising has emphasized claims such as clean smoking, snowy white, pure, miracle tip, 2000 filters, gives you more of what you change the filter for, and other phrases that imply health protection, when, actually, most filter cigarettes produce as much or more nicotine and tar as cigarettes without filters, and, as a result, the connection between filter-tipped cigarettes and protection has become deeply embedded in the public's mind." they are advertising a filtered cigarette, a cigarette that takes the fear out of smoking. that is a philip morris ad. this is another philip morris ad for their filtered cigarettes. they knew this. this was an intentional misleading campaign because this is their own document. and this is p-283, which is a special report: "the illusion of filtration is as important as the fact of filtration." and they put out the marlboro lights and said they were lower in tar, when they knew that they were not, and that it afforded no protection, and she switched. reliance. this is our evidence directly that she relied on what they said. and the evidence is clear from her that she believed it, and she relied upon it. and that is what the fraud and conspiracy question asks, did she rely to her detriment. this is from the surgeon general's report, which you will have back with you, which is p-487: "by the mid-seventies, the tobacco industry well understood the importance of creating health reassurance messages through claims of low delivery of tar." they knew it. the claims they made that she relied upon. "at the same time, tobacco company documents also clearly demonstrate that the industry understood that smokers would not achieve the claimed deliveries because of smoker compensation." this is evidence directly of reliance. so with respect to this question on the verdict form, the overwhelming evidence that we have put on of this campaign of doubt and denial, the evidence of the low tar, the filter cigarettes, and then we link it to elaine jordan and her actual behavior. what philip morris wants to argue, ladies and gentlemen, did not make any difference, nobody relied on it. we spent this millions and millions of dollars, but it did not actually impact anybody. it did not actually impact anybody. we were just spending these millions of dollars, but nobody relied on us. one of the jury charges you have is you have to use your common sense, use your common sense when you make your deliberations. this campaign of denial, this campaign that low tar will be safer for you was intended to make smokers rely, and it worked. and we brought elaine jordan to tell you it worked on her, and that instead of quitting in 1993, she switched to lights and continued to smoke. it worked on her. therefore, with respect to reliance, you may use your reason and common sense to reach your conclusions, and you may draw reasonable inferences. and that is an inference, that this massive campaign, that they would not have spent all that money unless it worked. and that is an inference that you can draw. whether philip morris' concealment or omission of a material fact about the health effects -- and that is one of them that the surgeon general's report says that they omitted telling people, it is not any lower in tar -- that that was a legal cause of elaine jordan's injuries. same question with respect to the conspiracy. same issue. not just philip morris, but together they agreed to do this. same question. same answer. now, the next issue that we get to is comparative fault. and we have touched upon that before as well; but, that, again, is the defendant's defense. and you remember, the judge instructed you about that, and you will have those instructions. that is something that the defendant has raised as a defense. and their defense is elaine jordan was responsible, too. but, importantly, that is -- they bear the burden of proving that elaine jordan did something wrong. okay? philip morris bears the burden of proving its defense of comparative fault by a greater weight of the evidence. if the greater weight of the evidence does not support philip morris' defense, and the greater weight of the evidence does support ms. jordan's claim, then your verdict should be for elaine jordan in the total amount of the damages." so the verdict form will ask you: "please state for each party the percentage of any responsibility that you charge to that party for legally causing elaine jordan's damages." what evidence was put on? if you want to compare, that is what that is. philip morris lied with the intention that smokers would rely to their detriment. why? to sell more cigarettes. for money. let us compare that. let us compare that kind of action to what elaine jordan did. she did not try harder; is that their argument? when she started smoking when she was 14 years old? when she was addicted? when she tried everything she could think of to quit, when they were suppressing the sale of even nicorette gum to help her. just compare what they did to what she did. and they bear the burden of proving that she did something wrong and how much her fault contributed. they bear that burden. ladies and gentlemen, we contend that philip morris is responsible for this, not elaine jordan. and if she is, it is a very small amount compared to their conduct. not trying harder when she was addicted. not knowing better when she was 14 years old. compare what they knew and what they did and why they did it. greed. next, you will get to the issue of damages, ladies and gentlemen. and there is several questions on the verdict form about damages, and we put on evidence of this. the first evidence is the total amount of medical damages, including all medical bills sustained by elaine jordan. and the total amount, you remember, i put them up there, all those bills, which will go back in evidence, but the total from their summary of them, over 2 million dollars. and the judge will instruct you that you are not to consider any kind of payments that were made or insurance or anything, and that is in your instructions right there. the total amount of the bills is what the total amount of damages that the plaintiff has put on as evidence, $2,092,186.64. and then we also put on evidence through mr. spruance of what the future medicals are. and you will not have a document back there because this comes from his testimony that he did orally in front of you; but, the total amount of the future medical care costs of 219,744 on the small end, and 844,000 on the large end. and there is a range there, and you will have to go back and decide which end of that range or in the middle somewhere you want to or you feel is appropriate to award. but you should consider things like the cost of medicines will go up. and you should consider things like what future expenses she might have and what mr. spruance said about that within that range. and i think you remember ms. speed asking, have you ever known medical expenses to go down? so the range is there between 219 and 844,000. past lost income, mr. spruance also testified about. and, again, there is no evidence on the other side of any of these. this evidence went in undisputed. and the range was 379,000 to 436. and that is a pretty tight range. and that is based upon some different assumptions that he made with respect to what she lost; and that is past, from the time she had to retire in 1999 up until the time she would have retired at the age of 65, that is that loss for that period of time. then the next question -- that is all of question number 7. the next question is: what is the total amount of damages for loss of services sustained? again, this also comes from mr. spruance's testimony. and the range is 71,000 to 81,000. and i already talked about that, the kinds of things she is not able to do because of her copd, that she would have to in the future hire somebody to do for her. and then now i get to this question, which is more difficult. what the court will tell you is, is that the amount of pain and suffering is up to the jury, in the lay conscience of the jury to deliberate and decide. and it is very difficult to put a number on suffering. and, ladies and gentlemen, i'm no expert at it, but there are things that you can think about because we put numbers on things all the time that are hard to put numbers on. so here's some of the things i think that you can think about. one thing you can think about is what is the magnitude of this harm? how bad was the pain and suffering? and i think you remember dr. rothstein said he had never -- in all of his years of practice, never seen anybody that went through as much. the magnitude you should consider. and so i think of it in my mind. there is small harms, there is medium harms, and then there is major harms. and certainly, this falls in the major. the length of time that somebody has this pain and suffering. how long did this last? and, ladies and gentlemen, she was diagnosed in 1993, and this is 2015, 22 years. 22 years. and what she has gone through, the number of surgeries, being near death, in and out of the hospital. you saw the chart when mr. spruance put it up of how many times in and out of the hospital, how many times near death, how many times her chest has been cut open, not being able to breathe. think about that when you are trying to assess pain, suffering, disability and physical impairment, mental anguish, inconvenience, and loss of the capacity for the enjoyment of life, in the past and in the future. there is two lines there, what she is already suffered and what we know she is going to suffer down the road because we heard testimony about that. how long her life lasts, (inaudible), those are all things that you can consider. and i'm going to ask for a number to put in there. and that number is not the floor, it is not the ceiling, because it is going to be up to you to deliberate as to what is the appropriate number there. but based on the evidence that you have heard -- and i think that that is the way you have to think about it, what is the evidence you heard on suffering from dr. rothstein, from elaine jordan herself, what is the evidence of the impact itself? what i'm going to ask that you put in there is 5 million dollars for past and 5 million dollars for future. i think that is a fair number for having suffered for 22 years with the copd and the extreme pain and suffering that she has been through. mr. cofer: i cannot hear her. ms. shamp: then, at the end, there is question number 10, where you add all of those lines up for all, 6-a through 9-a and b, and come up with a total amount of damages. and lastly, i want to address just for a moment punitive damages. "under the circumstances of this case, state whether, by clear and convincing evidence, punitive damages" -- and we talked about this (inaudible). punitive damages are given in order to punish and deter. and what the jury instructions are is they are warranted if you find by clear and convincing evidence the conduct causing loss to the plaintiff was so gross and flagrant as to show a reckless disregard for human life or of the safety of persons exposed to the effects of such conduct. and i think it is overwhelming that the conduct of the defendant showed exactly that, disregard for human life, total disregard for how their conduct affected not just individuals, but -- mr. cofer: your honor, i cannot hear ms. shamp. ms. shamp: i'm sorry. i'll speak louder. -- not only individuals, but their whole family. reckless disregard. we think the evidence is clear. mr. cofer: objection, your honor. this is improper argument. may we approach? the court: yes. (the following took place at the bench:) mr. cofer: they cannot consider the harm to the family. you cannot. there is no consortium claim. you cannot consider harm to the family. they intentionally did not bring a consortium claim. i've asked for a jury instruction -- ms. shamp: your honor, i think what i was saying was right, their disregard for human life and safety of persons exposed to such conduct. the court: you said families. and i think what i'm going to do is i'm going to sustain your objection, and i'm going to say, when you go back out there, to remind them the only person they are to award damages for is ms. jordan herself. mr. cofer: and there is no claim that the family is seeking damages. ms. shamp: that is fine. the court: i think that is fair. (bench conference concluded.) the court: i just want to remind our jury that the only claim for damages in this case is for ms. jordan herself, and not for any other individual. so the only person you should consider, if you wish to give damages to, is to ms. jordan herself. please proceed, ms. shamp. ms. shamp: the punitive damage instruction tells you that if we have proven by clear and convincing evidence that the conduct of philip morris showed an entire lack of care such that philip morris must have been consciously indifferent to the consequences, the conduct showed such an entire lack of care that philip morris must have wantonly or recklessly disregarded the safety and welfare of the public, or the conduct showed such reckless and indifference to the rights of others as to be equivalent to an intentional violation of those rights. so i want to talk for a minute about what we think the evidence shows with respect to why we think punitive damages, damages to punish (inaudible) satisfies this. and the court's instruction, it is in your instructions, so you can look at them in the punitive damages section, says that: "in determining whether punitive damages are warranted, you may consider similar harms suffered by other persons not parties to this lawsuit in assessing the reprehensibility, the reprehensibility or wrongfulness of philip morris' actions. so you can consider the harms that have been suffered by other persons in deciding was their conduct reprehensible. mr. cofer: objection, your honor, misstates the law. may we approach? the court: yes. (the following took place at the bench:) mr. cofer: it must be the same or similar conduct that harmed ms. jordan. you cannot consider harm to others except for the same and similar conduct. ms. shamp: i believe that is the charge. mr. cofer: but that is not what you said. the court: you said something different, so if you would just clarify. ms. shamp: i meant to be reading from it. the court: that is fine. thank you. that is fine. (bench conference concluded.) ms. shamp: let me read exactly what it says, because you will have this with you: "in determining whether punitive damages are warranted, you may consider similar harms suffered by other persons not parties to this lawsuit in assessing reprehensibility." all right. let us talk for a minute about whether punitive damages are awarded. the first thing i want to talk about is their statements about whether nicotine was addictive. this is a document from them, the battelle document, i think. and it is p-238: "moreover, nicotine is addictive. we then are in the business of selling nicotine, an addictive drug effective in the release of stress mechanisms that cause or predispose to lung cancer." and this is from 1963. and yet, in 1994, their president of philip morris goes on television and says smoking is not addictive. the question i think you need to ask yourself with respect to punitive damages is how egregious is this conduct, how serious is it, is it done with the intent to harm, with the intent to addict, and with the intent to entice children to their product? and we put on evidences of all of those things, and you will have that evidence back. one is that philip morris studied the smoking patterns of children as young as 12 years old. this document that you will have back there: "the smoking patterns of teenagers are particularly important to philip morris." "it is important to know as much as possible about teenage smoking patterns and attitudes. today's teenager is tomorrow's potential regular customer, and the overwhelming majority of smokers first begin to smoke while still in their teens." and you will have documents back there where they will have studies that show current regular smokers at the age of 12 to 14, looking at their smoking patterns, looking -- and then developing their marketing to attract those individuals, those kids to their product. this is a document that does just that, talking about: "an upper age limit of 24 was assigned, but no lower age limit." and then it said: "interviewers were instructed to go to the locations where young people, as described in their quota assignments, were likely to be found, near high schools and colleges, around young people's hangouts such as soda fountains, recreation areas, parks." this is from 1974. and there is many documents like this that we showed through dr. proctor's testimony of how they were targeting and marketing to children. this is where 18-year-olds and less are studied, and they are looking at them in their marketing documents. this is the document, you will recall, where they actually were -- they said it was an excellent suggestion to hand out candy, chocolate cigarettes to children. you will have that document back there. it is p-172. "in my opinion, this is an excellent suggestion." and there is more documents surrounding that. and this is philip morris' report to the board of directors in 1969, where they are studying why young people smoke. "we have to break the question into two parts. the 16-to-20-year-old began smoking for psychosocial reasons. the act of smoking is symbolic. it signifies adulthood. he smokes to enhance his image in the eyes of his peers. but the psychological motive is not enough to explain continued smoking. some other motive forces take over to make smoking rewarding in its own right. long after adolescent preoccupation with self image has subsided, the cigarette will preempt food in times of scarcity on the smoker's priority list." they were studying what teenagers wanted, and then marketed directly to them. you heard dr. proctor talk about placement of their product in movies and how -- and you also saw surgeon general's report of how placement in movies actually influenced children beginning to smoke. and we showed you the clip from grease and how smoking was portrayed as an initiation into adulthood in the grease movie. and, in fact, they supplied product. and philip morris, on p-400, you will see the entire list of movies in which they had supplied product for. and this is from the surgeon general's report from 1994, which you will have back there, which actually talks about the impact of it. and it says: "most adolescent smokers are addicted to nicotine, and they want to quit but are unable to do so. they experience relapse rates and withdrawal symptoms similar to those reported by adults." preventing tobacco use among -- this is another surgeon general's report which states that: "the evidence sufficient to conclude that there is a causal relationship between advertising and promotional efforts of tobacco companies and the initiation and progression of tobacco use among young people." so we have put on evidence not only that they marketed to kids, but that it worked. not only that they marketed to kids, but that it worked. and, ladies and gentlemen, we argue that that is reprehensible conduct, that that merits punitive damages, and that punitive damages for that alone ought to be awarded, in addition to all the other evidence that we put on. but this is the second piece of that, and that is, they did not just let the tobacco -- roll it, put it in a cigarette and smoke it. they actually designed their products in order to addict people. and dr. proctor talked about that, the specific ways in which they did that -- there are documents back there -- that they add nicotine to cigarettes and define the contribution of nicotine to flavor. and that document is p-499. what the nicotine delivery level should be. and this is a highly designed product, and they talk about that, including this one: "nicotine delivery can be controlled via the filter or smoke ph adjustment." and you will remember dr. proctor talking particularly about marlboro, and how because of the ammonia added, it added that kick. and marlboro went from being a nobody in the market to being the number one product. that this was a design feature designed to create and sustain addiction. this is not just a product that they put out there and say, people, smoke it if you want to. they intentionally want people to become addicted to it. and, ladies and gentlemen, that merits punitive damages. their own document says: "we cannot defend smoking as free choice if the person was addicted." and this is from their lawyers. i want to mention just for a minute the overwhelming battle that the public health community is facing. we showed documents about it, the overwhelming battle. the tobacco industry spent more on advertising -- mr. cofer: your honor, may we approach? the court: yes, sir. (the following took place at the bench:) mr. cofer: this is improper argument for punitive damages. she is on the punitive damages part of the argument now. she is talked about, you know, kids and others. now she is talking about the public health community. that has nothing to do with punitive damages, and it is confusing to the jury. you can punish for the harm to ms. jordan. if similar actions harm others, they can be considered reprehensible. in terms of public health community versus cigarette companies, it has nothing to do with punitive damages. ms. shamp: a part of the punitive damages argument is their advertising campaign, that their advertising campaign -- and that is what i was arguing -- that their advertising campaign is overwhelming, and the public health community has no fight against that, and they know that. and so that is part of punitive damages. mr. cofer: she is already arguing about advertising. frankly, advertising speech. she has to tie our actions to ms. jordan. this has nothing to do with ms. jordan, and it is time she move on. she is argued about this already. this is improper at this point. the court: i do think it is time for you to move on, so i'll sustain that. ms. shamp: i'm moving. i'm trying. (bench conference concluded.) ms. shamp: finally, ladies and gentlemen, we believe the evidence is clear and convincing that plaintiff is entitled to an award of punitive damage to punish and deter the conduct of the defendant, and that you should check yes in that box. ladies and gentlemen, i want to thank you, again. because i am the plaintiff in this case, we have -- i represent the plaintiff -- we have the right after the conclusion of mr. cofer's talking to go up and talk -- to come back and talk to you again briefly to rebut what he says. thank you for your attention. ms. shamp: thank you, your honor. good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. the jurors: good afternoon. ms. shamp: i just want to address a few of the things that dr. -- that mr. cofer said. and i will not address all of them, but i think some of them need at least some more conversation about. the very last thing that he said, he said to you that this case is about one smoker. this case is about one smoker and the conduct of philip morris. it is not only about elaine jordan, but it is also about philip morris. and what philip morris argues is that nothing that they did caused anybody any harm. ladies and gentlemen, as i said, you rely on your common sense, and you look at the conduct that they engaged in, the totality of the conduct that they engaged in. mr. cofer's talked about how there was a product that was legal for sale and that they cannot be punished for selling a product. and, in fact, that is not what the plaintiff has presented at all. but they can be punished for fraud and the conspiracy that they engaged in. i want to back up and start with the beginning of what he talked about. and he talked about the three questions. you remember what this case is about. but, ladies and gentlemen, the case is not about why mrs. jordan smoked. you will have question 1 about class membership. you will have that in your jury instructions. to prove elaine jordan meets the class definition and is a member of the class, she must prove that she was addicted, that her chronic obstructive lung disease was caused by her addiction to cigarettes and that she manifested chronic obstructive lung disease by november 21st, 1996. the question is not why she smoked. the question is: was she addicted? in some ways, the argument philip morris makes in this case is circular. on the one hand, they argue, well, she did quit and because she did not quit, then she was not addicted because she could have just put them down. and then they argue, well, she did quit. she was able to quit and thus she was not addicted because she could just put them down. it is a circular argument. under his argument, no one would be addicted. and the suggestion in closing argument that his -- that addiction is like making the choice whether to get out of bed in the middle of the night displays a great misunderstanding of the concept of addiction. and talk about the way in which mr. cofer represented some of the evidence that was presented. and you took notes and know what the evidence is. but mr. cofer said in his closing several times -- i wrote it down, i think, seven times -- that elaine jordan's father died of emphysema. the evidence which you heard was that elaine jordan's father died of a stroke and that he had emphysema. and that statement is not what the evidence is that mr. cofer said. the evidence is that he died of a stroke and that he had emphysema. also, mr. cofer said, i think, that there are certainly going to be over the thousands of employees of philip morris; maybe somebody wrote down some dumb things. i heard him make that argument. but i want to point out the documents that i put on during our case and who wrote them. not the thousands of employees at philip morris, the president. this document was written by the vice president of philip morris, george weissman, vice president of the philip morris association -- philip morris company, the speech by the president of philip morris. do you have the pictures? mr. m. kalil: oh, i think it is further down. ms. shamp: sorry, oh. howard cullman, who was on the board of directors of philip morris; joseph cullman, who was at one time the president of philip morris; william campbell, the president of philip morris. the suggestion that we were putting on evidence of documents from the thousands of employees of philip morris does not reflect the evidence that you heard. these are the highest levels within the company that made these representations. mr. cofer said that we put up documents from other manufacturers, and as the court instructs you, those are co-conspirators, that you can -- you can consider evidence of co-conspirators. and there were very few documents that came from the other manufacturers. if you will look at the documents that we presented here, they are mostly from philip morris, a few from the co-conspirators. but as the court instructed you, you have the right to read those and look at them. now, mr. -- and i objected but mr. cofer said that there has to be a link between philip morris's conduct and ms. jordan's injury in order to meet the class membership definition and all -- definition. and all i'll say to you is you will have the instructions with you, and you will see exactly what is required. and the instructions are instruction 10 and instruction 14. and they will tell you exactly what has to be. and what it says is that if the plaintiff meets the class membership and there is not a statute of limitation, then she has satisfied all of her claims -- right? -- and that she is entitled to recover them. that is in instruction 14. we also have put into evidence the full poll of what mr. cofer was showing you that ninety percent of the people had heard. the full poll is that plaintiff's 932. and what is important about the full poll is that what -- the question that mr. cofer put up, how many people have heard that smoking causes lung cancer? what we put up is that forty percent of the people responded that they did not believe it, that they did not believe that smoking caused lung cancer. so the question of whether people had heard something is, of course, very different than whether they had believed it. i thought it was very interesting when mr. cofer put up the surgeon general's report from 1964, saying that in that report they decided that there was not -- that smoking was not an addiction. you remember he put up the actual '64 surgeon general's report. i think it is very interesting. i have to figure out where we are here. because i put up this document from 1963. and what is the importance of that document time-wise is the year before the surgeon general's report comes out, where they said, moreover, nicotine is addictive. now, the surgeon general then, of course, does not say that nicotine is addictive. why? because they do not give those research documents to the surgeon general. and this's a document you will have back with you, p237. "prior to receipt, there is talic hoyt of the tirc has agreed to withhold disclosure of the battelle report to the tirc members or fau until further notice. agreed, submission of battelle or griffith developments to the surgeon general is undesirable." the surgeon general was kept in the dark by the conspiracy, like members of the public were kept in the dark by the conspiracy. again, what is the evidence and the truth? mr. cofer said in his argument that she became a regulation smoker in 1966. you heard the evidence. her child was born the end -- in september 25th, would have been a christmas baby, december 25th, in 1965, is when she testified she became a regular smoker, not after the warnings went on the packages. now, mr. cofer went on to say about the -- the issue of the light cigarettes and i think that is very important. but you will have the surgeon general's report with you. and the point that he made, being that there were some people who were saying people should switch to lights, and he showed the surgeon general's report from 1980s that said people should switch to lights and the surgeon general -- well, the surgeon general's report from 2010, which is p487, page 37 -- and i put this up in my closing earlier. but here, it shows you, at the same time, the tobacco company documents also clearly demonstrate that the industry understood that smokers would not achieve the claimed delivery. again, even the surgeon general earlier had thought that low tars would be a better solution, but in 2010, they realized and reported. and this is evidence that you can consider as to whether or not the company intentionally misrepresented the information that they knew about light cigarettes. again, mr. cofer said, she -- why did not she tell her husband of having all that? there was absolutely no evidence that she did not tell her husband. the question was asked, did she tell her other family members when it was asked whether her sister knew about the diagnosis? there is absolutely no evidence that she did not tell her husband about her diagnosis with copd. that is just not the case. but i want to talk a little bit more about the issue of manifestation because i think some of the things that mr. cofer said do not accurately represent what the facts are that you will have. because one thing he left out and that is dr. rothstein's opinion. and you will remember that the court said you are to consider dr. rothstein's opinion that there was a diagnosis in 1993. and you will remember dr. rothstein testifying about what he based that opinion on. and he said he based that opinion upon the natural course of her disease. and he based that opinion upon dr. tecson's record, where it indicated that she had copd five years earlier. and he based his opinion upon records that he had seen from the 1993 hospitalization. and all these things together, he testified that he believed she had a diagnosis in 1993. and that, ladies and gentlemen, is the actual testimony that you have to rely upon, that she had a diagnosis of the disease in 1993. now, mr. cofer said -- and i think he said that dr. tecson never said that ms. jordan told him she had emphysema. and we went back over the break and pulled up the actual -- mr. cofer: your honor, objection. may we approach, please? the court: yes. [#deleted sidebar#] ms. shamp: as i was saying -- good. mr. cofer said to you that dr. tecson had not testified that mrs. jordan told him that she had emphysema five years before. and this is actually what his testimony is. "question: in reporting her history to you, did she tell you anything about her history of emphysema? "answer: she had history and -- of asthma and emphysema. "and when does it say she had that history? "this one, october 24, 1998. "well -- okay. let us look at the record. it says 'had history of asthma attacks five years ago, also had emphysema.' do you see that? "yes. "so was she reporting to you on october 24th, 1998, that she had had asthma attacks and emphysema five years ago -- five years prior? "answer: yes." that was what the testimony was of dr. tecson. and that is why i went through the soap, what she had reported, and you will have that document back with you. one thing that mr. cofer put up that i thought was very interesting -- and i know this because i had not actually noticed it before he put it up -- and those were the social security records that he put up. and what i noted while he put it up -- and you probably noted the same thing -- that in 1993, she had a dip in her income of about 15 percent. it went from 21,000 in 1992 down to 18,000 in 1990 and then went back up, more evidence that in 1993, when she went to baptist hospital, she was diagnosed and got sick on that day. that is additional evidence that mr. cofer just put up in his closing argument. you know, what mr. cofer said, i think you have to look at, the implication of his argument was that tonya spencer and elaine jordan are not telling the truth. that was what he said, that elaine jordan, because she has an interest in getting money, was not being truthful on the stand. and mr. cofer said, i know it is confusing, when he started arguing about the manifestation and the statute of limitations and, frankly, i was confused too. because it appears to me that what they are arguing is that she did not know she had copd until after 1996. well, okay. all right. well, then if she did know, then it was before 1990. they are trying to argue out of both sides of their mouth, that either she did not know at all until 1999 or, okay, well, then she absolutely knew in 1989. they cannot have it both ways. they are trying to create some controversy around the very simple fact, and that is she was in the hospital in baptist in '93 and got the diagnosis of copd then. that is what the evidence shows. that is what the hard record shows with respect to dr. tecson's record and dr. rothstein's opinion. you know, with respect to class membership, as -- what mr. cofer said, if you think about it, there would be no class members. because what he argued -- and i stood up and objected three times during his closing because he said she could quit. and, therefore, if she could quit, then it was not her addiction that caused her disease. well, if it is true, every single witness -- every person who is addicted can quit. there would be absolutely no class members. but that is not -- that is not the standard that you have to look at. the question is not whether she could quit. what dr. wright said very clearly was is that there was no pathological evidence of asthma on her slides, showed that. i can look at the slides and see there is no pathological evidence of asthma. and, in fact, if you look -- and you will have them back there, all of the baptist records, where they looked -- the surgical records, look at the slides, none of them said that she had a pathological evidence of asthma on them. dr. rothstein said she did not have asthma. i tested her; she did not. looking at the slides, she did not have asthma. that is what they both say. mr. cofer attacks dr. wright but i think that dr. wright's credentials are extensive. he was the medical examiner and he goes in and testifies in court because that is what medical examiners do. they come in and say, yes, i can tell by the blood spatter pattern; yes, i can tell by the way the wound -- the -- that is what they do, medical examiners. and the other thing they do, which hospital pathologists do not do, they determine the cause of death. they sign the death certificate. they sign the death certificate that says this is the cause. and that is why we brought the chief medical examiner from miami-dade county for over 25 years to come in and say, this is the cause of what i see in the lungs. and that is what a medical examiner does, not a surgical pathologist. and ms. speed made that point when she was examining stonesifer. he does not write down when he is viewing slides that it is caused by smoking or that it was caused by -- that is not what his job is. he just says what he sees. but a medical examiner determines the cause, what caused it, signs the death certificate, and that is why dr. wright came in and told you that. ladies and gentlemen, i know that you are anxious to get to your deliberation, and i want you to go in and do that. and i talked a lot during the course of my closing arguments, both before and after mr. cofer's, about the truth and where the truth lies. and the reason i talked about that is because when you go back into the jury room, you are going to render a verdict. and what verdict means is "to speak the truth." veritas means truth in latin. dicta, like from a dictaphone, means "to speak." so a verdict is to speak the truth. now, we believe that the evidence will support that elaine jordan was a member of the class, that she suffered extreme and real harm as a result of the defendant's conduct, that their fraud and their conspiracy, she relied upon it when she switched to smoking light cigarettes. the surgeon general's report confirmed that. and we believe we are entitled to an award of punitive damages. for all of the reasons that we discussed, that conduct is egregious that you saw from the evidence in the stand. their conduct is egregious. and you can look at what the standard is. now, the punitive damages phase, dr. -- mr. cofer was right when he said, you are not to consider the amount of punitive damages right now, that all you are to consider is whether the plaintiff is entitled to it. the amount can be -- will be decided in a second phase, which is very short, typically lasts less than a day. plaintiff believes that not only is she a member of the class; she is -- on all of the questions that i went through on the verdict form and perhaps most importantly, that punitive damages are warranted in this case based on the evidence that was presented to you over the course of the last three weeks. i want to thank you so much for your attention, and i look forward to your verdict.