mr. cofer: counsel, ms. jordan, members of the jury, good afternoon. i told you in opening statement that we believe this case comes down to three pretty straightforward questions: why did ms. jordan smoke; why did she wait so long to quit; and did philip morris do something wrong that caused her to smoke and get sick. and i told you that the evidence would be that ms. jordan smoked because her friends and family smoked and because she liked to smoke. she said she always had the ability to quit smoking whenever she made up her mind that she really wanted to quit and was willing to make an effort, her efforts to quit. and finally, that nothing that philip morris did or did not do, said or did not say, caused her to begin and continue smoking. so let us look at the evidence. question 1: why did ms. jordan smoke? you may remember plaintiff's very first witness was dr. david burns. and he told you that two of the most important factors in determining whether someone smokes is whether their friends and family smoke. and we know, members of the jury, that many of the important people in ms. jordan's life are smokers. in fact, ms. jordan told dr. blank, while a couple of her co-workers were non-smokers, that most everyone she knew and worked with smoked. we know that her dad was a smoker. he smoked until 1970, when he died of a stroke and emphysema. ms. jordan's sister, judy, is a long-time smoker. and ms. jordan told you that she cannot remember a time when her brother tommy was not a smoker. ms. jordan's first husband, mitchell johnston, he was a smoker, and he smoked throughout their marriage. her second husband, her current husband, mr. clarence jordan, was a smoker who continued to smoke for years after ms. jordan herself quit. her son tim, her daughter, sheryll, are current smokers, and her daughter, tonya, told you that she quit just last january. but tonya spencer said something that i wrote down and i thought was very important in this case. what she told you was that smoking was just a way of life for her mother, and until her mother got sick, she enjoyed smoking. ms. jordan herself admitted that smoking relaxed her, it calmed her down, it helped her concentrate. she said she liked to have a cigarette with a cup of coffee, she liked to smoke when she watched tv, and she enjoyed playing cards and smoking. now, you heard that ms. jordan smoked her very first cigarette when she was at a carnival with some friends. her friends were smoking, and so she wanted to join in with them to fit in with the crowd. advertising did not cause ms. jordan to smoke. nothing philip morris said or did caused ms. jordan to begin smoking. she picked up that first cigarette because of peer pressure. she told you that. she said the cool kids were smoking, so she went over and wanted to be one of them. now, over the next couple years, she would occasionally get cigarettes from her friends, but she would also sneak cigarettes every now and then from her dad's pack. but she did not sneak her dad's cigarettes very often. do you remember why? because he smoked menthol, and she did not like the taste of menthol. now, ms. shamp has argued that for ms. jordan it was all about the nicotine. we know it was not just the nicotine; it was also about the taste. when ms. jordan became a regular smoker, she chose marlboro because it was a popular cigarette, and she told you she liked the way it tasted. dr. proctor told you there were three reasons marlboro is successful. he said: the advertising, he said ammonia -- and we talked about that -- and he said the taste or flavor. members of the jury, the evidence was that until ms. jordan got sick, she enjoyed smoking, and the cigarette that she enjoyed smoking the most was marlboro. so, why did ms. jordan smoke? because her friends and family smoked, and she liked to smoke. let us be honest. you know, most of us do things that we know are not necessarily good for us, whether we eat bad food, whether we drink too much beer, whether we spend too much time out in the sun on the days that it is sunny, whether it is, you know, staying up too late reading a good book or watching a movie when we know we have got an early morning. there are things that we all choose to do because we enjoy them. they give us pleasure. and as adults, we are entitled to make those choices. what it really comes down to is we have a lot of freedom to choose how we want to live our lives, and the decision whether to smoke is one of them. and we make our choices, and we are responsible for our choices. and you know what, do not take that from me. what did david burns say, their very first witness? you know he is no fan of philip morris or cigarette companies. "question: you said many times that smokers are responsible for their own smoking behavior, correct? "answer: that is correct. "question: and even if they are addicted, the smokers are still responsible for their own smoking behavior, correct?" and then what did dr. burns say? he said: "that is correct. the fact that someone is addicted, it is a barrier to behavioral change; but, it does not free them from responsibility for their own behavior." and that takes us to question 2: why did she wait so long to quit? you know, one of the first things i told you in opening statement, philip morris admits nicotine is addictive. some people who smoke will become addicted. but it is undisputed, you heard from every single witness in this case, that even addicted smokers can and do quit smoking. plaintiff's own experts told you that. dr. proctor told you that each and every day in this country 5,000 americans quit smoking. by the time of the 1990 surgeon general's report, almost half of all living adults in this country who ever smoked had quit. the vast majority of those quit cold turkey. they just put their cigarettes down and quit. currently, there are 60 million former smokers in this country, and many of them were addicted; but when they made the decision to quit smoking, they put their cigarettes down, and they did quit. now, you heard the evidence. the single most important factor in whether someone is successful in quitting smoking is motivation and persistence. simply put, unless and until the smoker makes up her mind that she truly wants to quit, and she is willing to make an effort or efforts to quit, chances are she is not going to quit, right? i mean, is that a surprise? i mean, is not that true of everything in our lives? until we make up our minds we really want to do it, we usually do not do it. so let me ask you this: before ms. jordan got sick, did she really want to quit? did she make a sincere and sustained effort to quit? so let us talk about that. ms. jordan testified that over the years she made several attempts to quit smoking. and she said that she would eat candy and peppermints and chew gum. she would occasionally hide her cigarettes by putting them in her purse or putting them in another room or leaving them in her car. and she told you that the first time that she tried to quit smoking was when she was pregnant with her son, tim, in 1966. now, just to remind you, to set the stage, ms. jordan had just become a regular smoker, and she decided she wanted to quit smoking because she thought it was nasty looking for a woman who was pregnant to smoke. and she said that smoking made her morning sickness worse, so she just did not want to smoke. that is what she told you. and you heard the question i asked her. i said: "well, ms. jordan, if you had just become a regular smoker, and you really did not want to smoke, why did not you just quit?" and she said: "i wish it were that easy." and then her testimony was, in 1966, when she was 17 years old and had just become a regular smoker, she was already so addicted that she simply could not quit. does that make sense to you? based on what you heard in this case, in your own life experiences, does that ring true? do you believe that ms. jordan was unable to quit, or do you think she just really did not want to quit? maybe she was not motivated to quit. because we know for a fact that she could quit, because she did. on february 27, 2002, ms. jordan quit smoking and never smoked another cigarette the rest of her life. but until then, until that day, she never went a single day without a cigarette. even on those days when she said she wanted to quit, she admitted she always had a cigarette in the morning. she never asked any of her friends or family how to quit. you saw in the records, when i asked dr. rothstein, he offered to refer her to a psychiatrist or psychologist, and she did not take him up on it. she never joined a support group or tried hypnosis or acupuncture. one time, she did ask one of her doctors for help in quitting, and he gave her a list of things to do; but, she admits she did not follow his advice. and when she was asked why, she said: "i guess i just did not want to quit," but then quickly added, "i could not." let us talk about that. you know, oftentimes, we say we cannot do something when we really do not want to. let me give you an example. maybe you heard about the guy who is home in bed, and he is sleeping away, and the phone rings. it is the middle of the night. and a co-worker says, hey, my car broke down, i need a ride, can you get out of bed and get me? he said, man, i'm sorry, i cannot. the guy said, i'll give you 100 bucks. he said, i'll be there in 15 minutes. you know, sometimes cannot actually means cannot; but, a lot of times, cannot means i do not really want to. members of the jury, we find a way to do the things that are important to us. and when it became important to ms. jordan to quit smoking, she quit. when she went into that hospital in february of 2002, she put her cigarettes down, and she never smoked again. she has not smoked a single cigarette in over 13 years. she is been able to quit and stay quit, even though her husband, her son, her daughter, her brother, and her sister continue to smoke. dr. blank told you it is virtually impossible to quit and to stay quit when the people around you smoke, yet since 2002 ms. jordan has done it. so why is that important in this case? because we all know every time we go to the doctor, the doctor says, do you smoke? and if you say yes, what does the doctor say? the doctor says, quit. and that is been true for a very long time. and the reason why doctors tell people to quit smoking is because when you quit, your risk of getting a smoking-related disease goes down. and if the smoker quits early enough and stays quit long enough, her risk of getting a smoking-related disease becomes about the same as a never smoker. what did dr. burns tell you? he said that ten years after a person quits smoking, the risk of dying drops by fifty percent. he said 15 years after quitting, the smoker's risk of dying is down by 80 percent. after 20 years, almost all of the risk is gone. that is dr. burns. what did dr. proctor tell you? he told you about dr. doll and dr. peto's 50-year doctor study -- do you remember that -- and what those doctors found. looking at what peto and doll found looking at doctors over a 50-year period, that on average smokers die ten years earlier than non-smokers; but, if they quit by age 34, they get all ten years back. ms. jordan turned 34 in 1983. if they quit by age 44, they get nine years back. ms. jordan turned 44 in 1993. if ms. jordan had stopped smoking in 1970, when the warning was changed to say smoking is dangerous to your health, and when her dad died of emphysema from smoking, or if she quit in 1985, when the pack warning was changed to say smoking causes lung cancer, heart disease, emphysema, and quitting smoking now greatly reduces serious risk to health, she would have avoided, basically, all of her smoking-related risk. but, of course, she did not quit. she made a different decision. and only ms. jordan was in control of her decision to smoke or quit smoking. members of the jury, the evidence is that ms. jordan always had the ability to quit. unfortunately, she waited until her lungs were so damaged that she needed a transplant before she did quit. and that takes us to question 3: did philip morris do something wrong that caused ms. jordan to smoke and get sick? you know, i told you in opening statement that if you look back over the last 60 years at the millions of pages of documents written by the thousands of employees at philip morris, you would see that when those things were taken out of context, they look pretty bad. they made statements where they said smoking was not a proven cause of lung cancer, smoking was not addicting. and i told you that the evidence would be that philip morris hung its hat on too many technical distinctions. they held on to those views for way too long. and, you know, if you think about it, given the number of people who worked at philip morris over the last 60 years, is it surprising that some of them had some bad ideas? and others, even with the best of intentions, made some mistakes? so what i told you i was going to do in opening statement, i said, you know, i'm going to do my best to give you the appropriate context to understand the documents and to understand what philip morris was saying and why they were saying it. so i want to show you and i want to talk about some of the documents. i want you to think about the documents that plaintiff showed you and the way they showed them to you. first, a number of the documents that you saw are not even philip morris documents. ms. shamp showed you documents from r. j. reynolds tobacco company and british american tobacco company and brown & williamson tobacco company. those are not philip morris documents. those were not written by philip morris employees. they do not in any way represent what philip morris was thinking. those were r. j. reynolds' and brown & williamson and b&w's private business records. there was no evidence those companies shared those documents with philip morris. and there was no evidence that ms. jordan saw them or relied on them or that they influenced her decision in any way. ms. jordan has sued philip morris. why did ms. shamp spend so much time showing you documents written by other companies, companies who are not defendants in this case? and when ms. shamp did show you a philip morris document, she often either took it out of context or did not tell you the whole story. let me give you just a few examples. in opening statement, ms. shamp told you that philip morris paid to have cigarettes or marlboro signage placed in the muppet movie. and she said that was a reason to punish philip morris and award ms. jordan punitive damages in this case. and i got up, and i told you that is absolutely not true. then when dr. proctor took the stand, he told you, well, okay, philip morris did give cigarettes to the people who made the movie, but he conceded there is no and there was no philip morris products or marlboro signage in the muppet movie. in fact, if you watch the muppet movie, you would never see any cigarettes. there was no cigarette smoking in the muppet movie. why did ms. shamp try to suggest otherwise? why? because it would have been a very prevalent thing to do, but philip morris did not do it. ms. shamp showed you a clip of superman 2. she showed you a picture of it in her closing argument that showed marlboro product placement. well, what you did not learn in cross-examination is that philip morris usa, the defendant in this case, was not the company who contracted with the movie. it was philip morris europe, a completely different company. why did plaintiff try to lead you to believe that the defendant in this case was responsible for something that it did not do? another example, and we saw this in closing argument when ms. shamp was telling you why philip morris should be punished, she showed you a couple of letters where gus wayne, an actor who portrayed little johnny, he suggested, hey, you know, how about i give candy cigarettes to little kids? and some philip morris employee said, gee, that sounds like a good idea. what you learned in cross-examination is it did not happen. there is not one shred of evidence that philip morris ever gave candy cigarettes to anyone. and to make the point, i said to dr. proctor, dr. proctor, you first raised this in 2013. you said there are millions of pages of documents. and you agree there is not a shred of evidence that philip morris ever gave candy cigarettes to anyone? and do not you think if there was, that proctor would have found it? so why was it suggested that philip morris did it? because we are protective of our children. because ms. shamp is trying to appeal to your emotion. because she wants to make you mad. so when i was in law school, my trial practice professor said, here's the deal. if you have got the facts, argue the facts. juries love the facts. if you have got the law, argue the law. judges love the law. if you do not have either, just make everybody as mad as you can. if philip morris had placed cigarette products in the muppet movie, if philip morris had given candy cigarettes to little kids, that would have been a very bad thing to do; but, what you learned when you had an opportunity to hear the other side of the story, philip morris did not do it. okay. here's the final example. in her opening statement, ms. shamp showed you a quote from a philip morris document called "motives," and a sentence that says: "no one has ever become a smoker by smoking cigarettes without nicotine." and ms. shamp suggested in her opening statement that philip morris knew people smoked for nicotine and tried to hide that from the public. well, frankly, that is just silly. dr. proctor admitted that it is been known since the 1900s that smokers smoke for the pharmacological effects of nicotine. and i showed you, remember, with him, a number of scientific articles and just articles in regular magazines that talked about nicotine being an important reason why people smoke. so when dr. proctor took the stand, they used this same document, and they showed you this same quote, and they tried to make the same point. "no one has ever become a cigarette smoker by smoking cigarettes without nicotine." they tried to suggest, see, we knew it. we knew something. philip morris knew something. they did not admit it. they kept it secret. and you remember the rule of completeness? the first time i tried to use it, i had the wrong document. that was kind of embarrassing. the second time, they were using this document. and i said, for the rule of completeness, would you please show the last paragraph? because i knew that this document was from a public speech. this was not a secret, hidden philip morris document. it was a speech that bill dunn -- and you see some of his documents -- made in 1972 at a conference on why people smoke. and you heard dr. proctor tell you that people from the national cancer institute and the surgeon general were in the audience and heard the speech. we then showed you this newspaper article, that after the speech bill dunn was interviewed by the local paper. it was the sunday edition, above the fold. and what did he say? "nicotine is an important reason why people smoke." and then i showed you the book, the book that dr. dunn -- that bill dunn put together. and dr. proctor told you that this book has been cited in four different surgeon general reports 12 different times. you know, if philip morris was trying to hide the fact that they think it is -- the nicotine is an important reason why people smoke, they sure chose an odd way of doing it. interestingly, you saw this document in opening statement, and you saw it in dr. proctor's testimony, but you did not see it today in closing argument. now, one thing that both dr. burns and dr. proctor said that i agree with, and that is, context is important. and let me be clear. i'm not here to say philip morris did not do some dumb things, but plaintiff has to prove more than that philip morris said or did some dumb things to recover in this case. plaintiff claims that philip morris fooled ms. jordan, and that she did not have the information she needed to make an informed decision whether to smoke or not smoke. and in order to recover in this case, plaintiff has to prove that philip morris actually did something legally wrong that affected ms. jordan. ms. shamp: objection, your honor. that is not a proper standard for class membership. mr. cofer: i'm not talking about class membership. ms. shamp: in order for us to recover, we have to prove that. it is, your honor. mr. cofer: in order to -- ms. shamp: for us to recover, we have to prove class membership. the court: i'll overrule. you can proceed, mr. cofer. mr. cofer: when you get to the jury room, look at instruction number 3. instruction number 3 is where it lays out all of the claims that plaintiff is making in this case. at the end of that, it says they have to prove that they caused ms. jordan's copd. in this case, they can make claims all day, but they have to link the wrongful conduct, the conduct they think is wrongful, to ms. jordan. ms. shamp: objection, your honor. we do not have to do that in order to prove class membership. mr. cofer: this is basic causation, your honor. ms. shamp: your honor, we do not have to prove causation in order to prove class membership. the court: i'm going to overrule. do you think we need to come over to sidebar? mr. cofer: i do not think we do. the court: i'm going to overrule. mr. cofer: okay. we are going to talk more about this, but let me tell you this. you have the jury instructions. and throughout this closing argument, i'm going to walk through some of the jury instructions with you. i'm going to talk with you about what it is plaintiff has to prove. i'm going to talk with you specifically about what the plaintiff has to prove with respect to class membership, okay? and so we will go through that and refer to some of the jury instructions. all right. so ms. shamp argued that philip morris, among other things, hid the risks of smoking from ms. jordan, and that she did not have the information that she needed to make an informed decision whether to smoke or not smoke. so let us look at the evidence. you know, i showed you on the timeline, and ms. shamp mentioned this in her opening as well, her closing as well, starting in the early 1950s, before ms. jordan was even born, studies were being published that linked cigarette smoking with lung cancer. and you know from dr. proctor, these studies were widely reported in the press, in newspapers, in magazines, and on television. and you heard about the famous mouse skin painting study in 1953, december of 1953, how ernst wynder and evarts graham painted tobacco condensate on the back of mice, and it produced skin tumors. and you heard that was a big deal and got a ton of attention. here's an example of how it was in life magazine. i think i also showed you when it was on tv in 1955, on the see it now program. and we know for a fact that these studies were getting a lot of attention and people were talking about them because in june of 1954, there was a national poll that asked have you heard or read anything recently to the effect that cigarette smoking may be a cause of cancer of the lungs, and ninety percent said yes. think about that. what question could you possibly ask the public today where ninety percent would say yes? i would not think very many things. ms. jordan was five years old at the time, and that was years before she tried her first cigarette. ten years later, in 1964, the surgeon general of the united states published its landmark report announcing to the world that cigarette smoking was a prudent cause of lung cancer. and plaintiff's own experts, both burns and proctor, told you it was a big deal and got a ton of publicity. it was literally front page news. it was the lead story on the night of the newscast. it was on the front page of the newspapers across the country. it was in the weekly magazines, like time and newsweek. and here's a report of how it was covered on cbs news with harry reasoner. (a video clip was played and transcribed by the court reporter to the best of her ability as follows:) "mr. reasoner: this is a cbs news extra, on smoking and health, the findings of the surgeon general committee. "almost from the moment that cigarettes were introduced, they were attacked, but the attack took a new turn 10 years ago, and culminated in the entry of a report by the surgeon general's committee. this, in summary, is what the committee says: "cigarette smoking is a major cause of lung cancer in men, and data on women smokers points the same way. cigarette smoking is a significant cause of cancer of the larynx and probably the most important cause of chronic bronchitis. "cigarette smoking may be related to other lung diseases. male smokers have a much higher death rate from heart disease, although it is not proven that smoking is the cause. "on the question of filters, the committee said there is no evidence that they do any good, but it did not exclude the possibility that an effective filter might be developed. in short, the committee says, if you smoke cigarettes, you increase your chances of dying early. the sooner you start, the more you smoke, the more you inhale, the worse your chances are. "the surgeon general's committee presented its report at a news conference in washington." "unidentified speaker: after long and exhaustive deliberations, the committee has reached the overall judgment that cigarette smoking is a health hazard of sufficient importance to the united states to warrant remedial action. "this overall judgment was supported by many converging lines of evidence, as well as by data indicating that cigarette smoking is relating to higher death rates in a number of disease categories. "more specifically, the committee states on page 61 of the report, and i quote, 'in view of the continuing and mounting evidence from many sources, it is the judgment of the committee that cigarette smoking contributes substantially to mortality from certain specific diseases and to the overall death rate." "mr. reasoner: cigarettes have been an intimate and reassuring companion. the familiar slogans, the familiar packages have been a part of our lives. it is like being told that an old friend has all along been betraying you. in a case like that, you give the old friend every possible chance before you finally decide to believe what you have been told, and maybe even then you give him a chance to reform. "in this time of our country, it comes down to you, whether you like it or not. no one is going to forbid an adult to smoke, and it is now quite clear that no one is going to tell him it is good for him either. the decision is his. the decision and the health that may depend on it. "this is harry reasoner. good night." (video clip ends.) mr. cofer: that is how it was covered on cbs. there was comparable coverage on both abc and nbc as well. elaine jordan was 14 years old at the time, and this was right around the time she tried her first cigarette at the carnival with some friends. now, of course, this would not have prevented her from trying the cigarette. she was 14 years old. she was with some friends. there was peer pressure. and so she made the decision to smoke a cigarette. the fact is, from the time ms. jordan first put a cigarette in her mouth, it was open, and there was tons of information, and it was tons of news that cigarette smoking was linked with lung cancer and other diseases. now, ms. shamp argued that philip morris denied that smoking was addictive. well, let us see what the surgeon general had to say. you heard in 1964 the surgeon general considered the evidence at the time and concluded that smoke was not addicting. and the main reason why is because the definition at the time required that cigarette smoking be intoxicating, and cigarette smoking is not intoxicating. so based on the definition at the time, the surgeon general said smoking is not addictive; but, the surgeon general was quick to say the fact that it is not addicting does not mean it cannot be hard to quit. dr. proctor told you people have known for hundreds of years it can be hard to quit, whether you call it a habit, an addiction, a dependence or whatever. it was not until 1988, 24 years later, that the surgeon general adopted a different definition and determined that cigarette smoking is, in fact, addictive. so as a result of the hearing, what happened? congress got involved. they passed a federal cigarette labeling act that required warning labels to go on every pack of cigarettes sold in this country effective january 1, 1966. congress told the companies exactly what the warning will say, how big it would be, the font they would use, and where it would be located. now, what was ms. jordan doing at about that time? this was -- she was pregnant with her son, tim. she gave birth to tim on september 25, 1966. and this was around the time that she became a regular smoker. so there are people who start smoking before the warning label goes on the pack; but, members of the jury, ms. jordan was not one of them. she became a regular smoker when she was pregnant with her son tim. she gave birth to tim on september 25, 1966. and this warning label went on the pack on january 1, 1966. make no dispute, ms. jordan said, i saw this warning, i just did not pay any attention to it. in the 1960s and 1970s, the public health community, the american cancer society, the american lung association, the american heart association, ran a number of public service announcements telling the public that smoking was deadly and caused disease. let me show you a couple examples. here's one with bill talman, a prosecutor on perry mason. (a video clip was played and transcribed by the court reporter to the best of her ability as follows:) "mr. talman: this is the house we live in. there is billy. he is running (inaudible) around. stevie, home from college. barbie, looking after her brother timmy. debbie, who will soon graduate from high school. susan, our youngest. and my wife, peggy, who looks after all of us. "and that is me, billy talman, with a friend of mine you might recognize. you know, i did not really mind losing those courtroom battles, but i'm in a battle right now i do not want to lose at all. because if i lose it, it means losing my wife and those kids you just met. "i've got lung cancer. so take some advice about smoking and losing from someone who is been doing both for years. if you do not smoke, do not start. if you do smoke, quit. do not be a loser." (video clip ends.) mr. cofer: let me show you another one that is even more poignant. and this is one that was recorded before yul brynner passed and was played after he died. you may remember yul brynner was a very, very popular actor back in the day. he did the king and i. he was in a number of movies, and he was much loved. (a video clip was played and transcribed by the court reporter to the best of her ability as follows:) "speaker: ladies and gentlemen, the late yul brynner." "mr. brynner: i really wanted to make a commercial when i discovered that i was that sick and my time was so limited. i wanted to make a commercial that says, simply, now that i'm gone, i tell you, do not smoke. whatever you do, just do not smoke. if i could take back that smoking, we would not be talking about any cancer. i'm convinced of that." (video clip ends.) mr. cofer: dr. proctor told you that these public service announcements started in the sixties s and seventies. that was one that was done in 1985. dr. proctor told you he thought these psas were particularly effective in causing millions and millions of people to quit smoking. he thought, in fact, they were even more effective than the warning. four years later, in 1970, congress amended the federal cigarette labeling act in regard to a new warning. for the next 15 years, this warning appeared on every pack of cigarettes sold in this country: "warning: the surgeon general has determined that cigarette smoking is dangerous to your health." at the same time this warning went on, that is the year that ms. jordan's dad died of a stroke and emphysema from smoking. ms. jordan said, again, she remembers this warning, but she just did not pay any attention to it, and she made no effort to quit. she was a 21-year-old woman and mother of two. she was not that 14-year-old kid anymore. she was an adult. she was a mom. she was a mother of two. and her dad had just died from emphysema from smoking, and she made no effort to quit. 11 years later, in 1981, dr. burns gave a speech at the lung association. and you know what he said? this is 1981. "95 percent of smokers are thoroughly aware of the health risks of smoking, and ninety percent thought it might affect their own health." so you have heard different evidence about what people heard, what they believed. ms. shamp talked a little bit about that in her closing. but what did burns say? what did dr. burns say in 1981, not in the context of a lawsuit, but speaking to the lung association. burns said in 1981: 95 percent of the people have heard, and ninety percent think it may be affecting their own health. ms. jordan was 32 years old. in 1985, the warning changed again. this time, members of the jury, the warning specifically said: "smoking causes lung cancer, heart disease, emphysema, may complicate pregnancy, and that quitting smoking now greatly reduces serious risk to health." so we know for a fact that the public was being warned that smoking causes emphysema and other diseases, and that quitting smoking greatly reduces risk to health. and we know that ms. jordan saw those warnings, too. unfortunately, she chose not to act on it. now, ms. shamp talked a lot about filtered and light cigarettes. she argued that ms. jordan smoked filters and lights because philip morris fooled her into thinking they were safer. and in closing argument, ms. shamp said it was the ads. she relied on the ads. the ads caused her to smoke filters, and the ads caused her to smoke marlboro lights. well, let us talk about what ms. jordan said. she testified that she is always smoked a filter, so she never switched from an unfiltered to a filtered. and she testified that when she started smoking filters, health concerns had nothing to do with her decision to smoke filtered cigarettes. do you remember why she wanted filters? to keep the tobacco out of her mouth. she never said that ads caused her to smoke the filters because she thought they were safer. she said health concerns had nothing to do with it. she wanted to keep the tobacco out of her mouth. she did testify that she switched to marlboro lights because they had less tar and nicotine, so she thought they would be better for her. but she admitted by that time her doctors were telling her to quit smoking, and that no doctor ever told her to switch to lights. and she also testified that when she switched to lights, she started smoking more cigarettes. she said she smoked an additional half to a pack a day. but even though she said she switched to lights to get less tar and nicotine, it never occurred to her that by smoking more cigarettes she was defeating the purpose of switching. now, think about that. ms. shamp said something about one of the great assets of juries is your collected common sense. think about that. it is like the guy who says, you know, instead of drinking a 12-ounce can of beer, i'm just going to drink two six-ounces instead. you are getting the same beer. and it is worth noting that when marlboro lights came out, cigarette ads were no longer allowed on tv or radio. you have heard some tv ads. remember, dr. proctor told you that january 2, 1971, all the ads were taken off the airways. and marlboro lights did not come out until then. and, in fact, in 1972, all of the print ads were required to have the surgeon general's warning. so by the time ms. jordan switched to marlboro lights, there were not any tv ads, and there were warning labels on every ad that she could have seen. so let us talk a minute, though, about what the public was being told about filters and light cigarettes. i told you this in opening statement. members of the jury, the evidence was that philip morris did not tell the public that lights and filters were safer. the surgeon general and the public health community told the public that filters and lights were safer. the thinking was, since tar is bad, less tar is less bad. and it is undisputed that all the cigarettes had the same warnings. but what the surgeon general said is, if you want to avoid the risk of cigarettes, quit. but if you are not going to quit, you should switch to lower tar cigarettes. and the reason why he said that is because there were dozens of epidemiological studies that were published by public health scientists that reported that people who smoked filtered cigarettes got less lung cancer than those who did not. and it was in the surgeon general's reports. i showed dr. proctor, like, three surgeon general's reports, but here's a 1989 report where they are reporting on the data for the studies. and so what did dr. proctor say? well, that is what they believed. that is what they thought the study showed, but they were all wrong. they were all wrong. so i said, well, look, here's from the world health organization in 2003 and 2012. three years ago, the world health organization is still saying that lower tar cigarettes and filtered cigarettes produce lower levels of disease than non-filtered cigarettes. it was the public health community, not philip morris. now, let us talk for a moment ago about ammonia and additives. ms. shamp mentioned that in her closing argument. and dr. proctor told you that ammonia compounds were the secret that sold marlboro; but, then on cross-examination he admitted, well, ammonia does occur naturally in the tobacco plant. and it is been public knowledge that philip morris has used ammonia compounds in some of its products since at least the 1960s. philip morris has had patents since the 1960s, public patents saying they used ammonia compounds and reconstituted tobacco. you also learned from dr. proctor that philip morris and the other companies worked with the national cancer institute. they used ammonia compounds to try to make safer cigarettes. you remember that discussion? the idea was, if you could find a way to get smokers the nicotine they want, and not the tar -- because it is the tar that causes disease, the nicotine is the important reason people smoke -- and so if you could find a way to get the nicotine from the bound to the unbound state, maybe you could make a safer cigarette. and so everyone knew about free nicotine and about ammonia. and they actually worked with the national cancer institute to see if they could make a safer cigarette. but here's the bottom line, dr. proctor admitted that cigarettes with ammonia compounds and cigarettes with additives are no more or less addictive than cigarettes without ammonia and without additives. dr. proctor told you, additive-free cigarettes cause cancer and are addictive, and cigarettes with additives cause cancer and are addictive. what proctor told you was it is not the additives, it is the tobacco. and do you want to know something else? if you want to know today what additives philip morris uses in its products, go to its website, and you can punch on by brand, and it will tell you the ingredients that go in the cigarettes that philip morris makes. so the reporter asked me to give her a head sign about an hour in if i'm going to switch to another topic. we are going to take a break, and when we come back, i'm going to talk with you about one of the most important issues in this case, when did ms. jordan's copd first manifest. [#deleted recess#] mr. cofer: thank you, your honor. all right. so let us talk about one of the most important issues in the case. when did mrs. jordan's copd first manifest? and the jury instructions that you need to focus on when you are back there in deliberations are instruction 10, which tells you that one of the things plaintiff has to prove in order to be a member of the class is that her -- she manifested chronic obstructive lung disease by november 21st, 1996. jury instruction number 11, i'll show you, and that is the test for manifestation. and then instruction 13 is one for statute of limitations. so when you get back there, it is 10, it is 11 and it is 13 that'll give you the information on this issue. all right. so let us talk about it. in order to recover in this case, you must find that mrs. jordan's copd manifested between may 5th, 1990, and november 21st, 1996. if her copd manifested before may 5th, 1990, it is barred by the statute of limitations. if it manifested after november 21st, 1996, she is not a class member. and i'm going to go through this in great detail. but, for example, if what she told dr. ticknor in her cme that her disease manifested in the late 1980s, if you believe that, she is barred by the statute of limitations. if you believe -- and we will talk about why diagnosis is important -- that it first manifested when she was diagnosed in '98 or '99, then she is not a class member. okay? so that is kind of the framework. i'm going to walk through it. i know it sounds kind of confusing. but we will just go through it. but the bottom line is in order to recover in this case, you have to find that her copd manifested between may 5th, 1990, and november 21st, 1996. and that is why plaintiff is trying so hard to persuade you that her copd manifested in 1993 because that would put it in the window. but the problem is there is no credible evidence that that happened. so let us talk about the evidence. there is no question that mrs. jordan has copd, and there is no question she had copd before november 21st, 1996. but that is not the test. the court has now instructed you on the test, the definition of manifestation. so what does plaintiff have to prove? and this is instruction number 11. she has to prove that her copd first manifested on or before november 21st and -- or copd first manifested itself on or before november 21st, 1996, if she knew or in the exercise of reasonable care should have known before that date that she had copd and that there was a reasonable probability that it was caused by cigarette smoking. okay. so if everyone agrees that she had copd by 1996; mrs. jordan already had it, does that mean it manifested? the answer is no. the issue is not just when she had it; it is when she knew she had it or should have known she had it and it was caused by smoking. and mrs. jordan has consistently testified that she had no idea that her smoking was harming her until she was diagnosed with copd. that is why the date of diagnosis is such a key fact. let me say that again. the test is not just whether she had it but whether she had it and she knew or should have known she had it and it was caused by cigarette smoking. and she has said, i had no idea smoking was harming me until i was diagnosed. that is why the date of diagnosis is so critical. okay? so let us talk about that. in her opening statement, ms. shamp told you, in september 1993, when she was 44 years old, mrs. jordan collapsed, unable to breathe, unable to catch her breath. she was taken to baptist hospital and diagnosed with copd. ms. shamp then said in 1999, she collapsed again and was referred to dr. rothstein, who is a pulmonologist. members of the jury, there is simply no credible evidence that either of those things ever happened. in fact, mrs. jordan, herself, testified she has no recollection of collapsing and being rushed to that hospital in 1999, so i do not know where anyone ever came up with that suggestion. but here's the deal. until ms. shamp's opening statement in this trial, no one anytime, anywhere, ever testified or suggested that mrs. jordan collapsed in 1993 and was diagnosed with copd at baptist hospital. there is no mention of mrs. jordan ever collapsing and being diagnosed with copd at baptist hospital in any of the medical records or the depositions or the interrogatories or the interviews in this case with ticknor or blank, not one, not a hint, not a suggestion. mrs. jordan never told dr. tecson, dr. rothstein or any of her doctors at the mayo that that happened. mrs. jordan did not tell dr. blank, the expert they hired to testify on her behalf, that that happened. mrs. jordan did not tell dr. ticknor that that happened. at trial, i read mrs. jordan's deposition and asked her about it, where she was specifically asked, "how did you learn you had copd? "how did i learn? when the doctor -- i was getting to where i could not breathe and had to go to the doctor. and it just kept getting worse." there was no mention of a collapse and rushed to baptist hospital. "my breathing was getting worse and worse, and i had to go to the doctor and i was diagnosed." nowhere in mrs. jordan's sworn deposition does she ever say she collapsed, was diagnosed with copd at baptist hospital in 1993 or at any other time. nowhere in her answers to interrogatories does she say she collapsed and was diagnosed with copd at baptist hospital in 1993 or at any other time. now, at trial, for the very first time, she testified she was diagnosed at baptist hospital in 1993 by dr. clower, and in fairness, in one place in her deposition, she was asked: "who was the doctor who first informed you that you had copd? "i thought it could have been rothstein but i'm not sure about that. "okay. "it could have been clower. i'm just not sure about it." but then we had the written interrogatories, where she said that she was diagnosed with copd in '95 by dr. rothstein, not clower, not baptist hospital, not 1993. '95 by dr. rothstein. she told dr. ticknor in the cme -- and, again, we talked about this a little while ago this morning. "so what point did a doctor say to you, mrs. jordan, i think you have copd? "'93. somewhere around '93. "'93. "okay. "and that would have been rothstein." mrs. jordan told dr. tecson on october 24th, '88, she had an asthma attack in 1993. so we are going to talk about the tecson record. and in june of 1999, she told rothstein she had been experiencing shortness of breath for about a month and a half and had been coughing up blood. she told him that she had asthma for about ten years. "mrs. jordan has been having trouble with progressive shortness of breath for about the last month to month and a half. she was told she has asthma in the past and has been using a ventilate" -- it should be ventolin inhaler -- "for the last ten years." but she never said anything to dr. rothstein about having been diagnosed with copd in 1993 or at any time, anywhere by anybody. and dr. rothstein said he would have asked her. remember, i asked him. i said: "dr. rothstein, you have nothing in your records about her telling you that she had ever been diagnosed before?" he said: "that is right." i said: "you would have asked her, right?" and he said: "well, probably." i said: "well, of course you would have. you diagnosed her with severe copd. would not you ask her, my god, had you ever been diagnosed with copd before? you would have wanted to get those records, right? copd's a progressive disease. you want to know how bad the disease is progressing, right?" he said: "yes. "and you did not get any records because she never told you she had been diagnosed before, right?" and he said: "that is right." members of the jury, there is simply no credible evidence that mrs. jordan was diagnosed with copd in 1993, and all of the credible evidence is to the contrary. now, it is true that tonya spencer testified her mother was diagnosed with copd in 1993. but she never said anything about her mother collapsing and being diagnosed at the hospital. and importantly -- check your notes on this -- ms. spencer testified that her mother was using inhalers in 1991 when ms. spencer's daughter was born. that is not what mrs. jordan said. mrs. jordan testified the first time she was ever prescribed an inhaler was december 1993, two months after she was taken to baptist hospital. so tonya's testimony about when her mother was first on inhalers -- you remember, her mom said, "i did not get inhalers until i was diagnosed." tonya spencer said her mother was on inhalers in '91 when her daughter was born. so tonya spencer and mrs. jordan's testimony contradict one another on a very key issue in this case. in addition, on cross examination, mrs. jordan testified no one in her family knew that she was diagnosed with copd in 1993 because she did not tell them, because she did not want them to know. well, first question is why not? i mean, how would your spouse not know? i mean, how would you not know if your spouse has collapsed and taken to the hospital and diagnosed with copd? how would you not know? but if that is true and she did not tell her family, then how did tonya spencer know? i mean, how could tonya -- she did not go to the hospital, and mrs. jordan said she did not tell her family. yet tonya spencer came in and said, "oh, yeah, mom was diagnosed in '93." members of the jury, mrs. jordan's own testimony is the only evidence in this case that she was diagnosed between may 5, 1990, and november 21st, 1996. now, what we do know is that she told dr. tecson she had an asthma attack in 1993. but there is no evidence that she had a pft. and both rothstein and dr. frazier told you, you can only diagnose copd with a pft. so you remember dr. rothstein, and he did say: "i think she was diagnosed in 1993." and i said: "well, doctor, it is true, is not it, that you cannot diagnose copd without a pft?" he said: "that is right." i said, "doctor, there is no evidence of her ever having a pft before june of 1999?" he said: "that is right." think about that. dr. rothstein is trying to help mrs. jordan out, and he understands it is critical to put the diagnosis in this period. so he just gives an opinion. "okay. yeah, she is diagnosed in '93." i said: "well, let us talk about that. you cannot diagnose without a pft, right? "that is right. "did she have a pft in '93? "i've never seen it. "have you ever seen a pft before 1999? "no, i have not." i do not have the instruction in front of me, but there is an instruction about the credibility of experts. and it says it is not just what they say; it is why they say it. and i'll tell you, you know, rothstein's obviously a well-credentialed physician here in jacksonville, and he obviously cares about his patient in his care. but he told you, you cannot diagnose without a pft, and he admitted he had no evidence there was ever one within the manifestation period. so you should ignore his testimony on that point. so mrs. jordan said it happened. but you know what? we know that mrs. jordan suffers from both short-term and long-term memory loss. i asked mrs. jordan about it, and dr. blank diagnosed her with the short-term and long-term memory loss. and, members of the jury, you have seen, you know, throughout her case that her testimony has been inconsistent and it is been contradictory. with all respect, mrs. jordan's testimony about the date of diagnosis is simply not credible, and it is contradicted by multiple independent and more reliable sources of proof. and let us just walk through that evidence. the first medical record we had for ms. jordan is october 21st -- i'm sorry -- october 24th, 1998. remember, she went to see dr. tecson, her family doc in macclenny. she had a headache and some vomiting, and she told him in 1998, had history of asthma attack five years ago. she also -- well, we will get to it. i've got it up here. while the notes are a little confusing, dr. tecson testified that on that visit in october 1998, he diagnosed her with copd because of her smoking history. do you remember that? we talked about that. tecson said he did not do any kind of testing or x-rays. he diagnosed mrs. jordan with copd in october '98 simply because she was a smoker. and then he wrote -- and it should be on this record -- "had also" -- well, right after, it says "had also emphysema." now, ms. shamp argued in her closing statement, dr. tecson said that she told him she had emphysema. that is what ms. shamp said. she said it twice. she said, we know she told dr. tecson that in addition to an asthma attack, she had emphysema. that is not what tecson said. tecson said -- and you saw his deposition. we brought tecson to testify. we are the ones who called her treating physician to testify. you did not hear tecson in their case. you remember, he had rothstein relying on the record that said "had also emphysema." and i said: "dr. rothstein, did you read his deposition?" he said: "no. i just have the record." but when we called tecson to testify, he said: "she told me she had an asthma attack. i made an independent diagnosis of copd just based on her clinical presentation. she never told me she had emphysema five years ago." and we know that that is true because if she was telling her doctors she had copd, why would not she have told rothstein that? mrs. jordan has consistently told her doctors that she is had asthma since at least the 1980s. in fact, she used a ventolin inhaler at least since the late 1980s. so in may 1999, mrs. jordan came back to dr. tecson. she coughed up blood. she was referred to dr. rothstein. remember, mrs. jordan stated in her interrogatories that it was rothstein that first diagnosed her. she said 1995. we know they did not meet until 1999, so we know that mrs. jordan's confused about that date. mrs. jordan filled out a new patient report, and here's what she wrote while she was there. "coughing blood, asthma," coming from dr. tecson. she never says a word about copd, right? so then dr. rothstein meets with her and he puts: "reason" -- "referred by tecson. reason for consultation, shortness of breath" -- bless you -- "coughing up blood. mrs. jordan's been having trouble with progressive shortness of breath for about last month to month and a half. she was told she has asthma in the past and has been using an inhaler for about the last ten years." so this is a 1999 record where she tells him she is been using inhalers since about the late '80s. and she says, i have asthma, but she does not say a word about copd or emphysema. and this is her lung doctor, right? so rothstein performs pfts and based on those tests, he diagnoses her with severe copd. you heard both frazier and rothstein. pfts are the gold standard for diagnosing copd. it is undisputed in this case; you cannot diagnose copd without a pft. and there is no evidence, none, that she ever had a pft before june of 1999. so she goes to dr. rothstein. she is diagnosed with severe copd and that is when she quits working at the sawmill. in order to get temporary disability, they had to fill out some forms. and this was completed and signed by both mrs. jordan and dr. rothstein. and it says: "any person who knowingly files a statement of claim containing any misrepresentation or any false, incomplete or misleading information may be guilty of a criminal act punishable under law and may be subject to civil penalties. "when did symptoms" -- this is the part filled out by dr. rothstein's office and signed by dr. rothstein. "when did symptoms first appear or accident happen? "may '99. "has patient ever had same or similar condition?" and the answer is: "no." "what was the standard patient's current diagnosis? "copd." now, there is some issue about prior primary and secondary diagnosis. primary diagnosis, copd. that is why she needs disability because of copd. secondary diagnosis, coughing up blood. you do not get disability for coughing up blood. she got disability because she had copd. and both she and dr. rothstein signed and represented that symptoms began in may of '99 -- it is consistent with the records -- and she had never had a similar condition. this form was prepared nine years before this lawsuit was filed. and both dr. rothstein and mrs. jordan clearly said symptoms began in may, never had same or similar conditions -- condition. you saw ten months later, they filled out another form to get more temporary disability. they had the same information except this time there -- rothstein's office wrote down symptoms began in june instead of may, reflected the date that they first saw her. now, you also saw medical records at the mayo clinic and prepared by mrs. jordan after she was diagnosed. this is in her own handwriting. "please describe in the space to the right your main symptoms or problems and how long have you had them. "copd, emphysema, four years." this is may of 2002. this is when she is being considered for her lung transplant by the mayo clinic. do not you think that the health-care providers at the mayo clinic, if they are going to put someone on the lung transplant list, would do a thorough job investigating the person's history and how long they have been having lung issues and all of those things? and here in her own handwriting, it says: "copd, four years." also circled asthma. you know, i'll show you other records. here's a representative example of four other records prepared by different health-care providers at the mayo clinic, all of which report that their information was she was diagnosed in '99. none of these records, members of the jury, not tecson's, not rothstein's, not the mayo clinic, ever suggest that she was diagnosed in 1993 or she ever collapsed and was diagnosed at baptist hospital. now, you heard dr. -- or not dr. -- you heard gil spruance, her life-care planner, take the stand. he told you that he interviewed mrs. jordan. she told him that she was diagnosed in '93, and she missed a lot of work from 1993 to 1998 because of breathing problems. so i showed mrs. jordan's social security records. and we can see from the social security records, in '1993 to '98 were her highest earning years. she got paid by the hour. they were her highest earning years. and so i -- i showed that to mrs. jordan. i said: "mrs. jordan, were not you mistaken? because the social security records show that you must be working more hours so were you -- you are mistaken, right?" and you remember what she said? she said that she was on the clock; she was not actually working. she was in the break room, not at the grading table. and i said: "really? so all those years you were not working, they paid you anyway? "right. i was on the job but i was not actually up there grading." well, champion must be an awfully generous employer. so here's the bottom line. this is an engle case and so that requires plaintiff to prove that her copd manifested on or before november 21st, 1996. since mrs. jordan claims that she had no idea that her smoking was harming her until she was diagnosed, that makes the date of diagnosis the key factual issue for manifestation. and it is clear that mrs. jordan was first diagnosed -- if you take the clinical diagnosis, it was 1998 by dr. tecson. if you take the real diagnosis that both rothstein and dr. frazier told you that a pft is required, it was not until june 1999. so the evidence is compelling, members of the jury, that mrs. jordan was not diagnosed and did not manifest within the manifestation window. and for that reason alone, she is not a class member. so let us talk about statute of limitations. and i'm sure during the trial, you are wondering, why are they saying '99 and saying the '80s? i mean, that does not make any sense. i'm sure you were confused. i could not wait, frankly, to finally have the time -- a chance to talk to you guys and tell you, here's why we are putting this evidence; here's how it is relevant. so let us talk about the statute of limitations. now, it is true that in many cases, people can have or someone can have symptoms of copd long before there is an actual diagnosis. and that is because copd is a progressive disease that reduces a person's lung function. and for that matter, both rothstein and frazier, bill frazier, not sandra frazier, told you typically someone has diagnosable copd long before they start experiencing symptoms. and remember, here's -- well, i'll take this down. there is the fletcher/peto. it shows the natural history. we all lose lung function over age. susceptible smokers lose it at a much faster rate. you know, when they stop smoking, they go back to the normal rate of loss. but the point is you do not usually get symptoms until you are down here somewhere. it depends on your activity. so you can have diagnosable copd that is diagnosable on a pft before you have symptoms. in june of 1999, when dr. rothstein gave mrs. jordan her pft, he found she already had severe copd. she was down here. a 50-year-old lady who you would expect to have copd right here, 50-year-old smoker, if the copd was just caused by smoking. but her lung function was down here. so we know that she had copd for a very long time, right? whether symptoms manifested, whether she recognized it, we know she had it. so you know mrs. jordan was asked -- when dr. ticknor did her cme, he -- he asked her a question. he said: "okay. i would like to clarify something with you. at what point did you know that smoking was hazardous for your health? for your health, not just in general. but at what point did you realize, did you gain the knowledge that smoking was harming your health?" let me stop for a minute before we go on. you remember, we had dr. blank on the stand, and i said: "dr. blank, you are a forensic psychiatrist. what is a forensic psychiatrist? and, you know, can people, you know, remember things differently or kind of exaggerate the truth or whatever if there is money involved or if they had some sort of interest?" she goes: "yeah." so i said: "well, how do you guard against that?" she says, "ask them open-ended questions. you do not ask them leading questions to suggest the answer. you try to ask the question in a way that you get, you know, the person's own story." so look at how that question is phrased. "okay. i would like to clarify something with you. at what point did you know that smoking was hazardous for your health? for your health, not just in general. but at what point did you realize, did you gain the knowledge that smoking was harming your health?" and she said: "around the end of the 1980s. "and how did you know that?" again, open-ended, not a leading question. "i was getting sick from it. "pardon? "i was getting sick where i could not breathe, coughing real bad. "and what health problems did you develop at the end of the '80s that you thought smoking was harming your health? "what health problems? i just got where i could not breathe. i was real tired and coughing real bad." now, the circumstances of this interview was that ms. shamp, a court reporter, a videographer and dr. ticknor were in a room together. no one from philip morris was there, and the doctor had an opportunity to examine and ask mrs. jordan questions, just like dr. blank had an opportunity to meet with mrs. jordan and ask her questions. so dr. ticknor asked her this open-ended question: "when did you first realize smoking was harming your health?" she says: "the '80s." now, do you remember today in closing argument, ms. shamp said, we know that she was diagnosed in '93 because in '93 she switched to marlboro lights, and she switched to marlboro lights because she had copd so she thought they would be better. that is what ms. shamp told you this morning. but what did mrs. jordan tell dr. ticknor? "do you remember -- do you remember about what year you switched to marlboro lights?" again, that is a non-leading question. he did not say, did you switch to marlboro lights in 1989? he said: "do you remember about what year you switched to marlboro lights? "yeah, the end of the '80s, '89, somewhere around there. "question: and tell me again why you switched. "why did i switch? because i figured the lighters was better than the -- marlboro regulars was, like, too strong, so i switched to lighters because i could not breathe. so that would be better for me to smoke the lighter cigarettes, lower tar and everything going. so i switched to the lights." so according to what mrs. jordan told dr. ticknor, that happened in the '80s. one more question. so dr. ticknor said: "okay. do you believe now, looking back on it, that you were addicted to nicotine in cigarettes? "answer: oh, i know i was. "question: okay. when did you come to that understanding? when did you gain the knowledge? when did you learn enough to say in retrospect, i now know that i was addicted to cigarettes? "answer: when i really got sick and i seen i could not get off cigarettes. "and when did you really get sick or -- and when did -- you really got sick was when?" and what did she say? "in the late '80s. "when you really got sick? "when i really got sick, about the end of the '80s, up through the '80s." so members of the jury, four months ago, mrs. jordan told dr. ticknor in front of ms. shamp that by the late 1980s, she was sick from smoking. she switched to light cigarettes and she knew she was addicted. and she told you that she switched -- or she got an inhaler when she was diagnosed with copd. and she told -- in june 1999, she told dr. rothstein she had been using the ventolin inhaler for about ten years. you remember, i asked dr. rothstein about that. i said: "dr. rothstein, it is your opinion she does not have asthma, right?" he goes: "that is right." so remember, i read this to him. i said: "if, in fact, she were experiencing those symptoms in the '80s, what was it?" he said: it was copd." so here's the deal. you know, you -- you are the judge of the facts. if -- if you believe overall that what mrs. jordan told dr. ticknor is true, if you believe that is accurate, that in the 1980s she knew her smoking was harming her, she was having the symptoms of copd, the things she described, the breathing, the coughing, the weakness, the tired, that that is why she switched to lights, that is when she first got an inhaler, if you credit that testimony, then she is time-barred. that is instruction 13. if you credit that testimony, she time-barred, regardless when she is diagnosed. if you do not credit that testimony, then she was not diagnosed till '99. but she said, i had no idea smoking was bad until i was diagnosed. so either it is '99 or if she really knew it was the late '80s, then someone, some doctor, presumably the doctor that prescribed her the inhaler, told her, of course, to quit smoking. and according to what we know about the way copd progresses and according to dr. rothstein, she would have been diagnosed with copd. okay. so where are we? you have heard three completely different versions of when mrs. jordan's copd first manifested. mrs. jordan told dr. ticknor in april of this year that she knew her smoking was making her sick in the late '80s when she could not breathe and was coughing real bad. dr. rothstein said, if mrs. jordan was having those problems in the '80s, they were caused by copd. so if you believe that is true, she is time-barred by the statute of limitations. and when you get to that -- we will talk about where that is on the verdict form. so that is version number 1. version number 2, last week mrs. jordan testified for the very first time that she collapsed at work in 1993 and was rushed to baptist hospital and was diagnosed with copd. there is no corroborating evidence that that ever happened. and, in fact, in 1998, nine years before this case was filed, mrs. jordan told dr. tecson she had an asthma attack in 1993, not that she was -- collapsed and diagnosed with copd. and finally, version number 3, dr. rothstein's medical records, the mayo clinic's medical records, the disability records that rothstein and mrs. jordan completed, the undisputed fact that the first pft was in june of 1999, and you cannot diagnose copd without a pft, the social security records all prove that mrs. jordan was diagnosed with copd in 1999. and since mrs. jordan had no idea smoking was harming her until she was diagnosed, her copd did not manifest before november 21st, 1996, and she is not a member of the engle class. okay. so let us go to the verdict form. and the first question is: state whether elaine jordan is a member of the engle class. so what does plaintiff have to prove to be a member of the engle class? it is actually -- if you look at instruction 10 -- you do not need to look at it now -- but she has to prove by the greater weight of the evidence that she was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, that her chronic obstructive lung disease was caused by addiction to cigarettes and that she manifested chronic lung disease by november 21st. we have talked about manifestation. let us talk about the remaining elements. you know what? i thought -- yeah, here it is. so what does she have to prove? this is -- these are the remaining elements. was elaine jordan, in fact, addicted to nicotine? we will talk about that. if she was addicted, was her addiction a legal cause of her copd and emphysema? you have to show both, not just that she was addicted, but her addiction was a legal cause. as ms. shamp said in opening statement that she smoked because she was addicted. that is why she smoked, because she was addicted. and, third, she has to show that cigarette smoking is what actually caused her copd and emphysema. so she has to show, in addition to manifestation, that she was, in fact, addicted; her addiction was a legal cause. that is why she smoked. and i'll show you the instruction -- and that it was smoking that caused her copd/emphysema. so let us talk about those things. and let us start with addiction. was elaine jordan addicted to the nicotine in cigarettes? well, the answer to that question depends on the definition you use. there is no definition in the instructions. you have heard the definition has changed over time. you heard until 1988, the surgeon general said smoking was not addicting. you have heard that since 1988, the surgeon general said it is, and philip morris has had on its website since 2000 that it is. dr. blank told you that she is never met anyone who smoked more than five cigarettes a day that was not addicted. and if you adopt that definition, she was addicted. dr. ticknor told you, no, under dsm-5, i have more rigorous requirements. i look for more extreme examples. i do not lightly diagnose somebody as an addict. i think she had tobacco use disorder. i do not think it rises to addiction. that was his opinion. dr. frazier came in and said, no, i disagree with ticknor; i agree with blank. but here's the bottom line. regardless whether you think she was, in fact, addicted, i'm not sure it really matters very much because plaintiff has to prove more than that she was, in fact, addicted. she has to prove that her addiction was a legal cause of her copd. and the evidence was that it is not. the law makes a distinction between something that is a cause in fact and something's a legal cause. and we talked about that both in voir dire and opening statement. you remember? i gave you an example of a guy that got hit by the truck. you know, what was the cause in fact; what was the legal problem. let me give you a better example. so here in florida, we all love our beaches, and -- but when we go to the doctor, the doctor says, put on sunscreen. wear long-sleeved shirts. you know, be careful. wear a hat and all that sort of stuff. so suppose a man goes to the doctor and the doctor's checking him out, says, hey, you have got a little spot on your skin. you know, it is not a big deal. on your way out, stop at the receptionist, and let us make an appointment to take that off. and he does not do it. so six months later, he comes back, and the doctor says, hey, i thought we were going to take care of that? you have got a skin cancer. now, it is not a big deal. you are going to scar. you have got to cut it out. but stop on your way out and tell my receptionist. let us get an appointment to get it taken off and he does not do it. six months later, he comes back. doctor, i do not feel good at all. doctor says, oh, my god, you have got a malignant melanoma. it started on your arm. it spread throughout your body and it is bad. what is the cause in fact of melanoma? the sun. what is the legal cause? he did not take care of business and he ignored his doctor's advice. you know, from the time mrs. jordan became a regular smoker, the warning was already on the pack. in 1970, just a few years after she became a regular smoker, the warning changed, became stronger, said, smoking's dangerous, and her dad died of emphysema from smoking. and mrs. jordan did not try to quit. in 1985, the warning labels were changed to say, smoking causes emphysema. quitting smoking now greatly reduces serious risk to health. but she ignored those warnings, too. clearly mrs. jordan has demonstrated that she has the ability to refrain from smoking and that nicotine does not compel her to smoke because on february 27th, 2002, she put the cigarettes down and never picked up one again. until this very day, in 13 years, she has not smoked a single cigarette, even though her family smoked around her. blank says it is virtually impossible to stay quit if somebody smokes around you but she is done it. she told you till february 27th, 2002, she never went a single day without a cigarette. even when she said she wanted to quit, she would smoke a cigarette in the morning. but dr. ticknor told you -- and this is not, you know, rocket science -- that a serious quit attempt is defined as 24 hours. i mean, if you are not willing to go 24 hours -- i mean, how serious are you if you are not willing to go 24 hours? until she quit, she did not. so here's the instruction. an addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine is a legal cause of mrs. jordan's copd if it directly and in natural and continuous sequence produced or contributed substantially to producing mrs. jordan's copd so it can reasonably be said but for that addiction, her copd would not have occurred. the instruction the plaintiff showed you was the second paragraph of the legal instruction. that is the concurring cause instruction. they did not show you this one. the one they showed you just said it does not have to be the only cause. but here's the deal. you have to decide, for it to be a legal cause, that her addiction is so strongly substantiated that but for her addiction, her copd would not have occurred, whereas ms. shamp said that she smoked because she was addicted. ms. shamp told you the ability to quit has nothing to do with whether you are addicted. it has a whole lot to do with whether addiction is a legal cause. if an addiction does not prevent you from quitting, if you can set them down anytime, if you do not smoke because you are addicted, if it does not compel you to smoke, that is not a legal cause. and let me tell you, all the experts agree, all of them, that all smokers, including addicted smokers, have the ability to quit. where is the evidence that mrs. jordan was any different than the 60 million people in this country who quit? there was none. whether a smoker quits depends on whether she wants to, whether she wants to quit more than she wants to smoke. and that is what dr. blank told you. remember my last few questions of dr. blank. and i said: "doctor, a smoker quits when it is more important not to smoke than it is to -- to smoke, right?" she said: "that is right." and i said: and the fact is if that were in 2002, mrs. jordan's motivation to quit smoking finally overcame her desire to smoke and she quit and never smoked again." so here the evidence is compelling, as a jury, that an addiction to nicotine did not prevent mrs. jordan from quitting. ms. shamp: objection, your honor. that is not the standard. mr. cofer: i'll rephrase. the court: all right. mr. cofer: look at the instruction. use your common sense. look at the evidence. i think it is pretty clear that plaintiff has not met her burden of proving that an addiction to nicotine was a legal cause of her continuing smoking. okay. but then you get to the third thing -- actually the fourth thing. so you have to prove manifestation. you have to prove you were, in fact, addicted. you had to prove that addiction was a legal cause. and then you still have to prove that smoking is what actually caused the copd. so what was the evidence? you heard from bill frazier, the quadruple-boarded pulmonologist from jackson, mississippi, and kurt stonesifer, the board-certified pathologist from tampa who took the stand yesterday. they told you this: they said, sure, mrs. jordan has copd. she has severe copd. but she has three independent risk factors, each of which can cause and can contribute to cause copd. ms. shamp: objection, your honor, based on the court's ruling on the motion in limine. the court: why do not we come over to sidebar? (a sidebar conference was held outside the hearing of the jury as follows:) the court: if you could refresh my memory. quite candidly, i do not remember. ms. shamp: when -- when -- when you said that dr. frazier could not testify that wood dust was an independent risk factor for causing copd. and what he just said is that the three -- that they both said that she had three independent risk factors for it. the court: oh. mr. cofer: although wood dust came in, she opened the door. the court: it did. ms. shamp: no, dust came in, only with causing hypersensitivity -- mr. cofer: okay. i'll clarify that. i'll clarify that. the court: thank you, ms. shamp. mr. cofer: i did not realize -- the court: thank you. (the sidebar conference was concluded, and the following proceedings were held in open court in the presence of the jury:) mr. cofer: okay. let me clarify that just a little bit. frazier and stonesifer testified that mrs. jordan had three independent risk factors for her copd and her emphysematous changes, her emphysema -- asthma, cigarette smoking and wood dust. and since each of those can independently cause copd and emphysematous changes, there is no way to medically apportion which caused it in mrs. jordan or even how much each of those independent factors contributed. so what are the facts? we know that 25 percent of susceptible smokers get copd from smoking. 75 percent do not. 25 percent of susceptible smokers get copd from smoking. 75 percent of smokers do not. here's the chart from the surgeon general's report. these are people, normal lung function, who have never smoked, were not susceptible. these are the 25 percent of susceptible smokers who get copd from smoking. right? so -- and what this chart also shows -- and these are averages -- that here's a 50-year-old smoker, and here's a normal loss of lung function that you expect in a 50-year-old susceptible smoker -- am i blocking anybody's view? -- who gets copd from smoking. right here, you are about 70 -- 65, seventy percent fev1. that is what you expect a 50-year-old smoker to have in terms of loss of lung function. this is from the copd report, from the surgeon general's report. there is mrs. jordan's pft on the chart. it is 25 percent. the average smoker with copd at age 50 is right around seventy percent. she is at 25 percent. so what did frazier say? something else is going on. and what else is going on? he said, well, she has long-term asthma. that is one thing that is going on. and, in fact, it is undisputed. every doctor who testified in the case said, asthma, by itself, while initially reversible, can become fixed and turn into copd, and asthma is not caused by smoking. in addition, from 1983 to 1999, mrs. jordan inhaled a lot of wood dust at the sawmill. how do we know that? she told dr. tecson she did. and we have heard evidence about wood dust in sawmills. wood dust, according to dr. stonesifer, can actually cause copd. what dr. frazier told you is it can cause hypersensitivity pneumonitis, which mimics the symptoms of copd and they both cause emphysematous changes. and we know that hypersensitivity pneumonitis is not caused by smoking, but one of the causes is inhaling moldy dust into the lungs. and dr. stonesifer told you that includes moldy pine dust. sawmill, you bring in fresh lumber, and then you take the lumber and then you strip it down. then you cut it into boards at some point and you plane it. and at some point, you put it into a kiln and then you dry it. but not until you strip it down and get it to where it is in the shape of the boards and that creates dust. and stonesifer told you it is not the dust that you see that is the problem; it is the microscopic dust you do not see that gets down in your lungs. the big chunks either do not get anywhere, or they are caught in your mouth, caught in your nose. it is the microscopic, the small five microns or smaller dust particles that get down in your lungs that cause the inflammation that cause the infection. then yesterday, you heard from dr. stonesifer, a board-certified pathologist from tampa with more than 30 years' experience. dr. stonesifer, the only witness who you have seen who has testified in engle cases for both plaintiffs and for defendants. he is not aligned with either side. the side he is aligned with is the truth. and when he thinks it is -- the plaintiff's right, he testifies for the plaintiff. when he thinks the defendant's right, he gives his opinions that support the defendants. he is the pathologist. he is a doctor's doctor. he, himself, is a cancer survivor. he has a perspective, members of the jury, that i think a number of the other doctors do not have. he told you that he -- he reviewed all of the pathology, all of the medical records, 20,000 of them, all of the depositions in this case. they criticized him because he spent a lot time and he got paid. he reviewed everything. and remember how he did it? y'all, i thought this was fascinating. so he gets the slides and he said, do not tell me anything about it. i do not want medical records. i do not want pathology reports. i do not want -- just give me the slides because i want to use my training, my eye to see what i -- i see just looking at the slides. and then he gets a judgment. he says, okay, now let us look at the pathology reports. all right. now let us look at the factual stuff. i see evidence of hypersensitivity pneumonitis. where is the exposure? oh, i see. okay. so she worked at a sawmill. for how long? 16 years, 40 hours a day, 50 weeks a year. i mean, you could add it up. so what did he tell you? he said because she has three of the risk factors -- smoking asthma, exposure to wood dust -- medically, there is no way to determine which one or a combination caused her lung problems. but he told you more than that. he said there is no doubt the wood dust was a cause of disease in mrs. jordan's lungs. he showed you pictures of giant cells and ill-formed granulomas in mrs. jordan's lungs. he showed you pictures of her lungs. he told you these giant cells and granulomas were not caused by smoking but were caused by wood dust. he showed you damage in her lungs that was caused by wood dust. he said, while the granulomas are scattered throughout all the lobes, they are predominantly in the lower lobe. and he said, you know, when you see inhalation from smoking, it is typically in the upper lobes. but because wood dust has mass and because of gravity, it tends to settle in the lower lobes. so he is seeing disease in a portion of the lung that you would not expect from smoking. and he is seen cellular changes, giant cells and ill-formed granulomas, that are not caused by smoking, and he says, this is hypersensitivity pneumonitis. he sees evidence of fibrosis in the lower lobes. that is what dr. stonesifer told you and he showed you the pictures. so in rebuttal, plaintiff called dr. wright. and dr. wright told you that mrs. jordan's lung problems were one hundred percent caused by cigarette smoking. he also told you that mrs. jordan never had asthma. how can he say that? he did not look at the medical records. he just looked at a handful of pathology records. how can he say that? her records are replete with reports of asthma. she is told doctors she had asthma. she told doctors at mayo she had asthma. she told tecson she had asthma. she told rothstein she had asthma. so this guy comes in and says, she never had asthma so that could not cause it. how could he possibly say that? he did not look at any of the depositions. he looked at none of the radiology. you know, i'm glad you got to hear stonesifer and wright back to back. i really am. that does not happen all the time, where basically the same day, you can hear two different pathologists and get a chance to really kind of compare their testimony, compare their credentials, compare their credibility. i'll tell you, so dr. stonesifer, he is the doctor's doctor. let me tell you what i mean by that. so when surgeons have people on the table and they are trying to determine whether somebody has cancer and where it came from, stonesifer's in the room and says, bring me the tissue and let me look at it. i think it is benign. or you know what? no, it is not benign. i think you need to get into the lymph nodes. it does not look like it came from the lung. oncologists, surgeons rely on dr. stonesifer every day of the week for life-and-death decisions for patients here in the state of florida. in contrast, dr. wright, has not seen a hospital in 35 years. the last time he was a practicing pathologist was 1980. so how does dr. wright spend his professional time? he is a professional witness. he is testified at trial or deposition, since 1996, 672 times. 672 times, he is been paid to give testimony. trust my math. that is about 35 times a year for about three times a month, month in, month out, for 19 years. that is the best they could do? that is the best they could do. you know, while dr. stonesifer's a doctor's doctor, i think it is fair to say that dr. wright is the lawyer's doctor who happens to be a lawyer himself. you know, he likes all the folksy metaphors. it is the power, you know, have -- you know, have gun, will travel. all right. so, members of the jury, we know that mrs. jordan's lungs were far more damaged than smoking can reasonably explain. we know that she has damage in her lungs from wood dust exposure. we know she has fibrosis in portions of her lung that should not be caused by cigarette smoking. we know from her very young lung tissue that wood dust did, in fact, cause significant damage to her lungs. so how does plaintiff respond to all that? they just pretend it is not there. when you say, well, asthma could cause copd. well, she does not have asthma. well, what about the medical records? she does not have asthma. it is in your own medical records. she does not have asthma. well, what about hypersensitivity pneumonitis? do not see it. well, here's the pathology report, non-necrotizing granulomas, ill-formed granulomas. no, i do not see it. they just pretend it is not there. when you have the burden of proof, you cannot just wish facts away. and let me tell you something, if a quadruple-boarded pulmonologist and a board-certified pathologist of dr. stonesifer's stature cannot tell you which of the three independent risk factors was a medical cause of the emphysematous changes and the damage to mrs. jordan's lungs, then they have not met their burden of proof. so on question 1 -- you will see it -- the issue is is elaine jordan a member of the class? has she met her burden? the answer to that, members of the jury, is no. and it is no for a number of different reasons. in order to prove it, the plaintiff would have to prove that the copd manifested on or about november 21st, 1996. and she was, in fact, addicted and addiction was a legal cause -- she smoked because she was addicted. and smoking is what actually caused her copd/emphysema. and if you believe that she has not proved all of those things, then you check no and this case is over. okay. let us go to question 2. did mrs. jordan know or by the use of reasonable care, should she have known, before may 5th, 1990, that she had copd and that there was a reasonable possibility it was caused by smoking? you know what? i'm not going to spend any time on this. we talked about it. this is simple. if you believe that what she told dr. ticknor is true, then the late '80s, she knew she was having breathing problems caused by smoking; she could not breathe and that is why she switched to lights; and that is when she got an inhaler; and that is when she knew when she was addicted; if you believe what she told dr. ticknor four months ago and then dr. rothstein said that is copd, then she is barred by the statute of limitations. and the answer to question 2, if you get that far, is yes. question number 3: state whether philip morris usa, inc.'s concealment or omission of a material fact about the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes was a legal cause of elaine jordan's injuries. again, legal cause. we talked about legal cause. i will not go through that again. let me tell you something about this question and the next question, about 3 and 4. and this is important. when we get to question 5, you are going to hear about something called "comparative fault," right? it is three questions down the road. if you answered yes to this question or question 4, comparative fault does not apply. if you answered yes to this question or the next question, even if you decide that mrs. jordan is 99 percent responsible, comparative fault does not apply, and she recovers one hundred percent of her damages. so i -- i just want to make sure that everyone understands that. as you go through the jury instructions, it can sometimes, you know, be confusing, how it all works. and so what does this question ask you? it says, question asked, if mrs. jordan reasonably relied on a statement that philip morris made or did not make. well, the plaintiff never identified a single statement that philip morris ever made or did not make that she said fooled her or caused her to begin or continue smoking. where was the evidence? there was no evidence, absolutely no evidence that mrs. jordan reasonably relied on anything philip morris did or did not do in her decisions to begin or continue smoking. she smoked because her friends and family smoked and she liked to smoke. there is no evidence that she was enticed in the beginning or fooled in to continuing to smoke. she started smoking because she wanted to fit in. she wanted to fit in with the crowd. before she became a regular smoker, the warnings were on the pack. she did not pay any attention to them. 1970, her dad dies from emphysema and the warning gets stronger. she does not try to quit. she saw the warnings in '85, but she admits it did not cause her to change her behavior in any way. mrs. jordan admits that she never read or heard the frank statement. she never heard of the tobacco institute. she never heard of the council for tobacco research. she never heard of the tirc. she did not start smoking filters because of ads. by the time she started smoking marlboro lights, ads were off tv. the warnings were already on the ads themselves. there was no evidence, none whatsoever that she reasonably relied on anything philip morris did or did not do, said or did not say in her decision to smoke. and on the lights, she never said, i smoked -- if i would not have smoked lights, i would have quit. there is no evidence that she was -- if she switched to lights, it was just brand choice. it was not because there was any evidence philip morris fooled her in some way. there is simply no evidence that philip morris tricked mrs. jordan or misled mrs. jordan into becoming and continuing to smoke. and, members of the jury, the answer to question 4 is no. for the same reason, the answer to question 5 is also no. or i'm sorry. the answer to question 3 is no for the same reason the answer to question 4 is no. so that takes us to comparative fault. and let me say something so there is no confusion. you never get to this question unless you find she is a class member. unless she is a class member, you never get here. unless you find she is proved all the things she needs to prove to be a class member, unless you find she was not barred by the statute of limitations, you never get to comparative fault. but if you do get here, here you should have an opportunity to compare mrs. jordan's role in causing her injuries and philip morris's role in causing her injuries. and, you know, i'm not going to belabor it. you know, i showed you the time line. before she ever began smoking, there were studies linking smoking to a disease. i showed you all of the newspaper articles, all the information, told you about the warnings, told you about her dad. from the time she put the first cigarette in her mouth, she was on notice that smoking was dangerous. there were warnings on the pack. she always had the ability to quit. she never put her cigarette down for one day until 2002. if she would have quit earlier, according to dr. burns and dr. proctor, she could have avoided the risk. but she made a different decision. the evidence is clear, members of the jury, that if you get this far that mrs. jordan's decisions and her choices played a substantial role in causing her disease. and only mrs. jordan was in a position to act on the information she had. okay. so questions 6, 7, 8, 9 and 10 are damages. so if you decide that philip morris has liability in the case and philip morris has responsibility; philip morris actually injured mrs. jordan, then here's where you award the amount of damages. and you heard mr. spruance testify, and ms. shamp put some numbers up on the board. and, you know, you heard spruance, and you will have to decide what credence you basically give his testimony. but then ms. shamp said, well, it is up to you. you know, i suggest you award -- award 10 million for pain and suffering. and i could not get all the numbers down. but basically when you look all the numbers she put down, she was asking or suggesting you award somewhere, for actual damages, between 13 and $15 million. you know, frankly it is hard for most of us to even conceptualize that amount of money, to get our arms around it. but just to try to put it in context, you remember, i talked to dr. proctor, when i cross examined him. and dr. proctor said he made over $3 million a year -- not a year. he made more than $3 million testifying in these cases. and i said, well, dr. proctor, i mean, just kind of put that in context. the average family in florida -- ms. shamp: objection, your honor. your honor, i do not think it is appropriate to make an argument about compensatory damage and compare it to what dr. proctor earned. [#deleted objection dialogue#] mr. cofer: so you remember us talking to dr. proctor and his -- my cross examination. we talked about the amount of money he had been paid, and he -- he admitted he is been paid north of $3 million. and i said, dr. proctor, it would take the average family in florida 60 years to make the $3 million that you have made. and so i want thank you to think about the amount of money that ms. shamp is suggesting. do you know how many years it would take the average family in florida to earn 13 to $15 million, going to work every day, whether you felt good or not, missing your kids' games, whatever it takes, going on a job you may or may not like? do you know how many years? between 260 and 300 years. if you get this far, it is up to you to decide what is an appropriate amount of money to compensate mrs. jordan for her loss. you have heard the evidence. you use your own judgment. all right. last question, punitive damages. you only get here if you answered yes to question 3 or yes to question 4. if you do not answer yes to question 3 or yes to question 4, you do not even get to the issue of punitive damages. but if you do get here, i want you to understand what you are being asked. first of all, you must find by clear and convincing evidence, not the greater weight of the evidence, clear and convincing evidence that punitive damages are warranted against philip morris in this case. so let me talk about what you are being asked to decide so there is no confusion. you are not being asked to decide an amount of punitive damages. you are being asked to decide whether mrs. jordan has shown that she is entitled to punitive damages. if you answer yes, there will be another phase to the trial. plaintiff will put on evidence. we will put on evidence. we will have closing arguments. and that is when you could decide the amount, if any, to award. so i do not want you thinking about an amount. focus on the issue of whether plaintiff has met her burden of showing by clear and convincing evidence that she is entitled to punitive damages. clear and convincing evidence is defined. it is a much higher standard and it is defined in the jury instructions. with respect to punitive damages, you will see the evidence must be precise, explicit, lacking in confusion and of such weight that it produces a firm belief or conviction without hesitation about the matter at issue. let me tell you something else. you have to decide, if you get there, that punitive damages are warranted based on conduct that harmed mrs. jordan. this is mrs. jordan's case. you cannot punish philip morris for harm to others. ms. shamp mentioned what -- how mrs. jordan's family suffered. they are not a party to this lawsuit. mr. jordan did not bring a consortium claim. they are not seeking damages in this lawsuit. if there are other people, if they believe they have been harmed by the actions of philip morris, they can bring their own lawsuits, and they can have juries of their own listen to the evidence and decide whether they are entitled to punitive damages. this is a case about elaine jordan. in order to award punitive damages in this case, you have to find that philip morris did something by the greater weight of the evidence that harmed mrs. jordan and you must find -- and if you will look at the instructions -- that the harm to mrs. jordan, what we did to mrs. jordan, supports punitive damages. so i want that to be very clear. you do not award punitive damages because kids smoke. you do not award punitive damages because the companies advertise. in fact, there are instructions, members of the jury. instruction number 22: manufacturing and selling and advertising cigarettes are lawful activities. i instruct you that philip morris cannot be held liable for manufacturing, selling or advertising cigarettes. you know, it is a legal product. you do not have to use it but it is a legal product. and we cannot be held liable. my client cannot be held liable simply for selling cigarettes. philip morris, even though they do not advertise -- they have not advertised since 2000. they have not had -- i mean, they have not advertised on the backs of magazines since 2000. they have not advertised at all in magazines since 2005. if they wanted to, they have a right to. they have a first amendment right to advertise, and you cannot punish someone or hold them liable for exercising their constitutional rights. you know, if you think about this case, the first three witnesses that plaintiff called had nothing to do with elaine jordan. dr. burns had never met elaine jordan. he testified by video deposition. dr. proctor said, i know nothing about elaine jordan. i do not know why she smoked. i do not know what she knew. i do not know whether her family smoked. i do not know whether she tried to quit. i do not know whether she wanted to quit. i do not know anything about her. dr. pete lipowicz was a video deposition of philip morris. he was asked questions about the company but had nothing to do with elaine jordan. so that is the focus. and that is your focus on punitive damages in this case. where is the evidence, the clear and convincing evidence that philip morris should be punished in this case based on conduct that harmed mrs. jordan? so the purpose of punitive damages is to punish and to deter. and in terms of deterrence, what did you learn from dr. proctor? well, since 1998, you do not see ads on billboards anymore. you do not see ads on public transit. you do not sponsor sporting events. the tobacco institute, the council for tobacco research are out of existence, have been since 1998. philip morris put up a website in 2000 to tell smokers, smoking causes cancer and other diseases; smoking is addictive; there is no such thing as a safe cigarette; if you want information on smoking, here are links that will connect you to the surgeon general and others. for -- well, since 2000, for 15 years, philip morris has said, if you want information on smoking, go to public health. since 2009, the company's been subject to fda regulation. and what did dr. proctor tell you? philip morris supported it. philip morris wrote a letter to president obama, saying, sign the legislation. we welcome fda regulation. now, you know, i know you saw documents, even out of context, that probably disturbed you. you have heard a lot about smoking's toll on society and i get that and i'm not trying to minimize that. but that is not a basis for punitive damages in this case unless there is conduct that you find by clear and convincing evidence harmed elaine jordan. and i respectfully suggest, members of the jury, the plaintiff has not met her burden of proof. all right. so what is this case about? this case is about one smoker, mrs. jordan, and whether she is a member of the engle class. it is a case about what she knew and why she smoked and why she waited so long to quit. i told you in opening statement that the evidence would be that she smoked because her friends and family smoked, that she always had the information she needed to make an informed decision of whether to smoke or quit smoking, and i told you that she always had the ability to quit whenever she decided it was more important for her not to smoke than it is to smoke. i also told you in opening statement and in jury selection, all we wanted was a fair shot, that there are two sides to every story, and all we want is a fair shot. we want -- we asked you to listen to our side of the story, and i know that you have done that. and on behalf of my client, i want to tell you how much i appreciate it. i know you have done it. i also told you in voir dire, it is true that our civil justice system is the envy of the world, and it is because men and women like you are willing to take time in your busy lives -- i know you have got stuff to do -- to be here early, be here late, to put up with all the delays that lawyers cause, but we could not have a system like this if it were not for jurors like you. so on behalf of my client, philip morris, on behalf of the lawyers, and not just david but the other lawyers who work so hard behind the scenes to help us bring you information we think you need to make the judgment in this case, thank you very much. and thank you very, very much for your attention in listening to my closing argument.