mr. acosta: thank you, your honor. of course i'm here on behalf of cathy and christine kalyvas. and, you know, the jury system is in a sense -- the court system, the judicial system, is a third branch of the government. and we all thank you very much for your attention in this case and being here and doing what you are doing and being part of it. i'm going to tell you about our case. and the first thing i've got to say is that the defendant, part of the cigarette industry, that industry embedded itself in our society. it embedded itself. and it was a cancer -- it was just like a cancer. it was a cancer that grew in our society. it was deliberate. it was 3756 intentional. it was for profit. and as a result, hundreds of thousands, if not millions, of people have died. they have died because of the choices of philip morris to do what it did. they were wrong. they should have never done it, but they did it. and they embedded themselves in our society to get away with it. and they got away with it by denying, denying, denying, using their strength to hire public relations agencies, to influence stories, to influence the media, to influence the government. they did all these things knowing that people were going to smoke cigarettes, they were going to get addicted to them, and they -- many of them were going to die. they knew. their own research determined it. you have heard evidence from expert witnesses. all right? now, they had theirs; we had ours. there is another set of evidence, though, that you did not really get to see much of that i'm going to show you right now. and these are documents that are in evidence in addition to this one. you have seen this one quite a bit. this is the philip morris website brochure, which is in evidence. and you will get to take these things back into 3757 the jury room with you, and you will be able to read them in the jury room. you will be able to see what i'm telling you. we have, i do not know, maybe 50, 75 records here that are in evidence that were not discussed during the trial because there is so much. it would take forever, and we cannot do that. so we are trying to provide you with enough evidence so you can see what really happened. and i'm going to start with the first one that -- the numbers on these exhibits are roughly in chronological order, just roughly, because there is some that are not. but for the most part, they are. oh, excuse me. by the way, your honor, i would like to reserve about 20 minutes for my -- my rebuttal. the court: that is fine. you may do so. mr. acosta: and may i have a warning at an hour? the court: all right. the clerk will do that for you. mr. acosta: the first one is a survey of cancer. this is an r.j. reynolds document. it is 1953. and within it, it just does a whole series 3758 of research that shows how cigarettes were causing cancer and the companies were aware of it. because then in 1953, they got together and they formed a conspiracy. it was a conspiracy. it was a conspiracy to do wrong. and the doing wrong was to deny what they knew to the public. we have the frank statement which came out as a result of what they did, which i have a copy of here someplace. let me find it. in this frank statement, they promised to put people's health ahead of their profits, ahead of everything, but they did not do it. they broke their promise. and they told people they believed that the products they made were not injurious to health, but they knew they were. this was all a big public relations issue for them. they hired one of the biggest public relations firms in the country, and then they had a meeting. and they got together and they decided that they would publish this. and their names are at the bottom of it. their names are at the bottom of it. they all signed on to it, and then they maintained that over the years. they -- as a group, they maintained this position. and that position was so that they would be able to 3759 continue to sell cigarettes. a couple of things that were in evidence are from a vice president of philip morris. his name is george weissman. and mr. weissman wrote that -- and this is in 1953. he wrote, look, if it turns out that there is something dangerous about our cigarettes, then we will go out of business. that is what he told the company, and that is what he told a group in a speech that he gave. and that is exhibit no. 22. his letter is exhibit no. 14. and he gave a speech; this is a copy of the speech. and in the speech, he told people, look, we will go out of business if it turns out that our products are dangerous. now, people knew that there were little irritating things about cigarette smoke. i mean, it is common sense that if you breathe in smoke, it can make you cough. it can make you sick, you know, right when you do it. so the companies, what they did is they advertised -- this is way back in 1954 -- you know, have assurance about our product because we put this stuff called di-gly in it so that you can inhale it without any irritation to your throat. okay, that is one 3760 thing, but to know that it caused cancer is another thing. and that is what they knew before -- before that time. we have record 42, which is 1958. it is a philip morris confidential document. and i've highlighted this area right down here because it says, "benzpyrene must go." benzpyrene is one of the carcinogens in cigarette smoke. if you read through the first document, you are going to see that there are many, many compounds that are carcinogenic, which they knew back before they did this. this is one of them. and they knew it had to go. and they were telling people, you know, do not worry, our products are not hazardous. then we get to 1961. and that is exhibit 50. this is the one where they know where the carcinogen is. they define it in the front of it. and then they show all of these carcinogenic compounds that they knew were in cigarette smoke. then in exhibit 51, we have a 1959 philip morris document where they know that one of the reasons people smoke is addiction. then we have another document, 1963. this is brown & williamson's vice president, one of the people that signed on with philip morris to this 3761 document -- or one of the companies that did. and he states, we are in the -- we are in the business of selling nicotine, an addictive drug, and we are going to challenge the surgeon general. this came out just before the '64 surgeon general's report. then we have exhibit 76, which is a technical forecast dated -- it is a philip morris document dated 1963. and when you read this, you are going to see that they knew about nitrosamines. remember, there was a lot of discussion about nitrosamines. well, they knew about them in 1963. they knew that they were extremely dangerous, and they did not care. they were worried, though, about bronchitis and emphysema at the time. they thought that that might be a bigger danger to them than the lung cancer issue. so that is another one that you can read to show you what they knew. but they denied it. they publicly denied these things. they publicly denied them. and they hired the -- they created the tobacco institute. they did not hire it, they created it. they created the tirc, this agency to do research. they created these things to manipulate the public, to make the public think 3762 that they were -- that they were doing good research, but they were not. they had great scientists. they did -- they did some great studies, but they did not do anything to connect smoking to cancer. they never once said that cigarette smoking causes lung cancer or any cancer. they never said it causes emphysema. they never said it was addictive. they did not do that. here's 1964. this is right after the surgeon general's report of '64. this is about the time spyridon kalyvas is in greece, and he is smoking. and if you will remember -- and i'll show you a little bit -- in a little bit what some of the -- his sister said about the american cigarettes being over there. but at that time, the company, philip morris, through mr. -- mr. weissman -- he is the one that said we will go out of business -- now he is totally changed his mind because he says that we need to provide people with a psychological crutch so that they will keep smoking our cigarettes. they disagreed with the surgeon general's report and they said, hey, guess what? we do not think the surgeon general's report is having much effect on 3763 people, let us just give them a psychological crutch. and you will see that there is are other things in here like, how we will go about doing it? we will even get comedians to make jokes about it. that is what they did. then we have a document called the 1965 -- it is a 1965 cigarette, and it is no. 79. and they talk about nicotine delivery, what was needed, and investigating purchasing nicotine, adding nicotine to cigarettes to -- and defining the contribution of nicotine to flavor and how they can transfer it from the filter to the smoke. they were very interested in nicotine going way, way back. and then here's another document from philip morris, no. 81. it is a talk to the philip morris board of directors. it demonstrates their philosophy about all of this. "our philosophy is not to start a war, but if a war comes, we need to fight and win." they were fighting the public health community so that they could keep selling cigarettes so that they could keep doing what they knew was wrong. they knew it was wrong and they did it anyway. here's exhibit 88, nicotine and smoke ph. you heard a lot about that. it is dated 3764 march 31st, 1966. ammonia carbonate -- like i said, you can read this whole thing -- basically, the amount of nicotine people got varied with the ph. that is what this says. and it says that nicotine delivery can be controlled via filter or smoke ph. that is what they were -- that is what they were doing back in 1966. exhibit 89 is the market potential for a health cigarette. now, what did they do in the 1950s when -- right after this came out? they started promoting and making filtered cigarettes. in fact, they took the marlboro, which used to be a lady's cigarette, turned it into a man's cigarette and marketed it to men. and they put a -- they put filters on these cigarettes because they knew that people would think that, well, if there is something wrong with it, this filter is going to take care of it. they were giving them a psychological crutch. then later on they did other little gimmicky things with their filters to make people think, well, it will be safer. we will make -- we will start lowering tar and nicotine. yeah, they lowered the tar and nicotine, but they -- they changed the form of the nicotine. they changed the form of 3765 it. and i'll show you another document in a minute about that. but this -- this particular document talks about how the filter was really an illusion and how the charcoal filter was just a gimmick. they wanted to keep people smoking. here's no. 91. this is a philip morris document, it is dated september 22nd, 1966. and at the end of it, it says -- you know, you can read the whole thing, but i'm just trying to point out some of the highlights -- do people differ in nicotine absorption? the answer to this is of importance as we evaluate that question as we influence our cigarettes to alter nicotine absorption. that is what they were doing. they were making it more addictive. this is the proof of what dr. farone said and what dr. cummings said. now, exhibit no. 102 is a letter from mr. osdene, who was, at that time, manager of biological research. it talks about how the cigarette contains a gas. when you smoke it, a lot of it, the burning tobacco turns into gas. and that gas is nitros oxide, which slowly destroys lung tissue. every cigarette you take, 3766 you destroy lung tissue. and it does not grow back, because your lung is nonregenerative. and that is what this says. and they knew that they were going to be destroying people's lungs as they smoked, and they did not care how many cigarettes you smoked. you know, this is not like the alcohol industry. the alcohol industry never said, hey, alcohol is not addictive; hey, alcohol is safe to use. never said that. but these guys did. philip morris did and the rest of them did. that is the difference. september 1969, this is a memo to the president of the company from the research director. and, basically, it shows that somebody had done a test that might hang the industry because they had not done any research on their own products, which they should have done. they had not done anything like that. now, here's no. 11 -- exhibit 11. and this is the disagreement philip morris had with the position that the new york times had about the warnings. they did not think that people should have to -- they did not think that warnings were necessary, because you know why? they did not 3767 think their cigarette was hazardous. you may remember we had the ceo of the company, mr. coleman, was on television, face the nation. and he said -- well, he said something about making smaller babies, that women may like that. and then he said something about how their cigarettes were not hazardous, how we do not have any programs to help people quit smoking, we do not think there is -- our cigarettes are even hazardous, you know, why should we? that was his -- his position on national television. here in 1969, this particular document's from the -- mr. weikum, who, again, was the director of research. and now they are worried about the liability situation. they are worried that if they admit that cigarettes cause cancer that they will be in trouble on a liability basis. the lawyers control a lot of what they do. this particular document indicates that they -- they believe that cigarettes may be an accelerator of cancer -- an accelerator of cancer. and they talked about how -- that they do not want to admit the cause of the disease. so you can -- you can take a look at that. now, somebody asked a question about -- about 3768 inducing lung cancer in animals. here's the study. this is philip morris' document. that man works for philip morris. he is writing to mr. -- dr. weikum, who is the head of research and development at philip morris. and basically he says, you know, dr. auerbach showed me photo micrographs -- those are pictures of slides, microscopic slides. and he said to my nonexpert eye that these were typical invasive carcinoma. and then he read him a report that wold corroborate the diagnosis. and then at the end he says, i would say the experiment is a crude one but effective in that carcinoma in dogs has been produced. you have these dogs breathing smoke. and he says, you know, even if that is wrong, the obvious emphysema produced cannot be denied. number 123, this is a confidential philip morris document. and, again, it talks about how they need to make a counterattack to the public health community for suggesting that smoking is bad for them. then an advertisement. this is in the mid-'70s. it is 124. the question about smoking and health is still a question. they are saying that nobody's ever been able to determine that 3769 smoking causes any disease in here. so you can read that. this is 1970. and this about -- this is another philip morris document. it is about ctr. the tirc, which was that industry research group, changed its name to council for tobacco research. and then they say that -- that ctr has frequently denied what others find to be the truth. let us face it, we are interested in evidence which we believe denies the allegation that cigarette smoking causes disease. that is what they were looking for. of course it is not there. it never was there. the physiological effect serves as the primary incentive. you get to read this. this was written by the head of the behavioral science department -- psychology department at philip morris. and they know that there was a physiologic effect of nicotine. he says, the tobacco product is, in essence, a vehicle for delivery of nicotine designed to deliver -- oh, this is a different document, by the way. this is 133. it is called the nature of tobacco business and the crucial role of nicotine therein. this is a reynolds document we included 3770 so you could see what the other companies thought, too -- that the tobacco product is, in essence, a vehicle of delivery of nicotine designed to deliver nicotine in a generally accepted and attractive form. our industry, then, is based upon design, manufacture, and sale of attractive dosage forms of nicotine. and i think he goes on to say, happily for us, nicotine is habituating. this is a letter dated 1972 from a person named udow that works at philip morris saying that people smoke really for the narcotic effect. that is what they smoke for is the narcotic effect. it says, although most people talk about taste, it is likely that a greater number smoke for the narcotic value that comes from nicotine. and here's 136. that same man that talked about the beagle study, dr. auerbach's beagle study, in 1972 writes dr. weikum there at philip morris. what it sounds like at the moment is that cigarettes are addicting and the reaction of the inveterate cigarette smoker is like that of any drug addict. now, this is a very interesting document right here. this is an r.j. reynolds secret document. and it is -- what they did at reynolds 3771 is they -- they took apart a marlboro cigarette. they were trying to figure out, why is marlboro selling so many cigarettes over winston? and what they found is that philip morris had been tinkering with the ph of the smoke and that that caused free nicotine. and it says, all evidence indicates that the relatively high smoke ph shown by marlboro and other philip morris brands and kools is deliberate and controlled. kools were made by brown & williamson at the time. then they go on to say, as the -- as the smoke ph increases above about 6.0, an increasing proportion of the total smoke of nicotine occurs in the free form that rapidly is absorb -- it is rapidly absorbed by the smoker and gives the smoker the nicotine, quote, kick. and then they talk about nicotine kick and free nicotine. this document is 138. it talks all about the -- changing the form of nicotine to free base. and there is a graph in it, this graph right here, which shows you as the smoke ph goes up, there is more free nicotine. and they also mention ammonia. in addition to the -- in addition to enhancing nicotine kick, 3772 increasing the ph, increasing the alkalinity of smoke above about 6.0 causes other changes, particularly the increase in smoke ph. and that is achieved by adding ammonia to the blend. they are talking about marlboros in that document. document 140. this was -- dr. farone talked about this. mr. osdene handed this out. so if anybody asked any of the people that worked there, what do you say if you are confronted by somebody that wants to know whether cigarettes cause cancer, the answer is: exposure to cigarette smoke has never been shown to cause any disease. that was the position that they took up till the year 2000. behavioral research and annual report, smoker's psychology. they went along and they -- they did lots of studies to figure out how they can obtain more effective ways to -- that they can develop to obtain consumer response to cigarettes. here's one, 142, manipulation of nicotine delivery by addition of acids to filler. 1975. this is one that shows that when you smoke a marlboro and you smoke a marlboro light, you get exactly the same thing. you get the same thing. this is their study -- philip morris' 3773 study. 1977. this is about that in bifo. this is a letter showing that they wanted to create a dummy mailbox so that they could hide what they were sending over to europe. they did not want anybody over here to find out. dr. farone talked about that because they did not want their records subpoenaed. then this is 1977, comments about the ctr. they are saying, hey, this program is going the wrong direction. we are going to dig our own grave if they are going digging into issues about whether or not cigarettes cause cancer. 1978. this talks about something that a dr. abood was doing that might potentially put them out of business, and that would be to find a nicotine antagonist. that might be a pill that you take so that those receptors do not light up when you smoke nicotine. they were worried that it might drive them out of business, so they actually -- they -- they wind up hiring dr. abood to do work for them. this is a study that they did in 1978. it is called roper study proposal to tobacco institute. let me read this. 3774 "an admission by the industry that excessive cigarette smoking is bad for you is tantamount to an admission of guilt with regard to the lung cancer problem. this could open the door to legal suits in which the industry would have no defense." "to suggest that" -- and then they talk about the smoker, the consumer. "to suggest that his coping techniques are not of his own choosing" -- that is because of addiction -- "and are predetermined certainly does not constitute good faith on the part of an industry toward its customers." this is an admission that what they were doing was not in good faith. here's one from dr. osdene in 1979. it is exhibit 165. "once again, i'm force of the opinion that the program seems to be misdirected since its main mission seems to be proving that smoking causes lung cancer." that is what they did not want. these are the documents that surround that one that i showed mr. -- dr. werley, who was the second witness for philip morris, who basically wanted to tell you about the second page of that document that had lots of research that they were 3775 doing but did not want to talk about the third page which said, avoid -- avoid doing any research that would link human beings to lung cancer. now, here's one. this is a lorillard document. this is so you can see other companies doing the same thing. lorillard says, "determine the minimum level of nicotine that would allow continued smoking." this is a memo to dr. seligman. and this, again, involves that dr. abood i mentioned before to do receptor studies. "they are doing central nervous system studies on the effects of nicotine receptors in that system." then this goes on. dr. dunn, in 1980, writes -- and there is a lot of it here, and i do not have enough time to go through it, but this is exhibit 175. and you will see that essentially what was happening is their lawyers were telling them what they should research and what they should not research and that they had to remain officially heedless of the drug properties of nicotine. they did not want anybody to know what they knew about nicotine and what they were doing. 178 is another philip morris document in 1980, evaluation of major r&d programs -- research 3776 and development programs. they had a nicotine program. the thing they sell most is nicotine, and they wanted to talk about the additives and the activities of the additives. then no. 180, this one is knopik to kloepfer. and in this particular document, this is -- this is somebody in the tobacco institute writing the president of the tobacco institute. and he says that basically there was a conference on -- on -- on drugs that he went to. and he says, "i feel badly about my own lack of intelligence gathering in this situation, but i do not think the questions i now raise are academic. legal counsel reminds us, i'm told, that the entire matter of addiction is the most potent weapon a prosecuting attorney can have in a lung cancer cigarette case. we cannot defend continued smoking as free choice if the person was addicted." this is an admission of the tobacco institute. they are admitting that when you smoke and you become addicted to nicotine, that your choice, your willpower is constrained by the influence of the drug. it changes the brain. it changes the structure and function of the brain. 3777 in 1981, document 182, this is another surgeon general's report response. "it is our opinion that philip morris and the tobacco industry take a more aggressive posture to counterattack the anti-smoking group." and that is what they continue to do. this one talks about the threshold of nicotine that is necessary for people to remain addicted. that is 187. here's an industry study called the nordeen study. it was done for r.j. reynolds. but in this one, they found that most people that smoke for a significant time would like to stop. and this is dated 1982. "many, but not most of those who would like to stop smoking are able to." and they were worried that people would somehow figure out a way to stop, and they did not want that to happen. this is no. 201, and it is the cigarette controversy, why more research is needed, presented to the united states congressional committee by the tobacco institute. another denial. 208. this is -- this is where philip morris tries to get dow chemical, who made nicorette gum, 3778 to stop advertising it to people that they did not know whether they wanted to stop or not. this is -- so what they did is they threatened them and they discontinued purchasing chemicals for a while. and dow then changed its advertising to only advertise to people that had already said they wanted to quit smoking but not to try to get anybody else to quit. here's document 221. it is november 1990. this is the one with project jolt. in 1990, philip morris has got a project to jolt up its tobacco by changing the form of the nicotine because it says that the form of nicotine has different physiologic responses. so what they are doing is they are manipulating the way that nicotine is delivered. they do not have to add nicotine. what they did is they changed the way it is delivered. and they changed the way it is delivered by this pronation issue. you know, whether it has an extra proton on it or not makes it free-based, goes through faster. and they know that when it gets to your brain faster that it produces a stronger sensation of the addictive effect. they also knew in 1992 that patches did not 3779 really work very well, that they would not work unless you had the behavioral psychology assistance to stop smoking, that there was a medical -- it is a medical issue for many people, not everybody -- not everybody. here's a man from the tobacco institute. this is a transcript of an interview of brennan dawson in 1994. and you remember we showed you a little movie clip near the end of our case where the ceos of the companies were under oath and they told congress, we do not believe nicotine is addictive -- 1994. this is after the surgeon general had determined it was in 1988. they denied it. and this sheet right here, 231, is in evidence. philip morris does not believe cigarette smoking is addictive. it is an advertisement. so the things that the plaintiff's witnesses told you are confirmed by these documents. if you -- if you -- if you read those documents, they will confirm the things that dr. farone told you and the things that dr. cummings told you. now, i want to talk about addiction for a second. and, of course, you may remember this 3780 from opening. this is how you get started. you smoke, the nicotine gets into your lungs, and then the heart pumps is right up to the brain. the faster it gets in, the faster the reinforcing action of the nicotine. you know, the cigarette companies, what they did -- what philip morris did is they made it as easy as they could to start smoking -- as easy as they could. then they make it as hard as possible, by making it more addictive, for people to quit. and then that makes it easy to relapse. you know, they are the masters of relapse. and many people quit. they make it a day or two, some make it a week or two, for many people repeated, repeated, repeated times. some people just do not make it. you saw in some of these -- these -- the questions from these books -- the questions from these books, even though it is a psychiatric manual, it was like 55 percent of people that tried to stop were not able to do so. the cigarette companies' own documents in here, most people, unable to. now, somebody that stops for a year, two years, three years, they pick up a cigarette, they 3781 already have tolerance. they do not have to go through that -- that nausea and the dizziness that very novice, naive smoker has to go through. you just pick it up and you are off to the races again. and that addiction, it does last for a life time. those receptors go dormant. that is what happens to them, but they are there. and when you start smoking when you are ten years old, you grow a lot more of them than you do if you start when you are 25 or 20, because of the development of your brain. it is a process. you smoke. it becomes a regular smoking habit. you get dependent on it. that is addiction. the ease in stopping, as you go along in this process, it gets harder to stop. the ease of relapse, it gets easier to relapse. this is the process. there was a cycle that was discussed by dr. groff. let me see if i can find that one. this is the cycle. you smoke, you get nicotine absorption, which they wanted to have happen as quickly as possible, it changes your mood. and for some people, it is arousal. but it is usually pleasure for most everybody. there is tolerance and physical dependence. 3782 tolerance means you cannot -- you cannot smoke 20 cigarettes the first time you try to smoke. you smoke one, it makes you cough, it makes you gag, it may make you sick, it may make you nauseous. for most people, they cannot just pick up cigarettes and just start smoking, it does not work that way. it is a drug, and your body has to build up a tolerance. it does it pretty quickly, though, usually in about two or three weeks. and then you are smoking 20 a day -- or you are able to smoke 20 a day, and then that lasts forever. it lasts forever, and you do not get sick. you do not continually get nauseous or dizzy every time you smoke a cigarette. you need the nicotine. and drug -- drug abstinence produces withdrawal symptoms. mrs. kalyvas talked about the symptoms her husband had and how he would -- he pace. he was restless. he had irritability. he was nervous. he could not concentrate on things that he did. that is -- that is typical of people who try to stop smoking. it is just a symptom. it is a symptom. those symptoms are not as strong for nicotine as they are for other things, but the cravings and the availability of the drug make it 3783 easy for people to keep relapsing -- they keep relapsing. and nobody knows exactly why, but nicotine works the same way in the brain as cocaine and other hard drugs. it is the same thing. then what do we get up here? you get the cravings to eliminate the withdrawal symptoms, and you are smoking again. you break the cycle, stop smoking; but it is easy to relapse. and that is why only 3 to 5 percent of people that try to quit smoking every year are successful that year. that is what happens. we have another board here that demonstrates how this process works, because one of the things that we have to show you in this case is how addiction leads to lung cancer. and that is what happens. addiction leads to continued smoking. you keep smoking and you get cancer. the people that get lung cancer, the people that get emphysema, those are the addictive -- those are addicted smokers. you see? now, i want to talk to you for a second about the plaintiffs' burden of proof in the case. and the instructions were read to you and, you know, they talk about greater weight. but what i'm 3784 going to tell you is -- is an interpretation of what that is. the greater weight is just this much. it is whether we are more right than wrong, whether it is more likely that we are right than wrong. that is what -- how you judge this. all right? so the first question on the verdict form is going to be, was addiction to cigarettes a legal cause of mr. kalyvas' death? and it only has to be a cause. it does not have to be the only cause or the cause; a cause. and it only has to be a significant contributing cause. that is what our burden is. please do not hold us to a higher burden than the law requires. please follow the law on that. it is whether we are probably more right than wrong. that is the way to look at this. now, there was testimony about mr. kalyvas' lung cancer. this is the bottom line. they had dr. andrews on the stand. and what was dr. andrews' bottom line? i do not know what causes cancer, you know. and he was all over the map. maybe it was because he was a baker. of course, if he was a baker, then that ran into the latency problem. if it was tb, it was 3785 tuberculosis, that runs into the latency problem because there was not enough latency between the tuberculosis or the job as a baker. but mr. kalyvas started smoking at age ten, so he had 30 years of cigarette smoking at the time he got lung cancer. 30 years is a long time, and it is a lot of smoking. dr. goldman, who is the head of the department and still sees patients -- he does not just have an administrative role, he still sees patients out there at usf and the va. dr. goldman, chairman of the department, been there 35 years, runs a smoking cessation program. he says he is looked at all this and says this pancoast tumor -- that is the name of this kind of tumor that mr. kalyvas had -- grows into the scapula and the ribs. dr. goldman said that the adenocarcinoma was caused by mr. kalyvas' cigarette smoking. it is a dose-response disease. it is caused by carcinogens. things that cause cancer are carcinogens, and they are chemicals. they are agents. and they disrupt the way the dna in your cells work, and that is how cancer is caused. and the dna has, you know, billions of levels, codes. and over time what happens is those molecules 3786 attack the dna chain and then cancer starts. dr. goldman said it caused his cancer. dr. andrews says, i do not know. so if dr. andrews says, i do not know, and dr. goldman says, i know, where does that leave us? that leaves us with the greater weight being on dr. goldman's side, because this -- this fellow does not even know. he said, i cannot tell you that smoking had anything to do with it. i cannot tell you whether it was tb, whether it was the fact that he was a baker or whatever. nobody can know. you know, that is the position the cigarette industry has taken for 60 years now. that is what they do. they have denied everything in this case. we came in here and we admitted some responsibility. we think the responsibility should be shared. the cigarette company; nope, he is not addicted; nope, we did not do anything wrong; nope, did not cause the man's cancer. you know, if there was ever a person that was addicted, who would be addicted if it was not mr. kalyvas? who would it be? you know, with his -- his smoking and what he went through and what he did -- and these are, you know, what some of the witnesses said. "he smoked all night long 3787 one time." his son says he is a chain smoker. his former wife -- former wife never saw him without a cigarette. "one time he tried to stop and he threw them out the window." she knew he struggled with it. and this is going back in the '70s, okay, back in the '70s. "there was a point where he was doing it for himself. nobody was making him quit, he wanted to quit smoking. he could not quit. but i do not think he realized it was something that he could not overcome." his sister: "he smoked a lot. between my dad and spyro, the ashtray was always full." thomas papas: "he had attempted cutting back. i recall him not smoking for a while and then, you know, just breaking down. he would go and, you know, just like have half a one, you know, the classic what everybody does when they try to quit. he smoked one right after the other. he had a cigarette in his hand more often than he did not." this is a man that cigarettes had a tenacious hold on. this is thomas mullane. that is lola's husband, and lola's his half sister. he is asked about addiction. "only in a way that -- only in 3788 hearing him say, i cannot stop smoking, or something of that nature. i tried, but i cannot stop. i do not know where or when that conversation took place, but i know he said, i just cannot stop smoking." 1971 to '79 is when he knew him. this was his friend: "was he addicted to smoking?" "i know he was." "how do you know that?" "because he wanted a cigarette while he was dying." and this is lola: "he tried many times to stop, but he could not." "did he say he was addicted?" "yes, yes. he tell me. he say, i cannot stop. i remember he tried to stop, i remember that, but he cannot. he could not stop. he said, i cannot stop, lola." those are what the witnesses said. and you heard what cathy said, how they would try -- how they would try. and, you know, it goes back in time a long way. this has been a long struggle. 13 years since he is died, and now here we are, you know. hard to remember every single little page. 3789 impossible. so we tried to give you the best that we could on that, and hopefully you will realize that what we did was met our burden of proof. we are more likely than we are wrong on that issue. now, the brands. it is always the issue of, you know, whose cigarettes were they? well, here's what lola says about it: "spyridon started smoking when he was ten." "do you remember how long your brother smoked the karelia cigarettes?" "not too long." and the reason for that was american cigarettes. "you said later he started smoking marlboro." and she says, "after they bring to corfu american cigarettes, yes, everybody smoked american cigarettes." "do you remember when they brought the american cigarettes?" "i was maybe 17, 16 years old then." "you were 16 or 17? so that would be 1961, 1962." "that is when the american cigarettes came. he started smoking about a year after that." and she says: in athens they have corfu 3790 town. they have american cigarettes. now everybody have every kind american cigarettes. and i be honest with you. we say in corfu, everybody like to smoke american cigarettes." but here's the one. now, he smoked marlboro and benson & hedges. benson & hedges is made by philip morris also -- benson & hedges and marlboro. and he smoked some -- he smoked a lot of other brands, too, but on a -- you know, not as a primary brand. the marlboro and benson & hedges were primary brands. here's nicholas: "he smoked some greek cigarettes like i told you, some american cigarettes, marlboros. i know he smoked marlboro lights, regular marlboros." and as i say, most people when they switch -- they try lights because they think lights are safer, but they are not. philip morris today admits that. it is in that website. and you will be able to see what they say about cigarettes today, which they denied until 2000. here's anastasia papas. '74 to '81, what she remembers was benson & hedges. thomas papas: "do you remember what type cigarettes spyridon smoked?" 3791 "benson & hedges in the gold pack." that is about the same time as anastasia. thomas mullane, '71 to '79. he only remembers marlboro. "i remember seeing him with a pack. the marlboro packs stood out with the white and the red and the v on the front. i remember him with a pack." additionally, he and lola would bring him marlboro from america when they would go to greece to visit. now, the evidence proves that we are more right than wrong about addiction, and we are more right than wrong about the lung cancer being caused by, or at least a cause from cigarettes -- at least a cause from cigarettes. remember i mentioned that dose response? i think i probably did not finish that thought, i do not think. but the more you smoke, that raises -- keeps raising your risk until something happens. but every -- every layer of cigarettes along the way contributes to that. it is part of the dose. an analogy was made to aspirin. you know, a person can take a lot of aspirin and nothing happens. you take one more and you die, because 3792 you have that dose response to it. well, if you took away some of the aspirin down below, you would not die when you took that last one, that 90th one, because it would not be 90 anymore. so the way smoking works is that all of these cigarettes combine to cause the cancer, and that is how dose response works. so one of the things you are going to see in the verdict form -- if i could have the elmo, please? and, actually, i want to go to the jury instructions first. this is something that the judge just read to you. and it is got circled, if so, whether such addiction was a legal cause. and then that second paragraph up there, in addition to -- in addition to defendant's cigarettes as a legal cause of spyridon kalyvas' death, if it -- if an addiction to -- i'm sorry -- an addiction to defendant's cigarettes is a legal cause of spyridon kalyvas' death if it directly and in a natural and continuous sequence -- that is a sequence -- produces or contributes substantially to producing his death so it can be said that but for his addiction to defendant's 3793 cigarettes, his death would not have occurred. well, what do we have then? we have a lot of smoking of philip morris cigarettes. a lot of it. they are -- dr. goldman talked about how they were a substantial contributing cause. that is more right than wrong. that is more right than wrong. and then i did not finish this. let me read further. "in order to be regarded as a legal cause of death, an addiction to cigarettes need not be the only cause. an addiction to defendant's cigarettes may be a legal cause of spyridon kalyvas' death even though it operates in combination with the act of another or some natural cause or some other cause if such other cause occurs at the same time as spyridon kalyvas' addiction to cigarettes and spyridon kalyvas' addiction to defendant's cigarettes contributes substantially to producing such death." so that is what has been proven. and, of course, that is up for you to decide. all i can do is argue the facts to you. but you heard them and you decide whether we are more right about that than we were wrong. if we were more right about it, then we should win. you should -- you should 3794 check yes on the verdict form, which -- there is the first question on the verdict form, was addiction to cigarettes manufactured by philip morris, inc., a legal cause of spyridon kalyvas -- the death of spyridon kalyvas, yes or no? if you answer no, then the case is over. but if you answer yes, then these findings from the florida smokers group apply to this case. smoking causes adenocarcinoma, which is the type he had. philip morris' cigarettes, these are things you have to take as true. philip morris agreed with the other cigarette companies to conceal information regarding the health effects of cigarettes and their addictive nature with the intention that smokers rely to their detriment. that must be accepted as true if you check "yes." now, dr. cummings said smokers did, in fact, rely on it. dr. farone said, you know, if they had not concealed some information from me and done what i wanted them to do at philip morris, we could have used technology to make a safer cigarette. did not happen. cathy kalyvas said, you know, had i known that they were changing the structure of my brain, you know, i would -- we would have done something. 3795 we would have tried harder. i would have encouraged him. if people had known that cigarettes were truly, in fact, addictive and they were changing the structure of their brains when they smoked, it would be a lot different. it would be a different world. if cigarette companies made admissions way back when, it would be a different world, but they did not. they did not do that. they did not -- they did not tell the truth. they told falsehoods, half truths to make profits. and they did it at the expense of people's health. the clerk: mr. acosta, that is your warning. mr. acosta: thank you. okay. i'm going to quickly try to wrap this up. there are more findings that you have to accept: that their products are defective and they continued to conceal it, that the products did not conform to the representations made for them, that they were negligent. i was going to tell you a little bit about dr. farone. remember the green slides? he had those six opinions. he went through six opinions 3796 about the things that philip morris did. dr. cummings, he had very similar opinions. dr. cummings is the one that came from roswell in buffalo, new york, who came down here who runs the tobacco cessation quit line up there, talked about mr. kalyvas' addiction and what the cigarette companies did. one of the things that we put on evidence about this adenocarcinoma, you may remember there was an issue about propane gas burners in these little barns that increased the nitrosamines. dr. farone talked about the increase of the nitrosamines from using that kind of tobacco and that then he knew what they were doing back then. the witness, mr. -- dr. werley did not even know about it until 1998 and 1999. dr. farone knew about it. he knew -- he knew that by bathing these tobacco leaves nitric oxide that it would increase the carcinogenicity of the tobacco that philip morris used, could have contracted for. they could have changed it back then, but they did not. they did not do that. and that particular issue, both the surgeon general and the national cancer institute in monograph 13, which i have right here and showed 3797 you, found that that was responsible for the increase in adenocarcinoma. you know, i -- i do not know how much you can say about somebody who is 35 years old and who is pregnant -- finds out she is pregnant at the same time she finds out her husband's got lung cancer. i do not know how much you can say about a little girl that is a year old -- let me show you just a couple of these blowups. we have not really published the pictures to you yet. they are -- they are going to go back in -- all the pictures that we put into evidence will go back in the courtroom with you. this is when he is in the air force. imagine what he looked like when he was ten. this is cathy and spyros when she is pregnant and he is got cancer. she is 35. and this is spyro playing with his daughter. now she is about a year old, and he is dying. and when you read those records -- he had to wear diapers at the end. she had to take care of him. you know, the only thing we can do is to get their attention. i mean, that is what this is all about. that is why we have gone through all of this. it takes a lot of courage to do what they have done. 3798 so i'm going to tell you that, you know, you have the ultimate decision about how much money you award in restitution. this is -- we are asking for restitution. and $15 million for cathy and $15 million for her daughter would not be too much money. that would not be too much money. we have asked for punitive damages. i'm not going to give you a number for that, that is something you just decide based on what you have heard. we do ask that you find that they are warranted. the amount of money that you think would punish them for their behavior is totally up to you. i do not have anything else right now. i hope i have some time left so after mr. reilly is done, i can come back and talk to you. thank you very much. mr. acosta: thank you, your honor. mr. reilly made a rhetorical question, you know, what did we do wrong? what did philip morris do wrong? well, what they did wrong is they did not tell the truth. that is what they did wrong. you know, they -- this case is -- you can divided really into two parts. the first part is whether mr. kalyvas was addicted to nicotine, 3860 which was a cause of his death. the second part is punitive damages. if you find that addiction to nicotine was the cause of his death, then these findings that we talked about before, the fact that their cigarettes are unreasonably dangerous, the fact they are defective, that they concealed things from smokers, concealed material -- material things that were otherwise unknown from people, those will be applied. and you will go directly to apportioning the damages between philip morris and the plaintiff. all this other evidence you have heard about additives and ammonia and all that stuff, that goes to the punitive aspect of the case, you see. and that may not have been made clear by us, and i apologize for that if it has not. but when you read through this and you see how it works going through the verdict form and the instructions, that is how it works. what philip morris has done and what they continue to do is to create doubt on things. they doubt -- they doubt everything that smokers say when they have come to court and try to sue them. i mean, that is the name of the game. they deny everything. mr. reilly: i object, your honor. i do not 3861 think this is a game. the court: overrule the objection. mr. acosta: mr. reilly, he wants you to speculate about, you know, all these people that did not agree or did agree. what is that all about? you know, where in the world would they come from to agree or disagree with dr. farone? there is -- there is no proof. there is no proof. i mean, where does that come from? it is just something -- it is just a matter of speculation because -- i guess because there is not some book somewhere or some document somewhere that says we agree or we disagree. it just is not -- it is not there. i took notes trying to follow along with what mr. reilly was asking, and so it is a little -- it is not in a perfect order. but one of the things that he talked about was responsibility. and the plaintiff in this case has accepted responsibility for a share of the fault. philip morris has not. and so there is something i need to tell you about responsibility. everybody believes in personal responsibility. that is not the point. but who do you owe the responsibility to? you owe responsibility to yourself. you owe 3862 responsibility to maybe your family. you owe responsibility to the rest of the people in the country. but there might be one person that you do not owe the same kind of responsibility to, and that would be the one that talked you into doing what you did. you know, this is a buyer/seller arrangement. they sell. and they -- they got mr. kalyvas, smoking their cigarettes, to do exactly what they wanted him to do. they got him to do what they wanted him to do. now they take the position, well, he should not have done that. but back then, they got him to do what they wanted him to do. and he did it. so is he as responsible to philip morris? that is why we have shared fault. that is -- that is why they have responsibility. they got him to do it. now, in terms of the addiction, you know, if this man is not addicted, then nobody's going to meet the criteria of addiction. and that criteria varies. you saw philip morris, since 2000, they have a much lower bar for what they consider addiction to be. you know, it is somebody that is nervous and irritable when they -- and have a difficult time smoking -- stopping smoking. 3863 that is at the bottom rung of what addiction is. you know, addiction is something that influences you. it is what causes you to keep -- to be a repeat buyer. now, this company knew -- this company knew that 45, forty percent -- let us say it was thirty percent of the people that see the warning try to quit. and they know they are not going to be able to do it. they know they are not going to be able to do it. you know, mr. kalyvas, he tried to stop. i mean, you -- you can pull little bits and pieces out of different parts of testimony and find different things. but if you look at it in total, you will see that he did, in fact, try to stop. now, once you try to stop -- once you try to stop, that means that the smoking you do from then on you would not have done if you had stopped. if it was just a matter of free choice and you decide, i'm not going to do it anymore, and you do not do it anymore, that is great. but that is not the way it works with cigarettes. and they knew that. and they did not tell the truth about it. that is why they should be punished, because they did not tell the truth about it. 3864 now, i want to say one thing about mr. kalyvas' lung cancer. you know, if you look in the medical records, you will see that there is one record that says rule out tb. the treating doctors ruled out tb because they found that he had an adenocarcinoma. otherwise it would not have been ruled out. so you can -- you can see that there. aside from that, the latency period that dr. andrews used was wrong. it was the wrong latency period. latency is from the time of initial exposure till the time the disease manifests itself, not the time when the first cell starts dividing, because nobody would ever know what that is. nobody could ever know that. and i showed that using the 1985 surgeon general's report. lucky. well, i do not know exactly what that has to do with this case, but whether somebody's lucky or not does not have anything to do with whether they get physiologically and psychologically addicted to cigarettes. but, you know, here's a guy who came over from greece, did not speak english. and he is a young man. he gets to stay in america. that is lucky. he got 3865 pulled from a burning wreck that he was rear-ended and his car flips over and he is -- he is underneath it and somebody pulled him out. that is the only reason he is still alive. that is lucky. so maybe that is what explains lucky. all i can say is, you know, when you go in the back and deliberate this case, that mountain, whether it is a mountain or a hill or whatever, we have met our burden of proof. it is -- it is a very low burden of proof. and, you know, i want to thank you for your time. and just go back and do what jurors do. we appreciate it. thank you.