mr. reilly: thank you, your honor. well, good morning, everybody. when i stood here in front of you in a different courtroom about two weeks and two days ago, i said to you guys during voir dire that when you take on the mantle of jurors that you gain great power, because you are the decision makers of this case, and i said you take on great responsibility. and that responsibility was to listen to the evidence 3800 that came in during the course of this case and then to receive the instructions of the law that judge barton gives you. and you have now received that. you each have a set of the instructions. and during the course of this trial, i've -- i try very hard not to look at jurors in trial because you have a job, and i do not want to disturb you. i do not want you to think that i'm encroaching on your territory, so i do not look at you. but during the course of this trial, it is become abundantly clear that you have been paying very close attention to the evidence in this case because you have been asking some great questions. and that is in spite of the fact that some of the evidence has come in in what i know to be a very difficult way for you guys to receive it. you had depositions in video form that have gone on for hours and hours, and you have had some depositions that have been read to you with counsel as the witness. and that is very difficult, i know, for people to pay attention to. but you have done a great job. so on behalf of sandra and myself and philip morris, and i know mr. acosta as well and mr. denson and mrs. kalyvas, we all thank you for 3801 your service, because this is exactly how we hope the system works. okay. now, you are about to do the most difficult part of your job, and that is to actually deliberate and make the decisions in this case. and now you have to do that following the oath that you took, and that is to make the decisions without bias and without sympathy. now, without bias. you have all indicated at the outset of this case that you really did not believe that you had a bias that would interfere with your ability to be fair and impartial. and we talked a lot about that during the voir dire. that does not mean, however, that you have to leave all of your personal experiences or your common sense outside the courtroom, because you do not. we hope you do bring your common sense and your personal experiences in with you. in addition to that, you have to decide this case without feelings of sympathy. i noticed the very last pictures that mr. acosta showed you at the end of his -- the first part of his opening statement -- closing arguments, sorry -- you know, it would be almost unnatural, i think, for folks not to feel sympathy toward mrs. kalyvas and her 3802 daughter, christine, because of the loss of a loved one. and that would be almost unnatural. but your job as jurors is to set aside those feelings of sympathy and to refocus your attention on the evidence that came in during the course of the case and the issues with the law that judge barton has now given to you. that is truly the essence of what you guys do as jurors in this case. now you are just about to do it. so let us go over, then, what are the issues that you have to resolve for us. rather than launching in with a number of documents -- and i cannot possibly -- and you will notice how that happened. mr. acosta brought up all these documents long after the last witness has gone. and i do not have dr. werley here to address the content of those documents. i do not have the ability to -- frankly, to spend my time in my closing argument going over each and every one of them reading different sections of them to you. but i'd invite you to read -- to read all of them, because you need to put them in context. you need to see what people are really talking about if you decide to spend your time looking at all the documents. 3803 i will spend a little time looking at a couple of them just to refresh your recollection as to what it means, to actually put things in context, or to try to look at things that are now 50 years old or 60 years old and try to make sense of it. so we will look at a few of them, but what i really want to do is i want to spend my time talking to you about what mr. kalyvas' case has really been about. because as i said when i started this case, this is not about some group of smokers. this is not about some vague amorphous group. this is about one person and one person's smoking, and that is mr. kalyvas. okay. so let us start. i told you that i thought that the first and foremost issue that you were going to have to deal with was going to be this question of whether or not was addiction to cigarettes manufactured by philip morris usa, incorporated, a legal cause of the death of spyridon kalyvas. and sure enough, there it is, first question on the verdict form. right? first question. and i said, you know, this question is not just one question. this question is a whole 3804 series of questions -- a whole series of questions. and i used either this board or one almost just like it to explain to you what those issues were. and i said, here's the question. here's what it breaks down to. there is four parts -- four parts. can you see? no, you cannot see? sorry. move this out of the way. i know i'm going to use this for a lid, and i'm probably going to destroy it in the process, but -- okay. the first question is, was mr. kalyvas addicted -- addicted at all? now, we had an enormous amount of testimony on that very issue. we had -- we had one board-certified addiction psychiatrist specialist in here who talked to you about that just yesterday. was mr. kalyvas addicted at all? and who has the burden of proof? mr. acosta spent quite a bit of time talking to you about his burden of proof. so let us talk about that for just a second, because mr. acosta does have the burden of proof. and he described it as, i've just got to have a little bit more, just a little bit more. but the truth is, he has to have such strong evidence that it overcomes the evidence that i've put in 3805 and that sandra's put in in this case. it has to overcome it. it has to be that strong. it is not just a little tiny bit. it is so strong that it overcomes the evidence that we have put in. so the first issue here is, was mr. kalyvas addicted? the second is, was mr. kalyvas addicted to cigarettes manufactured by philip morris usa? the third issue is, was mr. kalyvas' addiction so strong if he was addicted -- if he was addicted, was his addiction so strong that it was a legal cause of his death? a legal cause of his death. and let me stop right there, because you-all have in your instructions this definition of legal cause. and it is a lot. it is a lot. an addiction to defendant's cigarettes is the legal cause of spyridon kalyvas' death if it directly and in natural sequence, continuous sequence produces -- produces or contributes substantially to producing his death so that it can reasonably be said that but for his addiction -- that is if he was addicted -- to the defendant's cigarettes, his death would not have occurred -- not have occurred. that is how 3806 substantial that issue is. what does this mean? i said in my opening statement that it means that mr. acosta has to prove not only that mr. kalyvas was addicted, but that his addiction was so strong that it was essential to why he smoked, that pleasure cannot be enough for why he smoked. it has to be his -- his addiction has to be so strong that he would not have continued to smoke for the pleasure of smoking if he was addicted. it has to be -- his addiction has to be so essential that without it -- without it, he would not have smoked and he would have -- would he be here today? that is the burden of proof. but we are not done yet. we still have to -- you still have to decide, were philip morris' manufactured cigarettes the cause of his lung cancer -- the cause of his lung cancer? you can put legal cause right there, too -- the cause of his lung cancer. i'm going to talk about all of that in just a second. we are going to walk through -- just walk through what the evidence was. that is all. i said to you, you know, you can distill all that down into just three words, really -- just 3807 three words: control, causation, and responsibility. that sums up this entire lawsuit, sums up for sure that first and all-important issue. because if that -- if the answer to that question is no, this case is over and you go home. who was in control of mr. kalyvas' decision to begin smoking and continue smoking? you have sat here now through two weeks and two days of trial, and you have heard all the evidence about who was in control. what was the cause of his lung cancer, if anybody can say? i'll talk more about what mr. acosta talked about on that issue of causation in just a minute. and once you know the answers to those two questions, who was in control of mr. kalyvas' decisions -- frankly, as we walk through this, you are going to see decisions about lifestyle in general, not just about smoking -- who was in control of his decisions about how he lived his life? what was the cause of his lung cancer, if anybody could tell? and then you will know who has responsibility in this case. now, where did the evidence come from? before the case started, i said you are going to hear from family members, friends, medical 3808 records. and i said, you know, you are going to hear from mr. kalyvas himself. he is going to speak to you right out of the pages of the medical records in this case. and i said you are going to see the hospice record in which he is interviewed. and he is basically asked at a point in time when he knows he is dying from lung cancer, he is been a life-long smoker, he knows whether in his estimation he is addicted or not or -- he knows -- he knows all that. and what does he say? what does he say about how he lived his life? what does he say about this idea of control? now, mr. acosta not only did not show you this record, but you are going to have it. you are going to have it in the hospital records. but when he was asking his experts to evaluate this case, when they were making their decisions as to whether or not mr. kalyvas was addicted or not and whether or not addiction was the cause of his injury, he did not even give them this record. to make that point, i put in evidence the medical records that mr. acosta provided to dr. cummings -- to dr. cummings so that you would be able to see for yourselves that, frankly, in the one instance where mr. kalyvas speaks directly 3809 to you, not through some third person, not through an interpreter, directly to you, he did not give those records to his own experts when they were making their minds up on this issue. and what did -- i said, you are going to see that mr. kalyvas says -- and this is the hospice nurse saying, "patient stated that he has always lived on the edge" -- and that is in quotes. this is a direct quote. this is not a paraphrase. "patient has been in three serious accidents and has always been a risk taker" -- always been a risk taker. i could not show you that in opening statement, and you had to wait until i put dr. rossman on the stand to actually see this record. did mr. acosta even speak to dr. cummings, dr. goldman, or dr. groff about this statement? not once. not once. why not? well, of course for each of them to decide whether or not somebody's addicted, all they needed to know is you smoked 100 cigarettes. they have got a one-size-fits-all formula for determining whether or not someone is addicted. so, of course, they do not need to know this, do they? but you do. you need to know this, because this is mr. kalyvas speaking directly to you. 3810 what else does he say? you are going to have -- this is a four-page document. you can see it says "3 of 4." you will see all of them. you are going to see things in this document talk about lifestyle. you are going to see that mr. and mrs. kalyvas lived on their boat, this 45-foot boat, with no hot water. that is a lifestyle decision. they have a one-year-old baby. they are living on this boat, no hot water. you have got to shower at the marina. that is all right. i'm not criticizing it, it is just a lifestyle decision you make. so what does he say about his cancer? he says, "patient feels like god has given him three chances to kill himself. and since he did not die in accidents, god will do it for him"; hence, the reason for the cancer. does he say here, you know, i thought -- i think i'm a victim? does he say i think i've been deceived? does he say i think i've been addicted and forced to smoke against my will, that i tried desperately to rid myself of the risks of my lifestyle, and here i am, poor me? does he say that here? no, he does not, obviously. i apologize, it is a rhetorical question. right? 3811 it is rhetorical. clearly he is not saying that. he knows -- he knows just exactly how he got where he is. he knows that the decisions were his. he knows that, and he is not putting the blame on anybody but himself. and this is the only time you are going to hear directly from mr. kalyvas. now, mr. acosta said that, yes, that they have accepted responsibility in this case. they have said that mr. kalyvas was a legal cause of his lung cancer. and we talked about that in voir dire. we talked about that when you were going through the process of jury selection. i asked you, what -- what -- how did that make you feel? what did that -- how did that -- what did that make you think about what was going on? what did that mean to you? and we talked about the obvious fact that mr. kalyvas cannot have been a legal cause of his own lung cancer unless he could have quit smoking and quit in time to avoid getting lung cancer. because if you cannot quit, if you say, hey, look, i am totally out of control here, there is nothing i can do about that, then you cannot be a legal cause, can you? you cannot be. but they know -- they know how mr. kalyvas lived his life. and 3812 they have said, you know what? he is a cause. and i told you that in my opening statement. i said, you know what? i could probably just sit down right now and not show you the rest of the evidence that verifies what mr. kalyvas said right here, all the awareness he had about the risks of smoking, all the awareness he had about how difficult it could be to quit. i could -- i could -- i could just rely on those two statements and say that is all you really need to know to answer the question of who was in control. but i said, no, that is not right. that is not right. what i need to do is to walk you through mr. kalyvas' life so that you will know that what he said was, in fact, correct -- was, in fact, correct. and so if you do not mind, that is what i'm going to do with you now, is just walk you through -- and this is not a criticism. this is not a criticism of mr. kalyvas' decisions in his life. this is america. we get to make those decisions. we get to decide. cigarettes are legal here, and we get to decide whether or not we are going to smoke. alcohol is legal here, and we get to decide whether we are going to drink it. 3813 we have these choices here. we have them. and mr. kalyvas -- mr. kalyvas had them in greece as well. all right. so let us take some of these boards down so i have a little room here. if you do not mind, let us just walk through this timeline. and let me point out that the things i said were going to happen, the evidence that i said you would see, you saw. i said you were going to learn that in 1953, mr. kalyvas was born. and he was born in halkideon, greece, to his parents, elefterios and amalia kalyvas, who were both smokers. and i told you that he was moved to corfu as a little baby and that corfu was this remote island off the coast of greece in the middle of the adriatic. and you came to learn through the testimony of family that corfu is such a little village that there was one tv set in the whole town and that all the men would congregate to watch tv. now, during the course of his presentation, mr. acosta talked about statements made here in the united states. what do they have to do with mr. kalyvas in greece who does not speak english, who is born in 1953, who does not watch television, 3814 is not here in the united states, does not get here for 22 more years? that is why i say this is mr. kalyvas' case, not some -- some other case. this is this case. and i said that you were going to learn that mr. kalyvas began smoking, had his first cigarette, with the stravoravdis brothers -- i still cannot pronounce that -- and that they began smoking homegrown tobacco and karelia cigarettes. and that is exactly what you learned. you learned that from lola. here. she is talking about the stravoravdis brothers. and she says, "but the father grow tobacco. he and the stravoravdis brothers steal from his father the tobacco. and they used to make the cigarettes from the paper the father have." "they steal from father's tobacco?" "yes, they are devils." remember she talked about the two brothers being devils? and i know that -- this is part of the testimony that i know is hard to receive because it is coming from page-and-line reading by two lawyers. we do not have her here. 3815 "karelia, homemade tobacco, and marlboro. and sometimes if i do not -- if i forget the marlboro, i buy from the airplane cigarette." what she is talking about -- and this is lola mullane, the stepsister -- she goes earlier to the united states than he does -- than spyros does. and so when she comes back home, she brings marlboro cigarettes because that is what the dad and mom and spyros would like. so she gets them duty-free and brings them on the airplane. sometimes when she is on the airplane, she gets a different brand because she is forgotten to go to the duty-free store at the airport, and so she picks up whatever the airplane is selling. you guys have, i'm sure, all flown on airplanes and may well have flown on international flights where the flight attendants come along and they offer you the opportunity to buy duty-free stuff. and, of course, if they sold marlboros on corfu when he is ten years old, there would not be any need to bring these cigarettes, these marlboros, back to greece, would they? all right. you remember i said you are going to learn that mr. kalyvas already had been told by 3816 his parents, do not smoke, before he ever had his first cigarette at age ten. his mother, his father, and his sister all told him, do not smoke. smoking is bad for your health and if you ever start, you may not be able to ever stop. and that is exactly what the evidence was. and yet in spite of that, spyros began smoking with the stravoravdis brothers. and you remember that lola testified that he got severely punished by his father. but that did not deter -- you learned that he was head-strong, strong-willed. that did not deter him. he could not be bullied by his dad or cajoled by his mother or his sister into not smoking. he was going to smoke, and he did. and you remember the testimony was that every time his dad would go off to work that he would go up over the hill with the brothers and they would go smoke; and they would smoke either homegrown tobacco or karelia cigarettes. that continues until spyros becomes good friends with the fellow nick kourtelesis that you heard from again through a read page-and-line deposition. now, lola -- lola had a little difficulty remembering just exactly when it was that spyros 3817 left corfu. but we have the benefit again directly from spyros. spyros prepared this -- and it is in evidence. you will be able to see it. and he prepared it sometime after february of 1990. and he was describing himself, as all residents do. and he tells us just exactly where he was living and what he was doing each step of the way. and where was he? well, he was in corfu until he graduated from high school in 1968. he was born in '53. so that is 15 years or 16 years old. and then what does he do? does he move to athens? no. he then goes into the greek air force. and he is in the greek air force for three years. and finally in 1971, he ends up in athens. so that is where he lives and how long he lives there. now, we are going to talk a little bit about how he gets here, but that is from himself. this is -- this is spyros talking to you about where he lives and when he lives there. when he befriends nick, they have a lot in common. you know that they loved to ride motorcycles. they ride. they ride on dirt tracks. they ride on the street. they ride without helmets. they crash. nick said he 3818 crashed 26 times. he crashed a bunch of times with spyros. you know that they loved to party. you know that they loved to smoke. you learned all about that through the testimony that came in through nick. and you also learned that nick tells you the kinds of cigarettes that they smoke as well. he says that while they are living here, they smoke -- did i screw up your projector? sorry. how's that? i need technical assistance. actually, can you straighten it up? we need to see more details. thank you very much. you remember what is the first time you recall spyros smoking cigarettes? about 17, 18, maybe. do you remember what kind of cigarettes he was smoking? greek cigarettes. i do not know exactly. the same kind that you had? on and off, yes, sometimes. so, you know, it just makes common sense. it just makes common sense. does he later smoke marlboros? yeah, they end up -- they end up -- and did he bum cigarettes from tourists in athens? sure. there is no -- there is no question about that. but if you just apply -- do not leave your common sense at the door. if you just apply a little common sense, it makes all the sense in 3819 the world that when you are in greece, you are going to be smoking greek cigarettes, especially if you are not -- and we know that these are not folks that are particularly wealthy. while corfu is lovely, you have already heard that it is not a particularly affluent location. all right. now, what happens in -- and by the way, mr. acosta put up some quotes from lola about mr. kalyvas. i forgot to put this one up. "no, i believe he never tried." "he never really tried to stop smoking cigarettes?" "no." you have heard that testimony in this case. 1971, he goes in the service -- actually, it turns out to be 1968 -- 1973, i'm sorry. 1971, he goes into the pastry school in athens. '73, he graduates from the pastry school. then in 1974 or '75, the great adventure starts. right? as if going in the air force and moving to athens are not pretty adventurous by themselves, spyros and nick decide to join the merchant marine. and somehow they get themselves to italy in genoa, and they get jobs as sailors on a boat shipping out of genoa and coming to the new world. that is us, the 3820 new world. and that ship lands in houston, and immediately spyros and nick leave the ship and go directly to his brother's home in new jersey. and nick begins -- i'm sorry -- spyros begins to work at the restaurants that his brother leo has in new jersey. that is pretty adventurous. now, let us stop right here, because i would like to set the stage for what the world is like in terms of smoking here in the united states from a regulatory -- from a regulatory standpoint. 1964, way out here -- way out here, the surgeon general has broadcast to all of america that smoking causes lung cancer and other diseases. that is eleven years -- ten or eleven years before spyros and nick ever touch foot on american soil. 1970, a warning is placed on every pack of cigarettes. the warning says, warning, the surgeon general has determined that cigarette smoking is dangerous to your health. so regardless of whether or not in greece there are warnings on cigarettes or not, as soon as spyros and nick get here, every cigarette they buy -- and certainly when they get here, they buy marlboros 3821 and benson & hedges. sure. they are buying lots of different kinds of cigarettes, but we are not debating that he started smoking marlboros or benson & hedges, no way. but every pack they buy and every cigarette they smoke, they have the opportunity to see and be reminded of just the danger that they are undertaking every time they smoke. now, mr. acosta said, well -- but philip morris kept saying that it had not been proven that smoking causes lung cancer and was addictive. but listen for this -- listen for this when he gets back up, because he has a chance -- because he has the burden of proof, he gets to get back up and talk to you again. he gets to respond to whatever i say right now. listen for him to say that spyros ever heard anything philip morris ever said about whether smoking was addictive or smoking caused disease, because you will not. this is spyros' case, not somebody else's case. warning on every pack. 1971, all cigarette advertising banned on tv and radio. so any -- any -- and i apologize you cannot see this, and you probably cannot either. sorry. let me see if i cannot move it over. sorry. 3822 all advertising on television and radio, gone. every print ad, whether it is a magazine, a newspaper or a billboard, every ad has this warning on it. so wherever you look, if you are looking at cigarettes at all, wherever you look here in the united states, three years before they ever set foot on american soil, this nation is being warned over and over and over again about the health risks of smoking. everybody. 1975, they land here, go to new jersey. within months -- talk about adventure -- within months, what happens to spyros? he meets, dates, moves in with and marries -- he is 22 -- a 16-year old girl, anastasia papas, with the approval of her family, and he moves into their home. and they take up residence as man and wife in the basement of a house, in the basement apartment. and everything is glorious with one significant exception. and what is that? well, mrs. papas hates smoking. she is allergic to it and she hates it. and so once again, spyros is subjected to now his new law family, but a whole other family down on him saying, do not smoke, it is bad for you. do not smoke. it can be incredibly hard for you to quit. please do not smoke. do not 3823 smoke for me, because it is affecting me. i have these allergies and i do not like your smoke. and what is it -- mr. acosta did not show you this quote. this is right out of the evidence that you heard. what does he say? he says -- and this is what mrs. -- his wife, anna papas -- anastasia papas says spyros said to her. he said, i'm not going to quit. i've been smoking all my life and she needs to get over it. that is the quote out of the testimony that you heard. now, does that sound like a guy who is desperately trying to quit smoking and who just cannot, but he is -- he is just terribly unable to quit because he is addicted? and this is her quote. this is her quote. she went on to say that he definitely thought he was in control of his smoking, no question about it. no question about it. all right. he continues to smoke. although he does, she did say that he would make these -- how did -- how did -- how did he get described? this is not my description, but i think it is her sister that described him as a loud greek, a very outgoing, very -- i guess the word i would use is jubilant kind of guy, just bigger than life. 3824 right? and so what does he do? he makes these big gestures of throwing the cigarettes out the window. but he is back smoking the next day. he does not want to quit. that is what he claims. i'm not going to quit. i've been smoking all my life and she needs to get over it. i did not make that up. that is testimony you heard. i knew you were going to hear it, but that is testimony you heard. 1976, what else happens? well, that is a tragic, tragic time. spyros and anna get in a terrible automobile accident. he is burned badly on his body. he is hospitalized for at least four or five months. now, dr. rossman, who was here yesterday, is a true addiction expert, board certified in addiction psychiatry. he explained to you that this is much like the people who he sees in the colorado state penitentiary situation. they -- this is not a voluntary quit on his part because he cannot smoke in the hospital -- cannot smoke in the hospital. just like the prisoners cannot smoke at the prison. so he did not willingly quit, but he did quit. and what dr. rossman said is what? the nicotine is out of your body in very short order. 3825 it is half life is like two hours. so it is gone from your body in a day or two. he said for sure gone, completely gone, not even traceable in two weeks. he said withdrawal symptoms are gone after a few days. that irritability and that sort of thing, if you have it, it is gone in two weeks for sure. and he said those neuro receptors -- remember, i asked dr. -- i asked dr. groff -- i'm sorry. i did not. sandra asked dr. groff. she put two studies in front of him and said, have you ever seen these? no. have you ever seen these? no. but dr. rossman said, you know what? there are very recent studies that have looked at those neuro receptors from both a nuclear medicine standpoint and an autopsy standpoint. and he said they both show that after -- within three weeks, your neuro receptors are back to their normal level. this stuff about your neuro receptors remain upregulated or in increased numbers for the rest of your life is -- that is just not right. now, if you do not look at the studies, if you do not know about the studies, then, sure, you will not know about it. but here's dr. rossman, a true board certified expert in this field who 3826 says, look, it is been studied. it is been studied two different ways, with nuclear medicine, with autopsy. and what did they determine? they determined within 21 days -- because that is the time frame they looked at. they looked back and said, okay, is there still an up regulation at the end of 21 days? no. the answer is no. and he told you all that. and then it became uncontested. nobody came back. mr. acosta could bring in a rebuttal witness if he wants to say, no, no, that is wrong, but he did not do that because it is not wrong. so he is in the hospital. he is there for four to five months. during that period of time, dr. rossman said, look, if he had any withdrawal symptoms, they are gone. if he had any up regulation, increased number of neuro receptors, they are gone. he said, besides, you know what that is? that is just proteins on cells -- proteins on cells. and he said they are constantly working, working, working. he said, they are practically gone. he said, now you are down to the behavioral aspects and now it is up to you to decide whether you are going to go back. and he said, look, it is 3827 just like the guys that they get out of prison and as they are going out the door, i say to them, hey, look, are you going to go back to exactly where you were before or are you going to change your behavior? are you going to go back with the same crowd, go to the same parties, the same circumstances that got you in here in the first place, or are you going to change your behavior? i mean, anybody who is been involved in the prison process, you know exactly how that all works. it is behavioral. you get to decide, am i going to go to the parties where they are doing all these drugs? am i going to go do all that stuff or am i not? and it is a decision that you get to make. that is a decision that mr. kalyvas got to make. now, we do not know when he resumed smoking, we just know that at some point he decided to resume smoking. we do not have anybody who can tell us the answer to that. we know that in 1978, he and anastasia had a son, peter. we know that the whole papas family, along with spyros, moved to new mexico in the next year, another adventure. but we know that they are not going to stay together very long. we know that very shortly, anna and spyros get divorced. 3828 they are divorced in 1980. and then we are going to lose touch with him until 1985 when he is going to meet cathy kalyvas at the country and western bar belle star. now, by the time they meet, what is happened to the warning on every pack of cigarettes? well, it is changed. now to provide even greater emphasis on the risk that you take when you smoke, the warnings have changed so that there are four different ones, and every pack of cigarettes is going to bear one of those warnings. it is either going to say -- and i'm -- i will not take the time to read them all, but one of them says cigarette smoke causes lung cancer and other diseases -- lung cancer, heart disease, emphysema -- and may cause complications of pregnancy. but they tell you in four different ways that if you smoke, you are taking a significant risk. now, mr. acosta says, gosh, philip morris should not make cigarettes that can -- this is not a new product. everybody on this planet knows that if you smoke you take this chance. it is inherent to burning tobacco and inhaling it. it is inherent in that. 3829 now they meet, they begin to date, they even begin to live together. and then all of a sudden, he is gone -- gone back to greece. and you now have her calendars. they are in evidence. you can look at them. you can examine them. i did not have them until a very short time ago, but you now have them to review if you so choose. and they will reflect phone calls that she had with spyros. they reflect dates that she had with other people. they will reflect -- they will reflect her life in minutia -- in minutia. i mean, whether you water the plants or buy a new tv, it is all in there. it is all in there. 1980 -- 1980's here, we have a picture. we do not know the exact date of this picture, but this picture, i think, sums up the lifestyle -- lifestyle for mr. kalyvas. there it is. he is sitting on the sofa tieing his shoe. now this picture is in evidence. this picture was given to you guys by the plaintiff. this picture was put in evidence. this picture was given by mrs. kalyvas to her lawyers, and her lawyers put this picture into evidence. i had nothing to do with this. nothing. in this picture, you see mr. kalyvas, sofa. 3830 you see -- looks like benson & hedges. you see glasses of wine. mrs. kalyvas said glasses of wine. can you take this part right there? i asked mrs. kalyvas whether she saw a hand mirror in this picture, and she said, no, she could not. but you can. you can see a plastic bag -- a clear plastic bag. you can see something white. you can see something white. you can see papers. you can see -- thanks -- and you will have the picture. is there decision making going on in that picture? you might ask yourself, why the heck did they give me that picture? why would they give you that picture? is there decision making going on in that picture? you got it. is there lifestyle decisions going on in that picture? you got it. you got it. is there risk going on in that picture? you got it. 1988, spyros is still in greece. he is in a motorcycle accident. he is in a coma. of course he does not smoke when he is in a coma, but even after he gets out of the coma and he is still in the hospital, he cannot smoke. is this another opportunity for spyros to -- the nicotine is all 3831 gone. the withdrawal symptoms, if he had any -- by the way, when you go back to the story about him being in the hospital with the automobile accident, there is no history there from the family -- from the papas family of him walking around the hospital trying to bum a cigarette or something, trying to go outside to smoke a cigarette. there is none of that in that story. likewise, there is none of that in this story. he cannot smoke, does not smoke. we do not know when he resumed smoking, but clearly at some point, he decides he is going to smoke again and he does. we do not know when. he returns to the united states on december 6th. let us go to 1991. mrs. kalyvas told you all the things she did to quit smoking. you remember -- you can look at her calendars and you can see on her calendars where she writes down "quit smoking" on dates. and she said, when i was going to quit, my husband was going to quit. and she said, we tried to quit three or four times a year every year through the '80s, into the '90s. all you have got to do is look at her calendar. remember you will see her crib 3832 sheet, too. you will see a little refresher sheet that she created, she said, off of her calendars. and you will be able to look at that and say, hey, look, does this match up at all? where does mr. -- the only years in which you will see repeated quit attempts for mrs. kalyvas are going to be '87 and '88 when he is not here. and when i asked her, do you have any idea whether he even wanted to quit smoking in '87 or '88 while he was in greece, and she said, no, i have no idea whether he even wanted to quit smoking. '89, '90, she said she went to a smoking cessation program. it is not on the calendar. she said she went to a smoking aversion program, not on the calendar. i do not know whether she did or she did not. she told us that her husband did not go because he had to work on saturday. but when you look at the resume, you will see he is not near work. so there is no saturday that he cannot go to a smoking aversion or a smoking cessation program if that is what he wants to do. i'm not saying that mrs. kalyvas did not decide that she wanted to quit smoking, but here's -- here's mr. kalyvas. has he given any indication through action that he wants to quit 3833 smoking? did that picture look like a guy who wanted to quit smoking really and truly? that picture -- i've nicknamed that picture smoke and mirrors. that picture speaks a thousand words about how mr. kalyvas lived his life. now, we have some sentences from -- we have some sentences from the hospice folks. you take those sentences and put them together with that picture, and what is his nickname? what is his nickname? lucky. and you tell me whether mr. kalyvas is not trying to tell you how he lived his life. not a criticism, just fact. just fact. mrs. kalyvas quits on november 18th. quits. no more smoking. she celebrates. you will see it right in her -- in her calendars. she celebrates the next year, '92, the next year, '93. so clearly mr. kalyvas is attempting to quit in '92 or '93 along with her because she is already quit. so that is not happening. all right. 1993, they moved to florida, live on the boat. 1994, mr. kalyvas is told, you have lung cancer. dr. rossman said, i'm applying the diagnostic and statistical manual criteria for determining whether or not someone truly is addicted -- truly addicted, not a recreational 3834 smoker -- not a recreational smoker, somebody who really is in the grip of an addiction. and he says, they are not somebody who instantly quits smoking for three months and then after that changes to dropping -- if mrs. kalyvas is right, he goes from smoking two and a half packs a day, which is 350 cigarettes a week, to two packs a week, 40 cigarettes. dr. rossman said, you want to see control? that is real control. he said, i see patients who really are in the grips of an addiction, whether it is cigarettes or meth or coke or heroin. they really are in the grips of an addiction. but they do not stop on a dime and then resume at a level that is less than twenty percent of what they were doing before. that -- and stay there. that is real control. and he said, look, go all the way to the hospice records. go all the way there and see what you see in terms of control. because there is mr. kalyvas being monitored every 15 minutes. and, yeah, mr. acosta found -- in all the hospice records, he found a string of an hour and a half, i think, in which three cigarettes were smoked. but if you want to take the time to do 3835 it, take a look at the rest of the hospice records and see how often mr. kalyvas takes a smoke. because dr. rossman went to the trouble to do that. he had all the medical records, not just some of them. he had all of the medical records. he had all the depositions. do you remember dr. groff told sandra, well, i read mrs. kalyvas' deposition. well, how about everybody else? i do not need to know that because give me 100 cigarettes, and i'm done. that is all i need to know. tell me what time you have your first cigarette in the morning? that is all i need to know. so dr. rossman said, you know, i looked at the criteria -- you guys asked him some great questions -- i looked at the criteria to see whether or not there were indications of something having to do with an inability on his part -- i looked at the criteria to see if he satisfied the required number of criteria under the dsm, and he simply did not. he simply did not. and as a result, i concluded he was not addicted. so when we get to this first question and that first subpart of that question -- where did i put that? too many boards, reilly, you have run out 3836 of space. when you get to this first question, was mr. kalyvas addicted, mr. acosta, instead of just have to put up a little bit of evidence, has to put up a mountain big enough to overcome the mountain that i just told you about right now. his mountain has to be taller than the mountain i just gave you. and my mountain is pretty doggone high. and i brought you the only really qualified addiction expert in the -- that came to this courtroom, board certified and recertified in 2007. a frequent testifier in tobacco litigation? no way. first case he is ever testified in. is he a guy that lectures to plaintiffs' lawyers on how to -- sandra, do you know where that one is? you will find it. you will see it in the exhibits. i made it an exhibit, the brochure for the seminar that dr. cummings taught in on teaching plaintiffs' lawyers how to get big verdicts in tobacco cases. remember that right at the very beginning? mr. acosta tried to sort of even that up by asking him if he had taught at some seminar by a lawyer's organization or by some organization on 3837 proper utilization of forensic pathologists. not in the same ballpark, ladies and gentlemen. not in the same ballpark. dr. cummings, he said, i've testified so often in tobacco litigation, it is like my second job. can people quit smoking? mr. acosta -- i do not know if you listened to it as he was talking to you in the first part of his closing argument today, but he said three to five percent quit in any given year -- in any given year. it was just that little trailer. it is because he knows we have put this in evidence. what is that? it is the chart, most recent science from guys at the harvard medical school looking at, over time, what percentage of people quit. over 25 cigarettes a day -- and there is a real debate in this -- in this case as to -- i'm sorry if you cannot see -- there is real debate in this case as to just exactly what was mr. kalyvas' level of smoking. but over 25 cigarettes a day, 75 percent of those folks quit. and what percentage of them do not want to quit? this is everybody. this did not matter whether or not they said, i want to quit or i do not want to quit. this is everybody. and it 3838 was so echoed in this room -- it was so echoed in the courtroom when we did voir dire, i just was -- i just thought to myself, i do not even need this chart. i do not even need the science. i just need you guys. because what happened? i asked everybody, who used to smoke? how many hands went up in this room? almost everybody. not almost everybody, but many, many people. and i said, how many people are still smoking? and only one of you raised her hand. can people quit smoking? absolutely. do they quit all the time? absolutely. absolutely. all right. let me -- could mr. kalyvas have quit smoking if he had wanted to? if he wanted to change his lifestyle from what you saw in that picture, could he have changed his lifestyle? could he have changed from what he said was the way he lived his life if he wanted to? sure. he demonstrated it when he quit smoking like that and then had his level of smoking curtailed down to a level that showed tremendous control. all right. so a, b, and c end up being all no. let us talk about d. mr. acosta said, gosh, my expert, dr. goldman, said smoking was the cause 3839 of his lung cancer and mr. reilly's expert, sandra's expert, dr. andrews, was uncertain because he thought it might be a number of possibilities -- might be a number of possibilities. and so and he is uncertain. so i win because -- i win this issue because my evidence is i've got a guy who says for sure and they have got a guy who says not so sure, cannot tell. but that is not the way you evaluate that. how do you evaluate this issue? well, you evaluate the issue by actually looking at all the evidence. dr. godman said, i had most of the medical records. dr. andrews said, all the medical records, all the depositions -- all the medical records, all the depositions. that is how thorough dr. andrews is. i think you have got an opportunity to evaluate the level of professionalism of dr. andrews, and the questions you posed to him convinced me you got that same impression. i'm convinced you did. what did dr. andrews say to you? dr. andrews said, look, when i have somebody who -- and by the way, he testified in what, one other tobacco trial? dr. goldman has been with mr. acosta for 3840 how long? he does not even know how many cases he is being listed in. that is a professional relationship. dr. andrews said, you know what? when i have somebody who is this young -- this young and gets lung cancer -- that is a disease of sixth and seventh decade of life. so i virtually never see somebody who is in their early, early 40s who has lung cancer. so what does that make me do? that makes me think that there is something else going on here. should i just take the easier -- is he a guy that says that smoking does not cause lung cancer or something like that? heck, no. he said, the easy route is i just say, hey, smoking did it. but what did he say to you folks? he said, no, in this instance, i really cannot go there instantly because he is so young. i have to think about this a little more. so what did he do? he looked -- he looked at the records. did you ever hear dr. goldman say, oh, yeah, i evaluated the tb exposure. i evaluated the workplace exposure. i -- never uttered those words. he did not say, i've thought about his age, i've thought about his exposures, i've thought about these other potential 3841 explanations, and i've rejected them all and i still conclude that smoking was the cause of his lung cancer. did dr. goldman do that for you? no way. no way. but dr. andrews, being the thorough clinician that he is, being the thorough pulmonologist that he is, he said, let me look. now, mr. acosta says we are always denying. we did not deny anything. all we did was we listened to dr. andrews say what he found. and what did he find? and it is undisputed what he found. mr. acosta could have brought somebody else in here and said, no, no, tb is not a -- do not worry, tb is not a risk factor. you do not need to worry about tb. did not happen. he did not bring anybody in that said, look at all those studies that look at bakers, people in the baking industry, they are not not at increased risk, that is hogwash. he did not do that. he did not do that. as a matter of fact, what did he say to you today? he basically said, that is all legit, because it is legit. dr. andrews is not going to come in here and damage his reputation for a tobacco company. give me a break. that is ridiculous. so what did dr. andrews say? they have worked 3842 together. they worked together. so what did dr. andrews say to you? he said, look, the man tested positive for tb. and testing positive for tb, if you are the clinician, your you are taking care of the patient, if you do not think it is real, you do not worry about it. if you think it is real -- you take and consider all factors. if you think it is real, then you treat them and you treat them now. and what happened in this case? they treated him. the people taking care of him treated him. they thought it was real. and when you know, as soon as that, you know you have got a risk factor for the explanation for why he got his lung cancer, period. occupational exposure, baker, shop, the studies show it. was i surprised by it? very. did i have any idea that that was a real risk for people in that profession? no way. was it disputed in this room? no way, because that is what the studies show. so dr. andrews throws it in the mix. he said there is scarring in the lung -- scarring in the lung. is that a real risk factor for the development of lung cancer? absolutely. absolutely. the doctor said, you know what? you cannot 3843 rule out genetics. but he did not do any genetic testing and did not tell you that genetics was why mr. kalyvas got his lung cancer. he was completely candid. he was completely candid. and he said to you, you know what? i cannot tell you why this man got his lung cancer. do i include smoking in the mix? absolutely. absolutely. then he went one step further. he said, you know what? i looked at the size of his tumor -- i looked at the size of his tumor, big as a walnut. i look at how long that probably took to have a cellular change. i look at the latency period. and what do i tell you? i tell you -- did he say that he must have gotten his lung cancer in greece? no, he did not say that. what he said was, you know what? i cannot rule out the possibility that his lung cancer began before he ever got here. i cannot rule that out, because it is a disease of such latency. but did he tell you that is the answer? no way. he is way too candid for that. well, does that potentially make some sense in light of the fact that as we all learned in this courtroom, the karelia cigarettes versus benson & hedges or versus marlboros, the karelia 3844 cigarettes are twice as heavy in tar and about fifty percent heavier in nicotine than philip morris' own cigarettes, benson & hedges and marlboros. the clerk: mr. reilly, that is your one-hour-and-10-minute warning. mr. reilly: that is my hour warning? the clerk: one hour and ten minutes. mr. reilly: one hour and ten minutes. okay. thank you. i need to hurry along. all right. it is a good time for me to move on. so what is the answer to this question? the answer to this question is no. and if do you that, there is nothing more to do and you get to go home. all right. how about if you decide that is not right -- and, frankly, i think that should end your work. but if for some reason you think that is not right, i have to go on. i have to talk to you further. right? so i will. i will talk to you further. but you can see the way i've divided up my time. that should be the end of your effort. based on the evidence in this case, that should be the end of your effort. all right. the next question is, did spyridon -- spyros kalyvas reasonably rely to his 3845 detriment on the concealment or omission by philip morris of material information not otherwise known or available or its failure to disclose material facts concerning the health effects or addictive nature of nicotine? you know, there is absolutely no evidence in this case about what mr. kalyvas relied on to make his decisions about smoking. nothing. this question absolutely has to be answered no. the only statement made in this whole trial about anybody thinking about influence -- being influenced by philip morris came from mrs. kalyvas based on a question that one of you asked. and that was, why did you bring this lawsuit? and the answer that she gave was really -- she said, well, i want to -- if i had known, i would have done something different. this lawsuit is not about mrs. kalyvas. this lawsuit is about mr. kalyvas. and there is not one shred of evidence in this case. from the time he was ten years old till the time he died, mr. kalyvas knew that smoking came with a significant health risk, that if you ever started smoking, you could end up having great difficulty quitting, from the time he was ten-year old in 3846 greece. i remember asking you guys during voir dire, how many of you have been waiting -- ever waited for a cigarette manufacturer to tell you anything about the health risks of smoking to decide whether you would or would not smoke, and not one hand went up. and that is where mr. kalyvas is. there is absolutely no evidence in this case that mr. kalyvas relied to his detriment -- that means he would have decided to quit smoking in time to avoid his lung cancer -- on the concealment or omission of information of any type from philip morris. there is just absolutely no evidence of that in this case. if somehow you get beyond those questions and you get to this, i leave it to your sound discretion. you know who was in control of mr. kalyvas's decisions to smoke and continue smoking. and as far as money is concerned, again, mr. acosta asked you for $30 million in this case. i leave it to your sound discretion. if you get to this point of this question on this verdict form, i leave it to your sound discretion. the fifth question is, under the 3847 circumstances of this case, state where punitive damages awarded by clear and convincing evidence -- clear and convincing evidence against the defendant philip morris. what is it that they said we did wrong in this case? what is it in terms of making the cigarettes? and who agrees -- who agrees? mr. acosta said dr. farone -- the two sources here are dr. farone -- three sources, actually -- are dr. farone, dr. cummings, and mr. acosta reading old documents. and the first thing they said was -- and i see this print is way too small for you guys. but the first thing they said was, well, you should not make cigarettes that are inhalable. well, here's -- they said there is nobody that says that cigarettes have to be inhalable. well, for 150 years, cigarettes have been inhalable. what they want you to -- what they want you to do is to hold philip morris to a standard that would mean that philip morris had to change the entire way cigarettes are made in the world and have been for 150 years. and if you have any doubt about that, just take a look at what the world health organization, which is 3848 the -- in effect, the surgeon general for the rest of the world other than the united states, says about cigarettes. it says, a cigarette is defined as any roll of tobacco wrapped in paper or other nontobacco material. cigarettes can be either commercially manufactured or individually made. roll-your-own cigarettes are lit and the burning process produces smoke that is inhaled -- i wish i had a marker -- that is inhaled through the unlit end. that is not -- this is not alice in wonderland. we are not walking through the looking glass. this is the real world in which cigarettes are made as they are made and have been for 150 years. they are made to be inhaled. and everybody knows it. all right. they said ingredients -- they said toxins -- if you just took out -- dr. farone said, oh, if you just took out certain susbances, you would have a safe cigarettes or you would have a safer cigarette. he said, if you just would not use ingredients like ammonia, you would have a safe -- safeer cigarette. well, let us see who agrees with dr. farone or, to the extent dr. cummings weighed in, let us see who agrees with dr. cummings. and we will just 3849 go through it. here's the institute of medicine. i showed you their book clearing the smoke. here's what they said. these are the people that are -- they are mandated to evaluate this whole picture. they have access every one of these documents that mr. acosta showed you. every one of them. they are on the internet. they are on the website set up by philip morris. you can go on -- you can go on -- not today. after this is over, you are more than welcome to go on their website, look at these documents to your heart's content. the institute of medicine, go on the -- go on the website. you can read every one of those documents -- every one. the reynolds documents that try to reverse engineer a marlboro 20 years ago to figure out why they are getting their butts kicked in the marketplace. i'm sure reynolds was desperate to figure out, gosh, how come we are getting our butts kicked here? and some guy in the engineering department says, well, gosh, maybe we -- maybe it is because they use ammonia. maybe it is because -- i'm sure if we looked hard enough at the reynolds documents, we would find a guy in the marketing department saying, gosh, maybe they are 3850 out marketing this or something like that. who knows? but the bottom line is the institute of medicine has been tasked with this. and what do they say? they say, no one knows the dose-response relationships -- relations with specific toxins, the pathogenic mechanisms or the interrelationship between the many components of tobacco smoke with enough precision to make scientifically reliable quantitative judgments about the risk or actual harm reduction -- the risk or actual harm reduction associated with the use of any tobacco product. since we do not know which of many toxins may be the cause of specific harmful effects, we can only infer but we cannot know the health effects of the elimination of any one or several tobacco components. there is the truth given to you by people who are not getting paid as a second job or, in the case of dr. farone, a disgruntled ex-employee who go fired for insubordination 25 years ago still testifying against philip morris 90 times -- something like that -- who at the very end of his deposition -- i do not know if you heard that last question and answer. the last answer he gave was, 3851 i'm doing this to help philip morris. right. here's the institute of medicine telling you nobody knows that. although many components in tobacco are known to be toxic, little is known of the specific dose-response relations of the individual toxins as they occur in cigarette smoke or of the interactions between the constituents of tobacco smoke. there is little direct evidence that removal -- there is little direct evidence that the removal of specific substances from tobacco smoke or from the tobacco actually reduces risk or harm to human health. there you are. dr. farone -- let us just run through these real quick. dr. farone said, gosh, reduce the temperature of the burning end of the cigarette. who agrees? here's dr. farone. the surgeon general? no. department of health and human services? no. institute of medicine? no. national cancer institute? no. american heart association, american lung association, american cancer society, world health organization? has anybody come out and said, yeah, you are right, bill, that would be great; we would think that that was a safer cigarette? no way. and what did dr. werley, the guy from philip 3852 morris, say about this idea? because what bill farone said was, get the burning coal down to 450 degrees farenheit. dr. werley said, you know what? you do that and you will have a smoldering fire and you will create more toxins than you ever dreamed of -- ever dreamed of. how about reduce nitrosamines? this is exactly what this is talking about. there is little direct evidence that removal of specific substances from tobacco smoke or from tobacco actually reduces the risk of harm to human health. right there, that includes nitrosamines. who agrees with bill farone, william farone, dr. william farone? nobody. have any one of these organizations ever come out and said, you know what, if you just got rid of those nitrosamines, you would have a safer cigarette? nobody. nobody ever. they specifically refute it right there. how about -- we are going to change cigarettes completely. we are going to make cigarettes so you cannot inhale them. you talk about -- now we are turning the world on its ear. now we are going to turn the world on its ear. cigarettes have always been inhalable. i just showed you that from the 3853 world health organization. but dr. farone says, you know what? i think philip morris should be making cigarettes that are uninhalable. and mr. acosta put it out in front of him. he said, yeah, they are making cigarettes too inhalable -- too inhalable. who agrees that cigarettes should not be inhalable? nobody. nobody. i asked -- remember, i asked dr. werley this very series of questions. i said, does anybody agree that cigarettes should be uninhalable? does anybody agree that these -- that these -- that using ammonia makes cigarettes more addicting? you know, i asked dr. -- or sandra asked dr. goldman whether or not cigarettes -- we showed a whole bunch of cigarettes. we said, some of them -- in fact, i think i may have that chart. i will not take too long to look for it, but it was the chart that had all the brands of cigarettes that mr. kalyvas smoked. it is somewhere. i cannot find it. anyway, it included homegrown tobacco and karelia cigarettes. and sandra asked him, are any of these cigarettes any more addicting than the other? he said, no way. are any of these cigarettes any more dangerous than another? no 3854 way. it is nicotine in tobacco. you burn it. you inhale it. you run the risk that it will be addicting because there is nicotine in it, all cigarettes. there is tar. there is cancer-causing agents, toxins in all smoke. remember, i asked dr. werley. i said, are there cancer-causing agents if you just burn a pile of leaves? he said, yes, anytime you burn organic material, you are going to create carcinogens. you are going to create toxins. it is just the nature of the beast. no debate. ammonia and urea make cigarettes more addicting, who agrees? anybody agree? dr. andrews? anybody? nobody. nobody. remember, i actually asked dr. cummings that very question. and this is from the transcript april 16th, page and line -- page 1562, lines 23 to page 1563, line 5. i said, yeah, but whether or not it is more addicting is pure theory and why anybody likes it better is pure theory, is not it? well, more addicting, what it is, is that all cigarettes are addictive -- no dispute -- as long as they contain nicotine in them. potentially so. no question about it. and it is the theory, i think -- i think -- the theory i think is over the 3855 speed or delivery to the brain. that is where the science is still -- still up in the air a bit. that is it. that is their guy who testifies as a second livelihood against us. do additives make cigarettes more inhalable? i asked dr. werley that very question. he said no way. i said, does anybody agree that it is so? he said no way. there they are. did anybody come here from any one of those organizations and say, you know what, i agree with william farone? you ought to make -- you ought to take additives out, see the bromine or cocoa shells, anything? how about the institute of medicine? nobody. do additives make cigarettes more toxic? you know what? you are going to see this one and you are going to laugh. who agrees? nobody. not even bill farone. how do i know that? because here's what he said. this is his indictment of additives making cigarettes more toxic. doctor, you are not trying to tell the jury that a cigarette without additives is safer than a cigarette with additives, are you? it depends on what you mean by that. if you are talking about -- see, i think a cigarette without additives is 3856 probably less likely to be smoked in the same quantity. now, does he know that? no. he is just guessing. but he says, it probably will not be smoked in the same quantity as a cigarette that is more flavorful, easier to inhale, he says. but nobody agrees with that. so it is not safer in the sense of having -- it is not safer in the sense of having less toxic chemicals come out of it. there you go. if that is what you -- well, of course that is what we mean. is not that what you meant? is not that what you meant, dr. farone? but there is. he is saying, no, it is not safer in the sense of having less toxic chemicals come out of it if that is what you mean. but it may be safer because it is less acceptable to be used over and over again with such frequency. so you might smoke -- you might smoke less of it. let us put it that way. that is just -- that is dr. farone. what do the people who makes the cigarettes with no additives in them say about their own products? they say no additives in our tobacco does not -- not mean a safer cigarette. it is put on every pack. and somebody asked the question, does philip morris make these american spirit 3857 cigarettes? the answer is, no, they are made by the santa fe national tobacco company. and r.j. reynolds has one that is called winston no bull. same thing. has the same thing on it, no additives in our tobacco does not mean a safer cigarette. no way. the clerk: mr. reilly, you have one more minute. mr. reilly: one more minute. if i could just have a few more minutes, your honor, i'll -- just three or four? what else did they say? they said philip morris should cooperate with the public health community. i showed you that we did. the surgeon general, the national cancer institute to the tobacco (unintelligible) group, the institute of medicine, and the center for disease control. we went all through it. you are going to have the exhibits. you will be able to look at them yourselves. what else did they say? they said, well, we ought to go out of business. we ought to make cigarettes that no one will smoke, ought to make cigarettes you do not inhale. we ought to make cigarettes without nicotine. we actually did the 3858 last one. we showed it to you, next. nobody bought it. philip morris actually went so far as to make a cigarette that you have to have a holder for, a machine, reduces the level of these toxins, but nobody wants that. did the public health community get behind that? not once. not once. so, ladies and gentlemen, the answer to this question on the verdict form should you award -- is there an entitlement to punitive damages by clear and convincing evidence, no. obviously i've run out of time. i apologize for being longer than i thought i would be, but we are now at that point where you have to make a decision. and i do not have an opportunity after mr. acosta -- he gets to get back up again. why? because he has the burden of proof. remember, he is got to create that mountain, that mountain that overcomes everything i just showed you. he is got -- for clear and convincing, he is got to have a really tall mountain. i'm going to sit down. and i would just ask that as you are listening to mr. acosta give his -- sorry -- final argument, since i will not be 3859 able to come back up again and explain anything to you again -- and i will not be able to bring dr. werley and i will not be able to knock over the thing, i would only ask that you think to yourselves, have i seen this document? is it taken in context? should i take the time to look at it? is it 50 or 60 years old? is he reading me the whole thing? i would ask you to just do one thing, and that is remember this is mr. kalyvas' case. keep your eye on that ball. thank you very much. your honor, this is going to take me a minute to remove all this stuff.