mr. byrd: good morning. so this is -- the last time i could speak to you, obviously, was in opening, and this will be my last time to speak with you, and i appreciate your time. i appreciate these two weeks that you have given to us for your service. and i want to walk you through some ways that i think you can look at -- you are going to have to answer some questions on the verdict form, and i would like to talk to you about those and talk to you about what i think the evidence showed. just so you know how we will handle this, i'm going to speak to you for a few minutes and handle some of the verdict form questions, and ms. london is also going to come up and speak on a couple matters, on a couple other verdict form questions, and then i'll come back and finish off. so you will hear from both of us during the time. but i do want to thank you for your time. on behalf of mr. kerrivan, who also thanks you for your service this two weeks. it is an important -- it is an important thing to perform jury service, and i think you heard that at the very beginning and through the process we went through in voir dire to speak the truth, to try to find out and make sure that we had individuals who this was the right case for them, that they could put any sort of bias and feelings aside. we heard different people with different views, and you were especially selected because you were able to take an oath and promise that bias is about whether you even believe in cases like this and stuff, all those types of things we went over, that you are not that person; that you are going to go back there into the jury room and make a decision based on just the evidence that you have heard in this courtroom and just the law that the judge is going to give you, and you will have it in writing. i urge you when you go through each question to look at those jury instructions. you will have them in writing and follow them, because they are important. and if you stick within those four corners and make sure everybody follows those instructions. if there is some concern, somebody starts saying, you know, i just do not think -- i do not even agree with giving money at all in cases like this, well, you know, we went over that in voir dire, and everyone said they understood that they would be willing to give the full amount of damages and be able to do that. and so remind them "we need to follow the law and the instructions." i heard mr. davis speak in opening a little bit about two sides of a coin, you know, you make choices, personal choices, and the flip side of the coin was personal responsibilities. and as you sit here and think about the evidence, i want you to remember that the law says that we treat corporations equally. they want to be treated just like people in courtrooms, and they have that right. but then that means they have a coin, too, that has two sides. and with corporate choices that are made by r.j. reynolds and philip morris, there is corporate responsibility. so at each point when you -- you are going to have some questions that deal with how much fault to apply to each person. and mr. davis, i believe, will probably come talk to you about to look at all the choices that mr. kerrivan made, and that this is about mr. kerrivan. but i want -- at the same time, one of the reasons we built this timeline here is i want you to think about -- as you weigh the evidence, think about the choices that the companies were making at the same time in mr. kerrivan's life that they are going to want you to look at the choices he made. and then furthermore, as we told you, you have got to step back in history. you have got to put yourself back. we brought you dr. proctor, we brought you dr. grunberg to take us back in time about what the culture was like and what things were like. put yourself back in that time and understand how old was mr. kerrivan when he made his decisions. how powerful were the corporations when they made their choices? now, it is a simple concept, but when i grew up, a simple lesson, you know, your freedoms stop where they interfere with somebody else's. and it is kind of this concept, i think, you know, in america that we are made up -- this country is amazing. we have all type -- they are saying we all came over on different boats here, but we are in the same boat now. and, you know, there is nothing wrong with r.j. reynolds and philip morris putting out a product, it is legal to sell, advertising, making money. there is nothing inherently wrong with them doing that. but when their rights to do all those things start interfering and rubbing up against other people, like mr. kerrivan, then decisions have to be made as a society and lines have to be drawn. and that is really what you are here to do is be that conscience of this community to figure out how far do people get to go. you know, there is been a lot about -- let me go over a couple of things. this case, i mean, we did not come here out of nowhere. you have heard about the engle class. okay? we talked about this in opening, but it is a case from the mid-90's, okay, and it went on and on and on. it was a jury that sat for a very long time to hear a lot of evidence, way longer than you all did. see all sorts of documents, and they made certain findings, and they made findings that if we show mr. kerrivan is a member of that class, and we will get to those questions in a minute, then they apply. and you have to apply them, and you cannot -- you cannot second-guess them or -- they are applied. they are law, and you have to follow the law because the judge will tell us that. so this is -- you are really kind of the concluding act in this case that has gone on for a long time. and, yeah, there is been a lot of other cases. you heard -- you will hear a lot about how dr. proctor has testified a bunch of times and testifies all over the place. well, of course. mr. kerrivan did not choose his place in the line of when his case came up in this class. if he had been the first one, they would not have testified more than once. but, of course, there is been a lot of cases, and that is how the process works. and this is the concluding final act of that jury's work. you are doing that. you are that judge, as judge erickson instructed you. mr. davis: your honor, i object to that argument as a factually and legally inaccurate statement that this jury is that jury. the court: all right. the law i think is fairly plain that this case started off as a class and there were certain decisions made, and i've instructed you on them. if mr. kerrivan is part of that class, those findings are binding on you to the extent that i've instructed you on them. okay? this case is a continuation in one sense, and because -- mr. kerrivan is a purported member of the class, and ultimately one of the decisions you get to make is, is he in the class or not? and i think that is what mr. byrd was trying to say, and i do not think that there should be any confusion. just to make sure there is not, that is my comment on it. okay? you may proceed. mr. byrd: thank you, your honor. i told you in opening, and i do not know if i said this part in opening, but, you know, the truth of the matter is that i think everybody comes into these cases and everybody knows something about cigarettes. i mean, everybody has had some sort of experience through themselves or other people with cigarettes and have opinions about cigarettes. but i hope, and i think, that you have probably learned something during these two weeks that you did not know before about the cigarette industry, about cigarettes, about how they are made and about what went on for this 50-year conspiracy that dr. proctor talked about. i want you to think about what that perhaps means for mr. kerrivan, because if you learn some stuff that you did not know, then perhaps that can be telling about what mr. kerrivan knew back during this time. we said we came here really because we were assuming for four reasons. i think in opening i had mentioned those; that, you know, we felt that there were just some basic obligations that corporations should be able to follow that are not too much to ask for. one was that a manufacturer should tell the truth about the dangers in its product. that is not a lot to ask. that is something that in this country we believe is not a lot to ask from corporations. another reason we said we had brought -- we brought this case, because a company should make a product that is as safe as reasonably possible, and a company should market its product in a responsible way. then the final reason was companies should not take advantage of children and youth who are not in a place to make lifelong decisions. companies should not target those people, our children, with dangerous products. now, i had mentioned -- and to try to kind of put those things in order, you try to think of -- i mean, it was a different culture. cigarettes were so different back then, and the only thing i've ever -- i can think of to try to compare it to is today everyone uses cell phones. everybody has them. they are all over the place. but, you know, every now and then you have heard reports, people hear reports, that cell phones, maybe they cause brain cancer. okay. but everybody keeps using them. people have heard reports like that from time to time, maybe an occasional mention in a newspaper or something, but everybody keeps using their cell phones. now, what if it turns out that the manufacturers of those cell phones actually know that the cell phones we are carrying around and using every day cause brain cancer? and what if they have all these documents and hide it and they conceal it from their customers? and then what if, further, people start coming out with these reports and they step out and say, "it is not true. it is not true. it does not cause brain cancer. keep using your phones." market the product. all the while they know it causes brain cancer. and then what if you take that a step further and 30, 40 years from now the industry that manufactures cell phones, finally the news comes out, finally it is proven, finally outside scientists show these phones we have all been using are causing brain cancer and the cell phone industry comes out and says, "but you knew. had not you read it in the newspaper? come on." 50 years ago, do not you remember the new york times had a story about it? what were you thinking, using our product? you knew. you should not have entrusted us. do you think we were going to tell you the truth? that is -- you know, and then what if all that time while the public health community tried to warn people about cell phones, a massive conspiracy and campaign developed from the cell phone industry to squelch that knowledge, to advertise and get out on television and everywhere else and say, "do not believe it. it is not true. the science is not true. keep using your phone. it is not a problem." and then tries to come in and honestly say that, "you know, those p.r. people, the marketing people we have, you know, really, we just pay them to do nothing. it is not worth it. we actually spend $250 billion on marketing campaigns, and you know what? they do not make a difference." really? is that why super bowl ads are so expensive, because they do not work? i mean, can anybody really remember the commercials when they were a kid that actually made them go do something? but do not we acknowledge and understand that it works or they would not be spending that kind of money on it? that is a little bit -- that analogy is what you have to step back and understand, i think, largely happened here to mr. kerrivan and in this case. now, the first question you are going to be asked on the verdict form -- well, the first issue you are going to be dealing with is whether mr. kerrivan is a class member. and that is going to be two questions. i'm going to handle the first question, and it is whether mr. kerrivan was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine. it is demonstrative 11, willow. and i think it is up on the screen, so you can see it. so that would be the question. was kenneth kerrivan addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine? and i'm not going to waste time to show you the burden of proof. but before you make any decision on any question on the verdict form, please -- please go back to the written instructions that judge erickson gives you about what the burden of proof is, and it is exactly what we have been saying all along. our burden -- this is not a criminal case. you can have doubt. if somebody has a little doubt, there is nothing wrong with that. and you can tell them -- remember, it is okay to have doubt, because what we have to show -- all we have to show is, is it more likely true than not, okay? did we tip the scales ever so slightly in our favor with the evidence? and so that is the burden of proof that you use, and it is right there in the instructions, and make sure people apply it. we do not have to go all the way -- you know, a football game -- a lot of football going on now. we do not have to go all the way, 100 yards, one hundred percent, to the goal line. we have got to get to the 50 yard line and push it over. and that is what we have to do. and i do not mean to minimize it, okay? i do not mean to minimize that. we need to meet our burden. but you have to understand it is what is -- all the evidence you have heard, no outside bias, what is more likely true than not from the evidence you heard? and we brought you dr. grunberg, neil grunberg. his credentials are impeccable. he does not testify a lot. i think he said he has only testified ten times, ever, in tobacco and health cases. he worked with surgeon general koop, one of the most famous surgeon generals that people remember. you know the amish beard he talked about? he works with the department of defense and advises them on these very issues. he wrote -- and i do not have his copy because he took it back. he wrote the 1988 surgeon general's report, okay? here's the 2010 and the 2014. he wrote the 1988 one, the orange one that we looked at. and just to be clear -- i do not want there to be any doubt, okay? mr. kerrivan -- okay, we stand with the surgeon general of the united states. we proudly are with the surgeon general, all right? that is our side. our side over here in this case, we are proud to stand with the surgeon general of the united states from 1964 on. and that is where we are. and as you look at the evidence and weigh the evidence, i want you to consider and think about where was philip morris and where was r.j. reynolds and who did they stand with and who did they attack? dr. grunberg was a central part of that. you heard him say, you know, we studied this thing for two years. we do all this amazing science. then years later, in the '90s, all these documents come out; and he realizes these guys are beating us by 20 or 30 years on the information they had. and dr. grunberg told you -- we will not go back through it, but he showed you -- he drew the brain -- remember? -- and all that stuff, and he explained to you how nicotine receptors work and how when you are a kid, you are more vulnerable to this when you are a teenage years because your brain is still forming and nicotine receptors are expanding. and he gave you the science. he told you about -- i mean, i said this in opening, but i hope the evidence established this and showed its true. we are created in the most amazing way. i mean, we have these built-in protection devices, okay, that the cigarette is engineered to bypass. we have this -- the blood brain barrier. do you remember the saran wrap? and it is supposed to keep chemicals like this from coming out. but when you make free nicotine, when you change the ph enough to get that free nicotine, it goes through the blood brain barrier. and i think miss london will talk to you more about how -- the amazing ways our lungs are made, and we talked about that. and the cigarette is designed -- and dr. grunberg told you that the nicotine levels are set specifically to keep people addicted, and they know it. not too high, not too low, just right. and dr. grunberg told you about how addiction works. he talked to you about how you determine someone is addicted. he is the only witness -- there was no witness that the defense brought into this courtroom to tell you that mr. kerrivan was not addicted. you actually also heard from dr. shah, as well, on the topic. but dr. grunberg really walked you through, and he gave you the definition -- the only definition you have gotten from any side was the definition from the national institute on drug abuse, that it is a chronic relapsing brain disease, okay? use -- compulsive use, despite harm. and dr. grunberg told you how he walked through -- he interviewed mr. kerrivan. he reviewed all the documents. he reviewed medical records, by the way. not only did dr. shah talk about addiction, but mr. kerrivan's previous doctors had written in medical records "nicotine withdrawal, tobacco abuse." those are in the records. are those medical doctors just making it up? they do not meet the standards of philip morris and r.j. reynolds, these medical doctors? where was the -- where -- where is the witness from philip morris and r.j. reynolds to explain to you why he was not addicted? what is more likely true than not? weigh the actual evidence you heard. dr. grunberg talked about his -- started as a young kid. goes -- tolerance -- remember he talked about tolerance, and he built up from just, you know, a half a pack a day -- when he was 16 years old, he was smoking a little under a half a pack or about a half a pack a day, and then it just continues to grow and grow and grow. he gets to two, three, four packs a day. he is smoking the lights. gets up even higher, which is exactly what philip morris and r.j. reynolds wanted him to do. buy a pack, smoke all of it, put it -- buy another one, smoke that. they do not blame people for smoking one pack or two packs, do they? you heard mr. heimann say that on the video. he did exactly what they wanted him to do. he kept building up his tolerance. he smoked first thing in the morning when his feet hit the ground. dr. grunberg told you about how important that was and all throughout the day. and then they made this big stink in the evidence about, what happened at the wedding of his daughters -- of his daughter? that is addiction. you are at your daughter's wedding. you cannot put it down. you are like this with your daughter and horrified that now we have this fight over this. i'm not like that, he said. that is addiction. what else is it? he quit -- all the times he tried to quit. he tried to quit before florida, before he made his move to florida, so before the copd, and new year's resolutions and after and the gum and the patch and all the various ways. his medical records show he was trying all the time. he said he was trying all the time. and what happened? withdrawal symptoms: irritable, anxious, nervous. "i became kind of a pain that i did not -- i was not like that. i was not that guy, but when i did not have my cigarettes, i was that guy. i was not myself." dr. grunberg walked you through all of that and explained. he did not just say it is more likely right than wrong that mr. kerrivan was addicted. he said, there is no doubt in my mind. goal line, all the way, one hundred percent, 100 yards on that football field. no doubt in his mind that mr. kerrivan was addicted. so when you answer that first question, i do not think there is any doubt. and he talked to you about the addiction liability of different drugs, eighty percent of people, especially when you start has a kid, you are more likely to become addicted. and that is what happened here. that is the evidence. that is the evidence you consider in answering this question. and we submit that the answer is clearly yes by the preponderance of the evidence. now, i will point out one thing. you are not going to have this timeline back with you in the jury room, and so i've tried to put years and exhibit numbers down, because you will have the exhibits back there, and i urge you to read them. take the time to read them. this is your time. not a lot of people have been able to go through these documents. and dr. proctor is like one of the few people -- he wrote big books about it. he is like one of the few people to really -- in the world to be able to go through all this stuff. and you have this chance. those are the exhibits over there that are going to be back in the room, and walk through some of this. but one of them that i think is interesting, exhibit 94. the lawyers remind us, okay -- the lawyers remind us we cannot defend smoking as free choice if the person was addicted. and i want you to think -- and that document is in the 1980s. i want you to think about the motivation of philip morris and r.j. reynolds on this question of addiction and what it means when they have to admit addiction. now i'm going to turn it over to miss london because she is going to handle the next two questions, which are, did addiction cause the copd and did all the cigarettes he smoke contribute to that copd? she is going to talk to you for about 15 minutes or so, and then i'm going to come back and finish the rest of the verdict form, okay? thank you. ms. london: good morning. again, my name is sarah london, and i am very proud to be here representing mr. kerrivan. as mr. byrd said, it is been a long journey for him, years to come here before you and become an engle class member. and i'm going to just carry the torch here for a little while. and please forgive me if it is a little longer than 15 minutes. i'll do my best. there is a lot to cover. i, too, am very, very grateful for your service. i was sitting here a little closer to you, and i'm so impressed with your careful attention; and i know you are all paying very close attention and giving this case the attention it deserves, and we thank you for that. it is hard to have a one-sided conversation. so as i was trying to prepare my remarks, i wanted to anticipate what i could say that might help you to do your job, to decide the facts that you have to decide in this case and to administer justice. so as mr. byrd said, i'm going to focus just on questions two and three on your verdict form, whether mr. kerrivan gets into the engle class and whether these cigarettes manufactured by philip morris and r.j. reynolds were a cause of his copd. now, i do not want to insult your intelligence, and i want to respect your time. so please forgive me if what i say to you sounds obvious; but, frankly, i think when you weigh all the evidence on these two questions, from what we have showed you here in the courtroom, the answers really are obvious. and that is the word that dr. shah actually said. i thought that was just about right. remember i asked him on the stand about these questions, did nicotine addiction cause the disease? and he paused for a second, and he looked at me, and he said, it is obvious. and dr. shah, remember, was the doctor that treated mr. kerrivan and still treats mr. kerrivan. he does not have a dog in this fight. all right. so let us start with question two. would you mind pulling up question two on the verdict form just to show the jury what that is? there it is. all right. was addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine a legal cause of mr. kerrivan's copd? so again, this one with the burden of proof, just more likely right than wrong, was mr. kerrivan's addiction a legal cause? all right. so here's this term "legal cause." and you are going to be instructed or you already were instructed on what that term means, but i want to go over it because it is very important. willow, can you pull up the instruction on legal cause? i believe it is instruction ten from your preliminary instructions. (discussion off the record.) ms. london: can you just put it on the elmo, mr. byrd? the court: we will turn on the elmo. ms. london: your honor, i think that we may have an updated version of this instruction on legal cause for class membership, perhaps. the court: well, the instructions i read i have here -- i did not really organize anything. i just stuck it in a file folder, so i have to find it. ms. london: that is okay. it is the same definition of legal cause. the law clerk: it might be renumbered. ms. london: oh, it might be renumbered. okay. all right. go ahead and put that up. thanks. okay. so here's the definition of legal cause. and right there it says "wrongful conduct." but this definition of legal cause also applies here as to whether addiction was a legal cause or whether smoking cigarettes was a legal cause. that definition does not change throughout your whole consideration of the case. so i want to focus on what this says here. oh, thank you. all right. wrongful -- a legal cause, something is a legal cause of someone's injury, including the legal cause of damages resulting from someone's injury, if it directly and in a natural and continuous sequence produces or contributes substantially to producing such injury so that it can reasonably be said that but for the wrongful conduct or but for the addiction, the injury would not have occurred. in order to be regarded as a legal cause of injury, the condition or conduct need not be the only cause. something may be a legal cause of injury even though it operates in combination with the act of another, some natural cause or some other cause if the condition or conduct contributes substantially to producing such injury. all right. now, there is lots and lots and lots of causes here, and you will have these instructions back there. each one of you, i think, will have a copy, so you can look at it yourself. and i do not mean any disrespect to the judge, but i think this one is kind of hard to understand. so i want to try to break it down for you and give you some ways to talk about it with one another. at the bottom line, for mr. kerrivan to get into the engle class, we needed to show you that more likely right than wrong, his addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine contributed substantially to his copd. and what does substantial mean? now, that word is not going to be defined for you in these instructions. so that is something that we have to think about in our common usage. what is substantial? not insubstantial. made a difference. played a role. real. actual. contributed. so, essentially, did mr. kerrivan's addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine play a role in his copd? and this next part is key, right? we do not have to show that his addiction to the cigarettes was the only cause. there can be many causes that contribute substantially to an injury. and that makes sense, right? addiction -- there can be many causes for things. there is not always just one thing that causes one other thing. and the law recognizes that. addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine just needs to be a cause, a reason, played a role, in his copd. and i suggest that actually -- again, i think dr. shah actually gave us the best way to think about that, again, dr. shah, mr. kerrivan's treating physician. and here's what he said. he said, nicotine addiction caused the repeated exposure to the toxins in the cigarettes. and that exposure to the toxins in the cigarettes caused the copd. so nicotine addiction caused the copd. obvious, right? that is the chain of causation. and, willow, i think we have a slide on this. oh, i'm sorry. can we switch from the elmo? the courtroom deputy: i did. ms. london: all right. so this is the a causes b, b causes c. so then a causes c, right? so i'm going to start with this first part, how addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine causes the repeated exposure to the toxins in cigarettes. now, i'm not going to repeat what mr. byrd said, and i know you heard all the evidence about nicotine addiction, and i know you were paying close attention. but i just want to pick up a few things. what does nicotine addiction do? it causes changes in the brain. it creates those receptors that grow and grow. it creates a need to have another dose, to fill those receptors over and over to feel normal. remember what dr. grunberg said: nicotine is an amazing drug. up when you are down; down when you are up. it is the most potent drug-delivery device ever engineered, the cigarette. and the cigarette companies knew this for decades. they studied it carefully. remember, we showed you an exhibit where they were -- it said the pre-learner -- or the pre-smoker and the learner smoker and then the addicted smoker. and there is a line for why they smoke or what are the factors that matter. and it said nicotine and for that smoker plus, plus, plus. that is what addiction does. you need that dose of nicotine. keep pushing that lever, like pavlov's dog, to get that reward. that is what addiction does. it creates a need for the next dose. it leaves you unsatisfied. now, not only did the cigarette companies know this, because they researched it, of course, for decades and honed their research to fully understand why -- what nicotine addiction is and how it works, but they exploited it to profit off of it. they used that sophisticated research to keep the exit gates closed. to not only hook people, but to keep them hooked, to sustain that addiction. they engineered literally every aspect of this cigarette, taking the nicotine -- even genetically engineering those plants, taking it out and putting it back in and spraying it on a sheet, setting it at that optimal level to give that addicted smoker the dose they need to need another dose and another dose and another dose. how low can we go? remember that? that is what they were trying to do. how low can we go to keep our smokers -- our customers coming back, our repeat business? they used ammonia and chemicals, changed the ph, holes in the filter. you heard all this evidence. i'm not going to go back through all of it. but, boy, does it work. boy, did they get repeat business. boy, does that nicotine addiction keep somebody hooked for as long -- for a very long time. and you saw the evidence of how many millions of people in america got hooked and got sick. that is the power of nicotine addiction. that is what it does. that is why it keeps you smoking. i keep coming back to this, but it really impressed me. dr. shah, he described this also really well, what nicotine addiction does, right? he treats thousands of patients with copd, including mr. kerrivan, more than 20 years of experience. and he said, "look, addiction keeps people smoking. he is, like, even after doctors tell them to stop, even when they know it is bad for them, people are not stupid. people are educated. even the smartest, most educated people that he treats know how bad it is for them, or have copd. why they keep smoking? nicotine addiction. that is what it does, it keeps you smoking. and you saw how nicotine addiction, addiction to 30 cigarettes containing nicotine, affected mr. kerrivan. he needed more cigarettes every day, once he became addicted, to fill up those nicotine receptors, one, two, three, up to four packs of cigarettes a day. let us just for a moment -- we keep saying packs of cigarettes a day. but, like, really think about that. okay? three packs of cigarettes a day is 60 cigarettes a day. if it is ten minutes to smoke a cigarette, we are literally talking about spending every waking minute smoking a cigarette. that is what nicotine addiction does. it continually -- the next dose and all those chemicals that come right along with it. when he tried to stop, you heard from him about his intense cravings, the shakes, the nervousness, when his brain did not have what he needed, as an addicted smoker, that is the way he felt. and that is consistent with, as dr. grunberg told you, with exactly what happens to addicted smokers and how they feel. that little voice in his head that said, "smoke me smoke me," still in his dreams. nicotine addiction is exactly why he kept smoking. even up to four -- three, four packs a day after he is sick, even after his doctors told him to stop over and over and over again. and, of course, even after he saw his friends -- his dear friends get sick and die from smoking. 31 so why did mr. kerrivan continue to expose himself to these toxins in cigarettes? nicotine addiction. that was the whole reason dr. grunberg and the surgeon general went out and studied this question. we are putting all this information out there. we are telling americans, "stop. do not. it is bad for you." why do people keep doing this? are they dumb? do they not want to live? do they just love the -- do they just love smoking more than they like their family and their life? no. nicotine addiction does something. it gives -- it creates the need for the next dose, and you smoke despite harm, and that is exactly what happened here. and, again, no witness came in here to tell you anything else, to tell you any other reason caused his repeated exposure to those cigarettes. no one came in and said, "oh, he smoked just for fun or the addiction played no role at all. you did not see that." as you heard through this trial over and over again -- and i apologize if this became repetitive, but i think it is so critical and important for all of our understanding of this case -- that the surgeon general of the united states -- and you heard from the witnesses' mouths, i believe every doctor that came in here -- that nicotine addiction is the fundamental reason that people persist in 32 exposing themselves to the toxins in cigarettes, the fundamental reason. even mr. gentry, now he agreed it was a fundamental reason. and, of course, use your common sense. why would the company spend so much money and spend all this time researching and studying and designing ways to sustain nicotine addiction, if it did not do any good, if it did not create that repeat business, if it did not keep people smoking long after they know it is bad for them? that is why they did it. that is how they designed the cigarettes. that is how nicotine addiction works. it causes you to keep smoking. that is what it is. so the first part of this chain of causation, yes, more likely right than wrong and beyond that, we proved to you that the nicotine addiction was a cause, contributed substantially to mr. kerrivan getting all of those toxins in the cigarettes that caused his copd. now, the second part is a little easier. it is about whether the repeated exposure to the toxins in cigarettes, whether that caused his copd. and, frankly, as you know, this part is not even in dispute, really. even the doctor that philip morris brought to you, he agreed. he said no question that the exposure to the cigarettes caused his copd. every doctor said that. and, in fact, they were 33 certain. so let us put that together. as dr. shah said, "it is obvious. the addiction to nicotine, to cigarettes containing nicotine, that is what substantially contributed and far more than that, the fundamental reason mr. kerrivan was exposed to so many cigarettes, and that exposure to so many cigarettes is what caused his copd." all right. now, if in deliberations -- and i echo absolutely everything that mr. byrd said. you do have a very important job back there as jurors. in addition to sitting there and listening to all this evidence, you will have an opportunity and, in fact, an obligation to go back there and talk about the evidence and how you feel. you have to explain to each other how you feel. that is part of your job in your deliberations. so if somebody in deliberations says, "you know what? no one held a gun to his head. i think it is a choice. and even if he was addicted, he always had the choice to smoke." i want you to remind them that, as dr. grunberg told us, again, the world leading expert on this, addiction -- for a heavily addicted smoker, you really essentially have almost no free choice. it is the addiction interfering with your free choice. it interferes with you acting as a rational person, to take care of yourself. 34 that is how addiction works. it is a brain disease that gets in the way of you exercising your free choice. and just briefly, let us talk about this word choice, right? so a choice is, "am i going to have tuna salad or egg salad for lunch? who am i going to vote for governor?" you are not addicted to somebody running for governor. you are not addicted to egg salad. you can make a free choice in those circumstances. but for an addicted smoker, whether to have another cigarette, yeah, that is not a free choice, right? what is going on in your brain, that is having an effect on your choices. it is kind of like when you ring the bell, you do not have a choice of whether to salivate. that is how it is working. it is automatic. it is almost automatic in your brain. and if you can, pull up what the surgeon general of the united states has said about this, just most recently. this is evidence back there. i believe it is exhibit 1823. where the surgeon general, when they studied the power of nicotine addiction, and i do not want to remind you all of the studies and all that goes into preparing these reports, but their conclusion was, of course, the reality is that smoking is not usually a choice. tobacco use is an addiction, and nicotine is the primary drug in tobacco that causes 35 addiction. and over time, the brain cells of the smokers are changed. you can go back when you are in the jury room and i encourage you if somebody is saying, "maybe it is choice," to go back and look at this and look at what the united states surgeon general has said on this very question. of course, you did not hear anything from the other side. they brought you no witness to tell you otherwise. you know -- you can take that down. thank you. if somebody is really stuck on this idea of choice, you can remind them that it is fine, it is okay to think that choice plays a role in why somebody continues to smoke. that is fine. there can be multiple causes and, in fact, i have a slide that -- and, by the way, it is just like the cigarette companies' choices to engineer the product the way they do, to sustain addiction. that can be a cause. all of these things can be a cause. why do not you pull that up? i'm sorry. slide two. all right. this is my best effort at trying to put this in a way that -- to help explain it. so you can think a lot of things combined to cause mr. kerrivan's copd, right? and we have sure put on a lot of evidence of a number of different things that contributed. so you can think that you see personal choice there? you can think that was a cause, that that was something that caused 36 it. you can think that the conspiracy and the campaign of doubt and all the things that the industry did to conceal the truth and hide information from americans, and particularly when he was young, you can believe that that is a cause. i certainly think that is what the evidence will show. mr. byrd will talk more about that. and you can think that marketing to children and getting them hooked when they were young, that that was a cause of mr. kerrivan continuing to smoke. and these filters and these lights, you can think that is a cause, and i believe the evidence absolutely shows that, too. all of these things substantially contribute. they go into that sort of funnel and come down and work together in combination. but, number one, right there, the fundamental reason that mr. kerrivan continues to smoke and got sick: nicotine addiction. so all you need to -- so at the end of the day, as long as we showed more likely right than wrong, and i believe we have shown it far beyond that, to the 100 yard line, as mr. byrd said, that more likely right than wrong, the reason -- mr. kerrivan's addiction was a reason, the reason, the most important reason that he is sitting here today. 37 now, just on this point, and if somebody says, "well, i think he could have quit," and i think that will probably be a big part of the defense that you will hear. certainly, i believe that is why they brought dr. brodnan in was to try to show you, "well, i think he could have quit." i'm not entirely sure where he fits in. he seemed like a very nice doctor, but i'm not entirely sure how much he offered you in terms of how to answer the questions before you. but in any event, see on there, you can see the failed quit attempts, right, or his inability to quit or even his lack of trying to quit was a cause. that surely can fit in there. but i submit to you, of course, as you heard from dr. grunberg, that not quitting, that addiction plays a role in not quitting, right, and continuing to smoke and not wanting to go through the pain and discomfort of withdrawal. all of that plays a role. it all works together. and it is fine, you can think that failure to quit is a cause. so long as -- and nicotine addiction is also a cause. and on the flip side, of course, you could find that these companies, the fact that they -- if they had come clean when they knew what they -- when they knew how bad these products were for them and followed through on their promise to stop selling them, if they had quit selling them, we would not be here either, right? just like if mr. kerrivan, 38 of course, had stopped a month later or two months later after he started, sure, of course, that could be a cause, but it is not the only cause. and certainly nicotine addiction, as we showed you, played a big role. and on this point about quitting, i think this is really important, and mr. byrd did talk about this a bit. remember that mr. kerrivan tried, did try to quit before he got copd. and not only that, as dr. brodnan, he admitted on the stand, if he had quit before he switched to light cigarettes, we would not be here today, right? so certainly those light cigarettes, certainly those light cigarettes were a cause. and ultimately, though, i want to make sure this is really clear. you can take that down. thank you. and i'm wrapping up, mr. byrd. i want to make sure this is very clear. these questions of what mr. kerrivan did or did not do, his choice, his failures, how hard he tried to quit, you can consider all of that. and you will have a place on your verdict form where you can express how you feel about how much responsibility he bears, just like how much responsibility you think the companies bear. it does not belong in this question, though. this is just a simple chain of causation question. mr. byrd will address that when we talk about 39 comparative fault. all right. so i submit to you that when you weigh all the evidence, far more likely right than wrong, far more, that the answer to question two is yes, and i am just quickly going to get through question three because i think this one also is obvious. if you answer yes to those questions, one and two, and we finally get mr. kerrivan into the engle class, then as mr. byrd told you, those engle findings will apply. i'm not going to repeat anything that he said. i echo it all, but i know it is strange to rely on what another jury did, but i have to emphasize this, especially as i talk about the next question. you have to treat these findings as if you heard all the evidence and you found them yourself. they are entitled to that much weight. it is not just law. it is fact, and it is fact that applies in each and every one of these questions. so you will have to remind that to each other and use that to answer the next question. all right. question three: please state as to each defendant whether smoking cigarettes manufactured by that defendant was a legal cause of kenneth kerrivan's copd. all right. now, you are going to need an engle finding for this one; and, that is, the engle jury already decided that both philip morris and r.j. reynolds placed 40 cigarettes on the market that were defective and unreasonably dangerous. you already have that finding. it is part of this, and you apply it here. you do not have to decide it. and there it is again, legal cause, and i'm not going to go through that again, but make sure you have that instruction. the same deal. we only have to prove that it was part of a continuous chain of causation, that it contributed substantially, and does not have to be the only cause. certainly both of these companies' cigarettes can combine to cause it. and if that is what you find, of course, more likely right than wrong, the answer is yes. now, to be clear, every witness that came to talk to you -- or, well, let me put it this way. dr. grunberg explained how every single cigarette contributed to addiction. dr. gravelyn talked about how every single cigarette contributed to the cumulative exposure of the disease. dr. shah said the same thing. copd is a cumulative injury; and as mr. byrd explained to you about the power of the brain and all our bodies' defenses, you know how each cigarette exposes you to thousands of chemicals, freezes that cilia, inflames your airways and gets your body into that -- weakens your defenses and creates bacteria and all of that phlegm and garbage in 41 your lungs that creates holes and causes what we know is copd. every cigarette plays a role. every cigarette plays a role on the path to addiction and on the cumulative injury. each one is a dose of both the nicotine and the poison. the addiction and the poison comes with every dose. and the defendant has brought you nobody to tell you anything other than that both of these companies' cigarettes, that his smoking of these cigarettes was a cause. and you heard from mr. kerrivan on the stand about what he smoked over the years. and you saw, as i did, that he did not remember everything perfectly and that he could not tell you exactly the years he smoked what or exactly in what order. and i think there might have been some confusion about the camels and was it one pack in his life or a pack a day for some years, and that is going to be up for you to decide. i'll submit to you it would seem a little strange that he would remember one pack of something he smoked in his life, like, "oh, yeah, i only had one box of wheaties in my life, and i happen to have that on a picture." you can use your common sense and, of course, judge his credibility. of course in that regard, in terms of judging mr. kerrivan's credibility and all the witnesses, the judge has instructed you about giving you some guidance for that and 42 whether lapses in memory are on something important or not. and i will suggest to you as you go back to that jury room and you talk to each other about the evidence and you look at the answers that you have to give, that lapses in memory or things mr. kerrivan was not so sure about, those are not the important details. that is like what color was the dodge in the getaway car, right? on the really key stuff, the really important things that you need to make your decision, mr. kerrivan was pretty clear. and no witness came in and rebutted anything he had to say about any of that. just -- there are some stipulated facts, and that is how you will know that the cigarettes that he smoked, the luckys, the camels, the marlboros, those were all manufactured by these defendants and that is stipulated. that is not in dispute. so, finally, if somebody in deliberations says, well, i'm just not sure exactly how much he smoked or i'm confused about these pack years and whether that causes this, that or the other thing, i want you to remind them about how important those early cigarettes were, no matter how long he smoked them, how critically important they are in the chain of causation. those first cigarettes that get you hooked, those are the path to initiation cigarettes. dr. grunberg said the earliest brands you smoke 43 when you are a teenager, when your brain is vulnerable, very important. ninety percent of smokers start before the age of 18. i'm sure mr. byrd will talk a lot more about that, and i know he is anxious to get back up here. i promise you i'm wrapping up. and dr. gravelyn told us that, too, that those first cigarettes are so incredibly important to putting you on the path to disease. we know those cigarettes mattered to kenneth kerrivan. we know that, but for the cigarettes he smoked 16, 17, 18 years old, we would not be here today. that is legal cause, folks. and we know, of course, that those cigarettes mattered to these companies. you saw the documents. you know how important it was to capture that youth market. so if they come up here and say, well, we did not play any role, we did not do anything, that is not what they were saying back when no one was looking. that was exactly what they wanted, was to get somebody on the path to addiction, get them going. unfortunately, i do not -- there are unfortunate side effects to that addiction, and they said that in their documents. but they certainly were trying to capture that youth market, and they sure did. so there will be a place on the verdict form, though -- and remind somebody who is concerned about, i do not 44 know how long he smoked this brand or the other, there is a place on the verdict form where you can put a percentage for each company, right? so this question is only just whether more likely right than wrong, even a little bit, smoking that company's cigarettes played a role; and then you can apportion how much responsibility to each company later on in the verdict form, as mr. byrd will tell you. so i submit to you that at the end of the day, with all the evidence, the answers to questions both two and three, straightforward, obvious -- you probably did not me to talk that long about that, but the answers to both of those questions, the evidence has shown, is yes, yes as to both defendants. thank you. i appreciate your time. mr. byrd: thank you, your honor. let me just spend -- i'm going to try to pick it up and spend on the remaining questions, but those questions at the beginning are important because of class membership. if you find he is a member of the class, one of the things miss london referenced is comparative fault. it is a question that you will deal with. because if you find he is a member of the class, then you will -- for the negligence and strict liability claims, comparative fault applies. they do not apply to the intentional torts, which i'll talk about 45 later, but to comparative fault, they do. we do not need to put it on the verdict form. it is where you put the different percentages. it is further down in the verdict form, but i want to address it now. and, willow, can we put number one, demonstrative one up, please. so when you compare -- and i think i talked about this is a little bit. when you compare the fault of each of the parties, i want you to go back and really understand when mr. kerrivan started smoking and what got him into this in the first place. those first -- he started trying when he was 14 years old and then really started smoking every day by the time he was 16. and i think -- do you have demonstrative one, willow? no. sorry. this one. (holding up picture.) we showed you this picture, okay? this is 11-year-old kenneth kerrivan. here he is. and a couple years later, he starts smoking. and by the way, at this same time -- we showed you documents -- the industry is studying 12, 14-year-olds and no lower limit. they are studying those people. and i'm proud to represent mr. kerrivan. and i acknowledge that he is made a decision to own up and take some 46 fault for where he is. and that is -- that is big stuff. that is big stuff. and when -- when the jury is going to look and determine how much fault to apply for the decisions he made, i want them to think about young mr. kerrivan lost his dad, seven years old. essentially, lost his mom when he was 12. mr. davis: your honor, i -- there is a pretrial ruling on this sort of stuff. the court: we want to be very careful not to make an appeal to sympathy on that. mr. byrd: sure. but the point of that is that we showed documents of what the industry did in peer pressure, understanding peer pressure and getting people to smoke, and how they gave images of trying to make people who wanted to grow up to become adults sooner than they needed to be, those type of targeting of teenage kids and how they did that, somebody wanting to get older before their time. when you weigh the comparative fault of all that, those things get to come into consideration. in this jury and in this courtroom -- and in this courtroom, those things are considered, because at the same time, the power of philip morris and r.j. reynolds, the knowledge that they had, okay, was one hundred percent. there was not any doubt that they knew what they were doing, and we showed 47 you the documents that showed that. there was no doubt. and they did everything they could -- dr. proctor told you about the conspiracy. they did everything they could -- you can take that down, willow -- to push his knowledge down to as little as zero percent, you know, as far down as they could. they did a campaign of doubt. they went out and lied. they told everybody. they spent tons of money to go on television and the newspapers and everywhere else and say it is not true. and those are the things you have to look at. look at the time. look at the knowledge and power that the cigarette industry had at the same time that we look at mr. kerrivan's actions. sure, sure, there was information out there trying to warn mr. kerrivan. there were public service announcements. but you saw the evidence. 365 to 1. the public health authorities spent in a year what the industry spent in one day. how's that? 365 to 1. how do we weigh those percentages and how that looks? and you are going to make up your own mind about what percentage of fault to give to mr. kerrivan and the companies. and he has owned up, okay? now, philip morris and r.j. reynolds, we will wait to hear from them. we will see what percentage they suggest you put on their side of the coin. 48 but for mr. kerrivan, i would suggest maybe put the number where it goes. 16. he starts at 16 every day. how about 16 percent? he smokes for 20 years. 1985 is the first year that the warning finally says that it causes emphysema. that is the first time. he is been smoking all that time before then with these other warnings. he smoked for 20 years after '85. maybe twenty percent. somewhere. 16 to twenty percent. that is your decision to make. but when you do that, remember to apply -- to understand his age and where he was and how addiction was affecting him and his choices. unless i just missed something, i do not think there was any brain disease affecting the choices of philip morris and r.j. reynolds in their boardroom. now, this is where -- miss london talked about it, but this is where -- did he try hard to quit, could he quit, and all that. that has nothing to do with -- please do not let the defense -- they will make some arguments. do not let them try to write questions in the verdict form that are not there, okay? you just answer the questions in the verdict form. and you are not going to see a question in the verdict form on did addiction cause disease about whether he tried to quit, because it is not in the law a question you are supposed to answer. it has nothing to do with what you are here to do. 49 the only place that whether he tried to quit or how hard he tried to quit plays a role is in this comparative fault question. mr. davis: your honor, that is a mistake in the law. the court: let us come here and have a little conversation. [#deleted bench conference#] mr. byrd: so that is comparative fault. and i suggest the 16 to twenty percent range. how you divide it up among the defendants will be -- you know, he clearly smoked a lot more philip morris products, the marlboros and marlboro lights, than he did r.j. reynolds products. but the reason i think they are probably equally responsible here, however you 53 divide that up, is that the lucky strikes, the camels are in his early years, teenage years. those are the most important cigarettes in the whole bunch. and if he had not started on the lucky strikes in 16, 17, 18 years of age, we would not be here. by the way, dr. brodnan, who they did bring you, he said we would not be here if it had not been for those lights, the marlboro lights. i want you to think about that, because there is going to be this year, 1982, that you are asked about. and i want you to think about those lights that he started smoking and went on instead of the regular cigarettes. willow, can we bring up number six, demonstrative number six? when he is a member of the engle class -- you are then going to have -- the other two claims we have are the intentional torts, the fraudulent concealment and conspiracy, okay? and there is a few questions that go hand-in-hand with all of these. so i'm going to kind of address all these questions on fraudulent concealment and the conspiracy together, all right? but the most important thing here to understand is you have to go back to the engle findings -- they are written there for you. they are right here -- and read them, because when you -- once you get to these questions, he already is a member of the engle class. so, therefore, these findings 54 apply. no matter what, they apply. and you take the finding -- so, therefore, these are true and you must accept them, plus did it affect mr. kerrivan? and we think the evidence has shown that it does, and that is how you get to a "yes" on did he justify -- did he rely on statements? did he rely on these acts and omissions that the companies engaged in? of course, he did. i mean, the ftc reports are clear. the advertising that happened, for example, was unavoidable. it was unavoidable to anybody in america. it was everywhere. did he rely -- yeah, every time he lit up that cigarette, every time he lights up that cigarette, he is relying on their conduct and their actions throughout the years. and then there is going to be questions before 1982 or after 1982. and the box we submit that you should check is both before and after. there is a box that says, was it both before and after '82? of course, it was. because we showed you clearly, and dr. proctor showed you, that the conspiracy started in 1953, and their concealments and omissions continued all the way up until 1999. so did it happen before 1982? of course. did it happen after 1982? of course. and these findings -- if you look at number four, 55 "the engle defendants, including r.j. reynolds and philip morris, concealed or omitted material information not otherwise known or available, knowing that the material was false and misleading and failed to disclose a material fact concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking or both." and then number five follows that. it is the conspiracy. they agreed in concert, right? you can read that. that is what dr. proctor was talking about about the conspiracy. it started at the plaza hotel, and it did not stop all the way through -- this evidence we showed you, up at least until 2000 here, where they finally admit, oh, well, smoking does finally cause disease. i mean, in 1994 they are still lying to congress about it. and in 1999 they finally admit smoking causes disease and smoking can be addictive. but you heard from mr. gentry and mr. jupe, and you get to weigh what they said and their credibility, as well, because there are some things that they are not willing to say. and you judge the credibility of mr. jupe and mr. gentry about whether they are really agreeing with the surgeon general anymore or whether they still are fighting that addiction does not really cause disease, because i do not know what a chain of causation is. i do not really understand that. 56 so those are the questions on the intentional torts. we think -- and the instructions. i will not go over them. they are pretty detailed. please read the instructions about how you find that these findings, once they apply, essentially mean -- plus the evidence you heard about mr. kerrivan, that they are liable. and miss london talked to you about, you know, you can have several causes. we only need to show that it was a legal cause. and let me give you an example because, you know, was the -- were their negligence and strict liability a cause? of course, it was. but also the fraudulent concealment and conspiracy were also causes. you can have several causes, as miss london said, to operate together. and i'll give you a little bit of an analogy. a lot of baseball games going on right now. you know, let us say a pitcher pitches a no-hitter in a baseball game, okay? and so his team wins. they win like, you know, two to nothing. his team wins. and the question is, well, what was the cause of the win? who caused the -- what was the substantial contributing factor? well, the pitcher certainly was if he pitched a no-hitter. pretty good. but so were his fielders, you know, the infielders and his team that was helping him to make sure they got the ground ball and threw the guy out, they caught the -- to make sure there was not a hit. 57 then what about their hitters? somebody had to score the two runs to get the win. they all worked together. sure, was the pitcher a substantial -- was the pitcher a big one? of course, but so was the fielding. so was the hitting. without any of that, you would not have -- you would not have had the win. they had to all work together. it is like batteries you put in a light. take four batteries, put it in a light. you take one battery out, it does not work. okay? but each one of them contributes when you put them all in to making it work. and here, that is why we would submit that, of course, the fraudulent concealment that they engaged in contributed to mr. kerrivan's disease and, of course, their conspiracy contributed to their disease, just like the negligence and strict liability they engaged in. so that is how that works. damages. there will be a question on damages. and, willow, if we can put up number seven. this is -- the damages, you will see from the instructions. it says, "you should consider the following elements of damage and no other: plaintiff's bodily injury and resulting pain and suffering, disability, mental anguish, inconvenience or loss of capacity for the enjoyment of life in the past and in the future as a result of his copd." 58 and i will not go over it, but there is also -- well, let us look at demonstrative eight as well. demonstrative eight here talks about the fact that compensatory damages are not restricted to actual loss of time or money. they cover mental and physical aspects, tangible and intangible. and the judge told you this and instructed you about this, and it is important in answering some of what we talked about earlier in the case as well. thus, no evidence of the value of such intangible things as pain and suffering has been or need be introduced. okay? that is why, you know, it is not an easy thing to set a number, and i understand that, for the damages that mr. kerrivan has suffered. but that is going to be your hard work and your job to do. and i do -- we do have some suggestions of what that number should be. you know, if you have an injury and try to determine what type of monetary damages should go to help -- for what somebody has suffered for so long, i think you would look at, you know, what they suffered, how long it lasted and how long it is going to last in the future. so maybe if somebody had -- you know, had a car accident or something like that, broke a leg, had to -- you know, took a couple weeks -- you know, took two or three 59 months or something to get better but then completely recovered and it is fine, you know, maybe we are talking in the tens of thousands of dollars for that kind of pain and suffering and anguish that you went through. so you look at the level of harm, i think, and the length of the harm. and then maybe, you know, let us say somebody has an accident or something happens to them that hurts them, and now they, you know, have injuries to their leg or wherever, something that they are never going to recover. they are going to be disabled for the rest of their life. that is -- maybe we are starting to get into the hundreds of thousands or higher type of money and dollar amount that i think you would ask for for an injury like that that caused a lot of pain and a lot of suffering and is going to last a long time. maybe you lose a limb, you know, lose your legs or something like that. you start getting into higher damages and elements. but when somebody like mr. kerrivan, when you have a disease that is a creeping disease, that, you know, every puff of the cigarette froze the cilia, each puff of that froze the cilia and stopped your defenses and slowly created this problem over time, then you develop your lungs where you feel like an elephant is sitting on your chest. you cannot breathe out. you cannot -- you eventually get tethered to an oxygen tank, you know, 24/7; nose bleeds and 60 the like; having to take all this medication with side effects; not able to walk; two-and-a-half hours, two hours, i think he said, to get ready for court in the morning; sometimes a shower takes an hour and a half. and then, frankly, having to look and realize and understand every day, just -- just every day this could be the last. that is the last. now, we understand, you know, somebody might say, "well, i do not think any money is going to make him better, and he does not have much longer to live." that is not in the instructions of what you should consider. what you need to consider -- not sympathy. you know, it is too late for sympathy, by the way. we do not want any sympathy. mr. kerrivan is making the best of his situation, and he is a fighter, and he wants to keep fighting. but what you do is you look at the fair and the just amount. and when i have -- when we have to talk about the level of harm here that he is been suffering since 1992 or '3 and on, and what he is looking -- having to do these past several years and what is going to happen to him in the future, a very short future that he has left, then i have to ask in the millions of dollars. that is the kind of harm that are in the millions of dollars. and, frankly, you are going to have to set that number. i would suggest ten million dollars is the right 61 amount. i think that is the fair and just amount. now, you may go a little bit less. you know, we put the -- we figured out every puff. he must have had about 8.4 million puffs of a cigarette. maybe that is the appropriate number, because each one of those damaged his cilia, damaged his lung and slowly over time damaged it. maybe it is more like $12 million, and that is your call. you can go higher than i say or lower, of course, than i say. and there is no exact science to it, so the judge said, but we submit $10 million is the appropriate number. and you do not reduce, by the way, for your comparative fault because the judge will do that, if necessary, later. so if, for example, i'm asking for the $10 million, you put the full $10 million in there. he will make any reductions on your comparative fault later for the negligence and strict liability claims. for the intentional tort claims, though, all the damages will be recovered. okay? now, let me jump over -- so there will be one more question that you have to ask, and i'm going to cut some of my remarks short, because i know we took a little time. but the last question you will be asked to consider is whether punitive damages are warranted. and, willow, can you put up number nine? the instruction says, you know, "punitive damages 62 are warranted on a claim -- punitive damages are warranted on a claim as punishment to that defendant and as a deterrent to others. okay? the reason for punitive damages is to punish philip morris and r.j. reynolds. and -- and -- and, you know, we will come back for another phase for you to set the amount on that. this is just only to determine whether they are warranted or not. i'll let you know that other phase, it lasts like less than a day. it is quick. it is not like some long thing that you are going to have to be here for. but they are to deter these companies and other companies that would engage in this type of conduct, and that is why i think this case is essential and important, and i think we have established it. willow, if you show them number ten, demonstrative number ten. these are the elements that you will look at. i will not read -- well, let us go through a little bit. the defendant had actual knowledge of the wrongfulness of its conduct. i think the evidence has established that by clear and convincing evidence. the defendant had actual knowledge that there was a high probability of injury or damage to a person in mr. kerrivan's position. let me talk about that for just a 63 second. when mr. kerrivan smokes and he finally gets to the point where he understands or realizes that, you know, things can happen from smoking. you know, you can -- something can happen. you know, mr. kerrivan's head is like, "well, i hope it will not happen. there is a chance that it will not happen, but it could happen." that is what he is thinking, or any individual smoker. but philip morris and r.j. reynolds, every morning when they woke up and they made their choices, they made their own decisions, that should come with responsibility, too. they knew with certainty how many people would die as a result of it. with certainty. it was not a question. maybe they did not know which people. but with certainty they knew the number. now, the third one is: "despite that knowledge, intentionally pursued the course of wrongful conduct resulting in mr. kerrivan's copd." we showed the documents. dr. proctor came in here and told you about all their knowledge. dr. grunberg did, too. the knowledge of addiction and nicotine in setting levels. dr. proctor knew about the knowledge of disease. and despite that knowledge, did they continue to pursue their conduct? you bet you. and, in fact, when more dangers and warnings were coming out, did they -- did they say, like, "you know what? let us turn down. let us dial it back here. 64 we do not need to be pushing this product." no. they turned up their advertising dollars. it increased. they went up. what does that say? if they know -- you know, if they know about all this stuff is causing all these things and they are hiding it, what are they doing? marketing in the way that they did over those years, what are they doing still studying children? what is that? we think that that meets this prong. number four: "the defendants' wrongful conduct constituted a serious public wrong." i -- i -- i -- i -- i can think of no other case i could bring in front of you about a serious public wrong than what we have tried to show you over these last two weeks of this conspiracy and this -- the conduct of these companies. you can take that down, willow. i had a -- this is a good time to look at the timeline and see what they did. okay? this 1982 line that is important we will talk about. so the sales of cigarettes start going down in 1982. dr. proctor told you about that. what did they do? they start draping themselves in the flag, and i think you are going to hear some things about in america, we have choices, and we can make choices. and that is true. 65 that is true. i do not take away from that. but there is some language and terminology that they start trying to drape their conduct in, and i want you to think about it, because here they are, they are going to say that mr. kerrivan, that it is all his fault. and what are they doing in 1985 when nicorette gum is trying to come out? what did dr. grunberg say? how much earlier could cessation aids like that have hit the market? you heard mr. jupe yesterday. i've seen that video a few times. i do not think i've caught this before. he talked about, "well, maybe one day a pharmaceutical company should work on that whole brain receptor disease. i'm sure they would have a good business model for that. that would be great. they ought to do it." really? because when dow chemical decided to start making nicorette gum, what did philip morris say about it then? they organized this thing and put pressure -- the only thing they knew how to do is put pressure on dow chemical, they are going to strip away all their business if they did not only target that product to who? pick people that are already sick. you can make it, but, listen, only give it to people that are sick, not the rest of the people trying to quit. we will let them have that stuff once it is too late. that is what they did. that is their conduct. 66 what did they do, the people are trying to quit, the great american smokeout, the american cancer society is -- the american cancer society is out there trying to warn people, and they are ridiculing them. they are out there -- they are ridiculing the american cancer society. the same group that they are coming in here now and trying to tell you that they put out all these warnings that mr. kerrivan should have heard. you know, the last people in the world that should get to come in and hold up the american cancer society's warnings are the people that ridiculed them. mr. davis: objection, your honor. that goes to the defense of the case, pretrial ruling. the court: sustained. go ahead. mr. davis: can we get a curative on that, your honor? mr. byrd: i can rephrase that. the court: just disregard the last sentence. and then you may rephrase, okay? mr. byrd: the companies, philip morris and r.j. reynolds, okay, ridiculed the people that were trying to warn people. and then they sent out -- you know, they had -- mr. kerrivan, you heard evidence about that, you know, he had done those programs where he got coupons and all these 67 things, and he got, you know, like, marlboro gear and stuff that his daughter was all concerned about, and he was wearing all this marlboro stuff, he got that from their coupon program. so they have the largest database dr. proctor said of all this. and what are they mailing to their customers? the great american smokers' kit. you have a right to continue to smoke. here's what you should tell these anti-smokers: "do not nag me." that is their conduct. now, they do not get to just wipe that off the table. you know, they do not get to, you know -- they have to -- they cannot tell two different stories. philip morris and r.j. reynolds will today say things cause disease and cause these problems, but they told a different story when people were not looking and throughout mr. kerrivan's relevant time of his smoking history and disease. they do not get to take those things off the table and just act like because it happened a long time ago and we admit it is bad now, that you just take it off the table because you should not consider it. no. today is the day that it is time to be held accountable for mr. kerrivan, for what happened to mr. kerrivan. now, i drew a graph at the beginning, and i'm a horrible drawer, and we will show this, demonstrative number 68 three. at the very beginning of this case -- the last section i'll say here. i'm sorry for going a little bit long. but i tried to draw this graph, and it was really bad. i drew a line, and i drew another line. i told you that, you know, lung cancer and diseases like copd just had never happened in the early 1900s. and then out of the blue, this huge dramatic increase. you can see this one deals with lung cancer, not the copd, but it is the same type of thing. and dramatic increase. and then the consumption of cigarettes, it is the other line, the blue line on the left, this 20-year lag. it is the largest -- diseases like copd and lung cancer went from the most rarest -- the rarest form of -- the rarest thing ever to, like, the number one -- you know, the top five things that people die from. it is an epidemic like we have never seen. i told you at the beginning that we would -- i'd show you a conspiracy, the likes of which we have never seen. and i want to be really clear. this -- this chart, okay, that line there is 400 and -- we heard -- you have heard the figures. the surgeon general report, it is in evidence; but, you know, the latest numbers are 480,000 deaths a year, premature deaths. more than 20 million people have died prematurely. there is that one graph that says if it keeps 69 up, five-and-a-half million kids today will die from cigarette diseases. okay? but here's the deal. that line right there, that is not like -- that is not something like accounting profit line, you know. those are people. those are grandfathers and grandmothers. they are aunts. they are uncles. they are mommies. they are daddies. they are sisters. they are brothers. and we showed you the evidence. make no mistake. the replacement smokers are kids, ninety percent. ninety percent of their business comes from kids starting to smoke. one of those kids -- willow demonstrative one. -- kenny kerrivan. he grew up to make race cars. he wanted to make race cars. but at the same time, became one of the cigarette industries greatest customers. growing up, older, becoming older before he -- before he should have been and got hooked on a product that has left him where he is today. are punitive damages warranted to deter that type of conduct? yes. and we submit that you put "yes" down, and we will come back very briefly, it will be less than a day, to deal with that issue. but it is an important thing to do, because, you know, mr. gentry and mr. jupe, who you heard from, on their leadership teams or whatever they are a part 70 of, you know, they are going to hear or not what this jury does. now, i will come back in rebuttal, and i'll reserve the rest of my time for that, your honor. mr. byrd: your honor, thank you. may it please we will bring up our board. i'm going to be brief. i know everybody wants to get to lunch, and there is a lot of things i wish i could say, but i am going to try to just hit a few things. and just put it over here. that is fine. we will see both of these things. it does not have to be up there. just right there. that is fine. these slides were interesting to me because what is missing from their timeline is any of their own conduct, philip morris and r.j. reynolds, you know. so, oh, here's the psa of larry hagman, which, by the way, there is no evidence he ever saw anyway in 1982. what were they doing in 1982? what were they doing in the early '80s? where was that on their timeline? and, you know, this idea that, you know, he never 150 tried to quit, he never tried to quit, he never tried to quit, did they ever try to quit their conduct? when did that stop? how hard were they trying to stop this foolish behavior that we have over here on the evidence? and if you look at this timeline, if our product was harmful, we would stop business tomorrow? they knew their product was harmful. they did not stop business. do you think the public -- you know, it was big news. remember, it was big news, these reports that were coming out. people were glued to the tv. people were glued to the reports. it was big news. and what did they say when they got on the news? there is nothing in there harmful. if there is, we will take it out. i mean, is the idea that everything they said was not heard by mr. kerrivan, but everything that they want you to think, you know, the other stuff, he did hear, so he was like the only person in the country that did not get their 50 years of lying and campaign of doubt and controversy that they created? the truth squad? i mean, the idea that mr. kerrivan is the only guy out there that did not get any of this information to try to show doubt? so he did not try to quit? there is no evidence he tried to quit before '82? well, duh. is not that evidence, that he was believing a lot of what they say? do not believe it. it 151 has not been proven yet. it is not going to happen. is not that evidence to go to establish that they were fooling him all through '82, through the '80s? and filtered cigarettes -- we talked about this. here they are in 1966 talking about the illusion of filtration, okay? here they are in 1964 when they start developing -- pushing filters and then developing lights later. we need -- we must find in the near future answers which will give smokers a psychological crutch and self-rationale to continue smoking. that is their secret documents internally. we have got to find a way to give them a psychological crutch to keep smoking. and then what do they say? an important date, december 1st, 1982. it is exhibit 72. look at it. read it. and by the way, this concept -- i think you heard mr. davis say, you know, you just check "no" to questions one and two, and then we would go home. you are a better jury than that. it is a friday afternoon, and we are going to send you out here on a friday afternoon, but you are a better jury than to hear all this evidence and not go back there and read it and consider it and take the time that you need to answer these questions and answer all of them. and i encourage you to do that. i know that you are a jury that will dedicate that time. 152 now, this document, 1982, here they are writing secretly. if the exit and entry gates should ever be -- if the exit gates were ever opened, we are going to go out of business overnight? so what do they do? what do they do after '82? while all this other stuff is going on in their timeline, what do they do? they kick it up a notch. they ramp up. they turn up their advertising. they go after dow chemical. they start mailing out these, you know, american free -- you have a right to be an american and keep smoking. they start doing all that stuff. do you think it did not have -- i mean, is the idea that it just -- they did all that stuff, and it did not work at all, and mr. kerrivan was the guy it did not work on? the evidence is that it did work on him. he smoked filters. he went to filters. he smoked lights. and there is some testimony, by the way, from dr. brodnan that they left out. dr. brodnan -- they brought him. they brought this witness. he did not have any literature at all to support his theory about the quitting, by the way, in '82. there is no question on your verdict form about did he quit when he was 40 years old or not? that is not something you are going to be asked to do. but the evidence was -- what dr. gravelyn said was, "you know what, if it had not been for the lights, him smoking 153 those lights, we would not be here." mr. davis: objection, your honor; that is a complete misstatement of the evidence. the court: i'm going to remind the jury, as i have before, that the statements about what the evidence is, is their ultimate decision to make, and the evidence is what the jury believes it is. and you should listen carefully to the arguments of counsel. and that is where i'm going to leave it, just simply, because it is just important that the jury understands that argument by its nature is one person's recollection. and their recollection may well be flawed. the whole idea behind having ten jurors is that it is very unlikely that ten people sitting in a room will have a flawed recollection of the testimony. you may proceed. mr. byrd: i do not think i've ever been flawed ever. i do not think i've ever made a mistake, your honor. no, i... you will remember what the evidence is. (laughter.) mr. byrd: i'm going to skip over now a few things. i'm going to look at my notes and try to skip over so we can get moving and get to your real work. you know, the information about -- information of the 1800s and the reader's digest and all this information, i 154 think dr. proctor and dr. grunberg explained to you about that information that was out there. it was not the type of modern science that was going on inside the industry. but more importantly, if all this evidence is so important to mr. kerrivan, as mr. davis said, were the c.e.o.'s of philip morris and r.j. reynolds just -- they just missed it? they missed reader's digest? they missed christopher columbus? they missed this stuff from the 1800s? what did they do with that information? if it was so knowledgeable, what did they do? really? mr. davis came up here and pointed to the 1988 surgeon general's report that came out to try to say that was another opportunity for mr. kerrivan to quit and the warnings? really? do you mean the '88 surgeon general's report that philip morris and r.j. reynolds and the tobacco institute and all that, the wheels of the conspiracy, all those organizations, the organizations that bought off the american medical association so that the surgeon general would not come out with warnings, that conspiracy? the one -- they came out -- and we showed you the news release and the press releases on the day when the '88 report came out. dr. grunberg remembered it vividly, said, "it is scare tactics. how dare you, surgeon general, say this is addictive." 155 then they went on in that report. they went further. they said, "you know what? you are just trying to scare kids. this is a bad thing for you to do to kids." why do you think in their, marketing when the '88 report came out, that they were so worried about how this information might affect kids? because it is ninety percent of their business. and the exit gates are starting to open and people are wanting to quit, just like mr. kerrivan. they go to congress in '94. they still lie. this idea of mr. kerrivan -- i mean, some of these things that they put on the board, you know, it is like, "i had a chronic cough from cigarette smoking," you know, a lot of that. now, some things, okay, i think -- i'm not going to say that everything they put up here is inaccurate or anything. i think they have got some interesting stuff from the evidence, and i think that is right. but the idea like "i had chronic coughing going forward due to cigarette smoking," that comes from his deposition testimony years later in this past year where he is looking back going "i had a cough. it was from cigarette smoking." there was not evidence out there that said in 1970 he can remember that that is what he was attributing it to. there was not evidence that it goes on and on and on like every day he is doing this. you heard evidence about this dr. grunberg could 156 only come up -- and mr. davis was very careful to pick his words -- that he could only give you two specific documented cases of quitting and that is because the answers to those questions involved around, yeah, the only documents we have are the medical records, because that is the only way we document something. so he pointed to those, where it said nicotine withdrawal and the patch. remember, dr. grunberg showed it, and i believe dr. gravelyn did as well, that he was being prescribed medication secondary to nicotine withdrawal. so those are the documented cases, but dr. grunberg went on and said he tried to quit several times from his interview with mr. kerrivan and from reading the deposition. and in the deposition, he said over and over how many times he tried to quit, and dr. grunberg relied on that, too. but he wanted to just only talk about where can you really prove it with documentation? well, okay, those are the medical records. but that does not mean that is the only quit attempts that he gave you evidence about. incidentally, what did dr. brodnan say? they did not talk about that part of his testimony, did they? dr. brodnan said, oh, yeah, he tried to quit with the gum. he tried to quit with acupuncture. he tried to quit with the nicotine patch, new year's resolutions. that was dr. 157 brodnan. is that documented enough? it was not just two quit attempts. then this idea that he just put them down, the characterization that mr. kerrivan just put them down in 2006 and cold turkey and that he is never had one since. okay? here is a man who takes an hour and a half to take a shower in his state today, and what he told you was, "when i finally quit in 2006, it was the hardest thing i have ever done." that is what he said from the witness stand. this idea that he just put it down, never craved it again, you know, never a problem, that is just not true from the evidence. that is just not what he said. by the way, you know, when the first warning came out in 1966, he is what? twenty-four years old, about? that is roughly ten years or so. he is already addicted. he is already addicted by this time. the filters, i do agree with ms. patterson that that is right. you know, she talked about the filters and the lights, and those were the marlboro. that is philip morris. philip morris had the filters that he relied on and the lights and low tars that he relied on, and that is their product and that is what they did. r.j. reynolds also made filter cigarettes and they also made light cigarettes as well. but the ones that mr. kerrivan smoked on filters and lights and low tars were sure 158 philip morris. i'm passing through stuff. oh, this idea of withdrawal, that there was no other evidence about withdrawal symptoms, do you remember i had to read the testimony for dr. grunberg that they did not read from his daughter, who said the times that he tried to quit, he was irritable? it was horrible. and do you remember she even went on to say, "i mean, i was finally, like, dad, you need a cigarette." what about that? did that just not make it onto the chart here, that testimony? that prior deposition testimony, it just did not make its way down here. mr. davis: your honor, there should be a limiting instruction for the nature of that testimony and what it came in for, given that argument. there was deposition testimony introduced during -- in cross-examination of dr. grunberg. the court: let us come over here at side bar. (bench conference as follows:) mr. davis: the objection, your honor, is that as argued, it was as if -- i think it was donna fletcher he was referring to or maybe karen, the other daughter. i think it was donna fletcher. it was as if she had testified and that i was asking and that testimony should be disregarded. the reality, as we discussed, i think, during dr. grunberg, is to the extent there was deposition testimony 159 used during his cross-examination. it was used and admitted solely for the limited purpose with the witnesses, non-party witnesses of -- that the jury could use it to evaluate his opinion. and i'm asking for a limiting instruction just to remind them. i think you gave them that instruction at the time that that argument was a disregard of that instruction. mr. byrd: no. i was talking about dr. grunberg as i'm making this closing argument. we are talking about dr. grunberg, and they were attacking his opinions he gave. and i said, "do you remember i had to read to him that this was something else?" i did not come in here and say, "donna fletcher said this." that is not what i'm saying, and i think it is completely fair to handle it the way i have when i'm addressing their attack on grunberg's opinion. that is how it came in in the evidence, originally. mr. davis: i've been where he is, and sometimes when i'm there, i cannot remember what i said either. but what he said was this is the testimony. this is what she said about withdrawal. it was not tied to dr. grunberg, and it should be -- there should be an instruction. the court: i'm going to give a very brief instruction, simply saying that you should remember that the evidence that donna kerrivan gave was not received as evidence. it was only received as evidence that was relied 160 on from formation of the doctor's opinions. mr. byrd: i just think that is a harsh and unfair instruction. the court: why? mr. byrd: because the same instruction was not given when he did his -- in his closing arguments, where he is talking about all of this stuff and what they relied on and what people said. i mean, i think you have already given the instruction and the evidence originally. it is unfairly -- i'm just playing by the same rules they are in closing argument, and it is kind of unfair to now give a limiting instruction. the court: okay. i'm going to give a limiting instruction on everyone and say to the extent that there is been argument about expert opinions and there have been references to out-of-court statements that were received for a limited purpose, the court simply reminds them that statements that were received for the sole purpose of support of expert opinions were not received as facts in evidence, but only for the limited purpose in forming expert opinions, which does not relate to anyone. okay? mr. byrd: thank you, your honor. (in open court.) the court: ladies and gentlemen of the jury, during the course of all of the arguments that we have had this 161 morning, there have been a number of references by a number of lawyers to facts that were received for the limited purpose of explaining the expert opinions -- opinion. they are from witnesses that, by and large, never appeared personally or testified. so those facts are not before the jury as facts to determine whether they are true or not because they were received only for the limited purpose of explaining the expert's opinion. so i've already instructed you on that before; and if there is any confusion, that is just important just to bear in mind that there is a class of evidence that we received that was only to explain why the experts hold the opinions they hold. and the mere fact that someone may have argued them during the course of the last three-and-a-half hours does not mean that you get to decide those facts are true for any purpose other than the limited purpose of explaining the expert's opinion. mr. byrd: thank you, your honor. the court: yes. mr. byrd: and let me go through a couple more things. you heard from mr. heimann in his video that people are justified in relying -- consumers should be justified in relying on their statements because cigarette companies give truthful statements. you heard that testimony. so the 162 companies told you themselves that people should be justified in relying on what these cigarette companies did. i heard both counsel -- i'm just going to cut this short. you also heard from dr. gravelyn that eight to ten pack years were enough, and you did not hear anything really from r.j. reynolds' counsel on the r.j. reynolds' brand issue that, you know, the significance of the fact of what did it do in contributing to the addiction, those early years, and how important that is, and i do not think we heard anything to counter that type of evidence. you know, one pack -- i mean, a lot of people have trouble remembering not only in advertisements but the exact years. i mean, i do not think anybody could sit there and, like, "i think i ate fruit loops in the '50s and then went in the '60s to the wheaties cereal." so not only did dr. -- i mean, listen to what mr. kerrivan said and you take him at his word. judge erickson has told you how to evaluate that testimony and whether things are something that are just, you know -- something that is hard to remember and no big deal or not a big deal. but i'll put mr. kerrivan's credibility up on the line before mr. gentry or mr. jupe any day of the week. and if you want to evaluate that, please do. i encourage you to do that. 163 but i'll say this: i think it would be a little bit strange if the one pack, that he supposedly remembers one pack as an actual pack, that that just happened to also be the one time he caught on the photo that we show you. i think he is remembering it because it was more use than that, and i think that is the only reason he would have been able to recall it years later. you know what? they did not tell you about -- ms. patterson talked about a lot of deposition testimony and things that he said, you know, about when he was being asked about his use of camel. i do not think she addressed -- do you ever wonder, like, why they were asking him about camel in the first place? how they knew to ask him about camel in the first place in those questions? camel and lucky strike. you will see some of the documents, if you review them; and i do not know the exact exhibit number. camel and lucky strike made up more than 50 percent of the market in these early years, in the '40s and '50s. everybody was smoking them. they were the largest brands around. it was the most popular brands. finally, i heard both counsel say that, "we are not here to criticize mr. kerrivan." and then they say, "but you do it. you put one hundred percent on him, but we are not here to criticize what he did." after all, he is a great customer for them. 164 "we are not here to criticize; but you, jury, you do it for us. put one hundred percent on that line." and you also heard from ms. patterson and mr. davis, you know, this concept of going back -- and i showed you the picture of young mr. kerrivan. this idea -- and they have gone back in their timeline, and they have gone back in their arguments to say back before he ever even started smoking, he knew better. he knew better. he should not have done it. he knew he should not have done it, and he knew it was wrong. and i want you to think. what that means is we are placing blame on a 14 year old, 15 year old, 16 year old. that is what they want you to do, and i would submit that we do not do that, not here. what they said was these are the arguments they made. now, you heard the evidence. you have heard the evidence about his living situation, moving in with his uncle, his father, his mother. you have heard the evidence that came in on that, and here's what they took from that evidence. they said, "well, you know, he was independent. he started smoking when he was already out on his own, when he was supporting himself." mr. davis: your honor, that is beyond the scope of rebuttal. mr. byrd: that is exactly what ms. patterson said, your honor. 165 mr. davis: and we are into pretrial-ruling land here, too. the court: i am concerned about where we are going with this. i just want you to be very careful, because i believe ms. patterson did say those words, and you are able to rebut that. but you have to be very careful about the court's previous ruling. mr. byrd: she said he was independent before he ever started smoking. he was out on his own supporting himself. and that is right, and that is what the evidence was, about 16 -- 14, 16-year-old mr. kerrivan. that is what the evidence was. what i'd like you to do is go take a look at exhibit 1302, it is the 2012 surgeon general report and read those pages about what the industry knew about young people starting to smoke, how they used it. leon del marco, i do not know who that guy is, but i'll tell you what. he started smoking for some reason. they are putting out ads teaching people how to inhale, and they understand peer pressure, and they use it. if you are not sure about that, do not take my word for it. go read exhibit 1302, excerpts from the 2012 surgeon general report and make your decision about whether the industry was doing these things intentionally or not, because they understand that ninety percent of their business comes from this type of age 166 group. but we do not dispute at all what miss patterson said. you betcha. he was on his own, and he was out supporting himself at that age. and, frankly, that is exactly what made him one of their greatest customers, because that is how they marketed, and that is what they want. they want people to grow up by starting to smoke when they are too young. thank you. and we will rest, your honor.