mr. davis: mr. kerrivan, counsel. may it please you, ladies and gentlemen of the jury. i want to echo on behalf of ms. skagerberg and myself our appreciation for your service and for your incredible focus and attention over the past two weeks as you have listened to the evidence. we appreciate that very, very much and thank you. now, obviously, i'm going to leave some time for ms. patterson to speak after i have a chance to talk with you. this is a case about kenneth kerrivan. it is not about smokers in general. it is about the decisions that mr. kerrivan made, his decision to start smoking, his decision to continue smoking despite knowing the health risks, and his 74 decision not to stop until he was motivated to do so. and to understand those decisions better, we have prepared a timeline, and i would like to walk through that with you to point out both some events in mr. kerrivan's life but also to point out information that was publicly and widely known. all right. folks, we know that mr. kerrivan was born in 1942. we know that he moved in with his uncle in '54. we know -- it is not on here -- that he remembers when he was seven some fighting between his mom and his dad about smoking. he remembers in retrospect it may have been about money. we know that he tried his first cigarette at about 1956 when it was given to him by his friend leon del marco at the bus stop, and he said he coughed and he hacked, and he testified to is that "i should have realized back then this is not for you." we know that in the late '50s and early '60s mr. kerrivan's uncle, who was a smoker, developed breathing problems, and that sometime around '58 or '59 mr. kerrivan started smoking every day. and he told us, i believe -- your recollection is what is important, but he testified that "a pack would last me three or four days" in that time frame. then he moved on into the '60s, and that is when he increased his smoking, i think, initially to a half a pack 75 and then on up. now, if you look at -- we also -- of course, he is not clear on the date, but we know mr. kerrivan's uncle ultimately died of lung cancer some time in the early '60s. now, dr. grunberg told you if you go way back in time, that scientists and investigators knew 100 years ago that nicotine was a drug and could be addictive. and we know that in the 1930s, the 1940s, the 1950s there were articles in reader's digest, one of the most popular, if not the most popular magazine at that time on health and addiction. we heard evidence of the 1953 study by drs. wynder and graham, the mouse skin-painting study. that was in '53. and that the next year, the gallop organization did a poll, and ninety percent of americans at that time had heard that smoking may cause cancer. then beginning right in that same time period, there were tv programs on smoking and health, like the see it now and edward r. murrow examples that -- and shows that we showed you. now, as we move into the '60s, let us start in the public arena. we know that there was the 1964 surgeon general's report. that was the first report, of course, on smoking and health. dr. proctor, i believe, called that report one of the beginnings of the end of smoking or end of cigarettes. 76 through the mid '60s there were psa's, public service announcements, on smoking and health. you may remember that we showed you in 1966 that psa, that famous poster, "congress has acted and the next step is yours." in 1966, the first warning went on the packs. this is the one that said, "cigarette smoking may be hazardous to your health." and then, again, the psa's began in the '60s, and i think we showed you one example which was the bill talman, he was the perry mason prosecutor, who said, "this is a case that i do not want to lose." then later there was the psa, i think it was a number of years later, but these psa's continued, and you saw the example of larry hagman, who was that famous actor from i dream of genie and from dallas, who was doing his explanation about that. we do know as well that between 1966 and 1970, during the time of that first warning, that 13 million americans had quit smoking. now, if we go up and see what is going on with mr. kerrivan during this time period, we know that in 1964 he marries cheryl and that his first child, karen, was born in 1965, a year later. he testified that he avoided smoking near her when she was a baby, because she was afraid the smoke, in his 77 words, might do something to her. beginning in about that time and throughout the '70s, mr. kerrivan worked for the john fray company. you recall the testimony that mr. fray did not like smoking and that every day he came onto the job site where mr. kerrivan was working and said, "them cigarettes are no good for you." so this was kind of a continuous daily message that he was getting as we go through this time period. now, he testified about the 1966 warning. he remembered that he saw that warning when it came out in 1966. he testified that that was the first time that he really understood that the surgeon general was saying that smoking is bad for your health. he did say he had reading problems, of course, but he was able to understand the intent and meaning of that warning. he told us that. he also in that same time period, about '66 forward, testified that he remembered the surgeon general saying on television that smoking is a bad habit, and you should quit. in 1967, and we talked a fair amount about this, this was when he had that incident where he picked up his mother to go to aunt anna's house. she was moving slow. he was trying to hurry her up. and she said, "i cannot move fast. i cannot breathe." and he knew at that point that she 78 had lung and breathing problems, and he thought they were related to her smoking. she was a smoker. now, it is unclear in the evidence whether it was right then that he knew she had emphysema. he suggested that she might have told him then, right in 1967, that she had emphysema. there was other testimony that would suggest that he did not associate that word with her breathing problems until sometime later. michael, the second child, was born in 1968. again, just to remind you of the time frames here, he was 22 when the first surgeon general's report came out. when that first warning came out, he was 24 years old. and then in 1967, he was 25. we move into the 1970s. just as the headline here on this, just to put the whole decade, mr. kerrivan testified that he did not want to quit smoking, and he did not try to quit smoking throughout the entirety of the 1970s. in 1970 -- we will go back to the bottom here, the public stuff below the black line. in 1970, there was a new pack warning, "warning: the surgeon general has determined that cigarette smoking is dangerous to your health." we know that in 1971 all cigarette advertisement on television ended. and the next year, the same surgeon general's warning went on all cigarette advertisements and other media, print ads, et cetera. 79 we know that by 1979, at the end of the decade, that 30 million americans had quit smoking and that throughout this decade smoking and health psa's, public service announcements, continued. we will go up and see where mr. kerrivan was. mr. kerrivan, in 1970, testified about that warning. he understands that a new pack warning is out and that it is a warning that cigarettes are bad for you, and he understood that, he told us, with every time he picked up a pack. he is still working for mr. fray in this time frame. at some point here he takes the other job working on glass. we are not quite sure when this happens, but it appears that he worked for mr. fray at some point in this period and then began working in the glass work that he did. in any event, once he started working in glass work, he testified that he had a chronic, all the time, what he called a "cigarette cough." that was his term. in 1972, his last -- his youngest, donna, was born, but that was also the year that he and his wife divorced. from 1974 on -- remember, by this time karen, who is the oldest, is in elementary school. from that point on, from the time she was in elementary school, mr. kerrivan tells karen not to smoke because he knows it is not good for her. 80 we move into the 1980s. he testified -- he testified that he was not highly motivated to quit smoking in the 1980s, but you also recall that when he testified here in court, apparently for the first time ever, he claimed what he called, his term, "spotty" attempts to quit in the 1980s. and he said he would make new year's resolutions. he did not specify which year. he did not tell us which new year's it was. and that he would quit for a week at a time. and where i got the "week" was his testimony that he would make the resolution. he would throw the cigarettes away, but a week later he would be smoking again. that is what he said. in any event, in the public sector, this was -- oh, this was the larry hagman, the dallas, i dream of jeannie. so you can see -- just to show you bracketing -- the consistency of these messages in the public, on television, et cetera. in 1985, this was where the rotating warnings came out. we showed you two of those. one that said, "quitting smoking now greatly reduces your health risks." the other specifically mentions emphysema caused by cigarette smoking. his chronic cigarette cough continues throughout this period while he continues to do work with glass. in the early '80s, he warns karen -- this is when she was a teenager. he smelled smoke on her. he said, "i 81 will make you eat a pack of cigarettes if i catch you smoking." we know -- there was some question about why dr. brodnan came. dr. brodnan came to make absolutely clear the importance of this 1982 date in this case. i think it is also supported by the chart that dr. gravelyn gave you, which is that if mr. kerrivan had quit smoking on or before 1982, the medical probability is that he would never have contracted copd. you heard that from him. and then from -- interestingly, mr. kerrivan, when we asked him about these warnings, he said he never understood those pack warnings, that he never saw the word "emphysema," that it never registered with him that quitting smoking -- that one of the messages was, "you need to smoke now and it will help your health." and he testified that from 1985, when those came out, all the way to 2006, when he quit, those warnings did not -- he just did not see them, did not pay attention to them or something. all right. then this moves us through to about 1991, 1992, when he moved to florida. all right. we are now in the 1990s. and this -- of course, again, just to repeat, he moved down here to florida, '91, '92. you remember the circumstances of that. karen had moved down a year or two before. she had -- he had a grandchild, first one. he came down to visit. he liked 82 florida. it was warm, a good place, a lot of people from new york do that. he came back. he came down and moved in, lived with karen and her husband -- fiance at the time, perhaps; i think it was fiance at the time -- for a while. he did some painting work with him. you remember, found out he was lazy and ultimately moved on in '74 to get the job with wimpy's wrecker service. but that is what got him down here to florida. he lived with her for a while and johnny sole. then moved out and found his own place. but in 1993, dr. stevens diagnoses mr. kerrivan with copd. he was very clear about that date. he remembered it very clearly. says, "you have got to quit smoking." again, for the first time, we believe, ever, he testified in this court that he quit immediately upon that. he testified that he quit cold turkey for two weeks. he also testified that he continued throughout the period of '93 to '96 to see dr. stevens about once a month, that every time he saw her, she told him to quit; that in that period, he quit a few times for as much as two weeks each. the wimpy's, the tow truck work that he testified about, began in 1994. his good friend, john howard -- dear friend i think he was characterized by counsel -- tells mr. kerrivan that, "hey, you know what? i have copd." and this is mr. kerrivan's recollection of what he was told in the 83 mid-'90s. "if you do not quit, it is going to kill you." at the same time, his co-worker, who may have been the boss, actually, at that outfit, developed lung cancer. he is the one that died. he was a smoker, just as mr. howard was. he developed lung cancer, and he is the one that died at an early age. and there was some suggestion in the evidence that when mr. frost died -- and this is jumping forward to about '06, '07 -- he was the boss at that time, and that is when the work ended because the company went away. in any event, i guess the point we would make about this is this was at a time after -- many years after he had been diagnosed with copd and had been continually told that your copd is caused by smoking, and you need to quit. the first -- dr. grunberg, having looked at all the medical records and interviewed mr. kerrivan, could find only two specific documented quit attempts. the first of these is in 1996 or '97. now, we know it was after 1996 because he was using the patch, and we know that the patch was not available without a prescription until '96. and mr. kerrivan told us that he did not need a prescription to get the patch. so he uses the patch, and he quit for a month. he testified that he does not remember being nervous or jumpy while wearing the patch. and after a month of no smoking, he did not smoke while he was using the patch, 84 he said that -- he made a decision to go back and start smoking cigarettes again and quit using the patch. and what he testified is, "if i'm not going to buy the patches, i might as well get the real thing." the period between 1996 and november 2005, which leads up to the next, second, and last, documented attempt to quit smoking, mr. kerrivan was regularly seeing his lung doctors. he is told over and over and over again that he must stop smoking for his health. but within this whole almost ten-year period, there is no additional documented evidence in any medical record of any quit attempt. in november -- and we are backdating a couple of months from the record that we have in january of '06. maybe i'll just start there. we know that in january of '06, this was when he had -- he was hospitalized for pneumonia. and he described that event where his friends -- where the emts came over. he had asked for oxygen, so the first time he had ever seen oxygen or used it. they brought one out of the truck. his emt friend came over and said, my god, kenny, you are about to die. we have got to get you in. he fought it. they gave him oxygen, and he went to the hospital. and it was in that event, in january of '06, that dr. campbell told him, if you do not quit smoking, you are going to be dead in six months. 85 but in that record, you recall, there is a reference that he had actually gotten pneumonia two months before. so we are backdating that to about november. and at the time he went into the hospital, he had not had a cigarette for two months. and so he got the pneumonia and quit -- actually quit smoking cigarettes in november of '05, but the pneumonia had progressed to the point that he was very sick and in the hospital in january '06. and it was at this point in his life that he testified that he made the decision to quit smoking. he did it cold turkey, no aid, no gum, nothing. and his words were, "i made up my mind i am not going to have a cigarette. i was determined i was not going to have it." and that was -- it was after that that you recall that he went back home. he got the stanley steamer folks in to do the rugs. he got the painters in to do the kilz, paint the walls. i think he got stanley steamer or somebody back to do the ac vents. he was trying to avoid any smell of smoke. he had the new truck that had never been smoked in, and he went out -- and a couple of nights he said he even slept there to avoid -- before it all got cleaned up so that he would not smell the smoke. 86 and he is now an absolute -- and since that time, is an absolute former smoker. really, since november of '05 and certainly since he made that decision in january of '06, mr. kerrivan has never had another cigarette. and he testified to us that he never felt like he needed another cigarette. and so we are now eight -- almost nine years from that event. we also know from just the numbers that as we get into our time frame today that 60 million smokers in our country have quit smoking. all right. one of the things i was going to play, and i think because of my desire to get us out of here before lunch, but i would like to remind you of it, is the power of that 1964 harry reasoner piece. i'm not going to play it again, but you saw it. that was the one that came out immediately after the 1964 report when cbs news did that special report and harry reasoner talked so poignantly, one of the most respected journalists at that time, about choice and the time now is what we know about smoking. but you do recall that. and i just mention it because it was emblematic of the incredible publicity that that 1964 report got when it came out. all right. i'd like now to turn to the verdict form. i'll put this down. i'll walk through a couple of questions with you on that. 87 the first question, as was pointed out, was mr. kerrivan addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine? now, in your instructions that judge erickson gave you, there is no legal definition of addiction. you are to decide this case. it is a question of fact for you, as judges of the facts, to decide based on all the evidence. now, there is no dispute that mr. kerrivan over his lifetime smoked a lot of cigarettes, but remember that dr. grunberg told us that not everyone who smokes cigarettes, even a lot of cigarettes, is addicted. so it is not enough in answering question one to simply know that he smoked a lot of cigarettes. they did bring you dr. grunberg, who testified that mr. kerrivan was addicted to cigarettes. and you remember that he did use a definition of that from the national institute on drug abuse, the nida, n-i-d-a, in which he characterized addiction, and it is characterized there, as a chronic relapsing brain disease. so how did dr. grunberg go about determining whether mr. kerrivan had a chronic relapsing brain disease? well, he first said that you cannot tell the difference between an addiction to a drug and a habit involving a drug unless somebody stops being exposed to that drug and to see whether or not you get withdrawal symptoms. so a key under the nida definition and dr. grunberg 88 is you have to have somebody stop their exposure to the drug, and then you look carefully to see whether they have withdrawal symptoms. he also told us that it is typical of an addicted smoker to have six or seven quit attempts before they are able finally to stop. now, we know there was no evidence whatsoever that mr. kerrivan quit at any time in the '60s -- tried to quit at any time in the 1960s and '70s. so there can be no evidence of withdrawal symptoms in that time. and mr. kerrivan raised the possibility through the testimony here about the new year's resolutions, that he may have quit for a week -- a few times in the '80s before he moved to florida, but he did tell us for sure that throughout the decade of the '80s, he was not motivated to quit smoking at any time in that period. and the thing, i think, that is significant here is that dr. grunberg had really -- really engaged this case. he testified about that. he looked at all the medical records. he read all the depositions of all the witnesses and family members that he testified about that had testified under oath before we came here to court. and he interviewed mr. kerrivan on the phone and spent time with him, asking him about his smoking, about his efforts to quit, et cetera. 89 dr. grunberg never said anything about new year's resolutions and quitting for a week during the '80s. he did not mention that at all. he also testified that the only two specific quit attempts that he could find from the evidence were the patch that we talked about in '96 or shortly thereafter -- and we say '97 because you know there is that medical record that mentions the patch. we know it was after '96. the patch, quit for a month, no smoking, "i might as well get the real thing," going back to cigarettes, and then jump forward to 2006 when he was told by dr. campbell, if you do not quit, you are only going to live for six months, and that is when he quit for good. that is dr. grunberg's analysis of his quit attempts. mr. byrd: objection, your honor. that misstates the testimony. the court: ladies and gentlemen of the jury, one of the things that happens when there are objections to misstating the evidence is that you need to bear in mind that you are ultimately the judge of what the evidence is and what it says. now, the lawyers are not free to misstate the evidence, but they do not have a perfect recollection as to what was said and when it was said either. and so what i tell juries all the time is that, 90 ultimately, if you think that what is been stated is not correct, that is your decision to make, because you are the judges of the questions of the fact, okay? and i'm not going to interject and say whether i believe that it is a misstatement or not, because i do not have perfect recall either. and so i'm just going to leave that all to you, okay? mr. davis: very good, your honor. and let me be clear what i'm saying. if you -- i would respectfully suggest to you that dr. grunberg never testified about any attempt or any quits that mr. kerrivan made on new year's resolutions during the '80s where he threw his cigarettes away and put them down for a week. but i agree; it is absolutely your recollection of the evidence that is important. i also respectfully suggest to you that the only two specific documented quit attempts that he could find in the record were the patch in '96, '97 and the final quit attempt in '06. now, as to the two specific quit attempts, the patch and the final quit in '06, dr. grunberg did not associate any withdrawal symptoms to the quits. he did not testify as to any specific withdrawal symptoms to the patch or to the quit -- the final quit in '06. what he did was he said that the salient example of 91 withdrawal was the incident when mr. kerrivan attended karen's wedding, and that is why that issue came up in the case, is that dr. grunberg pointed that out to you as one of the most salient, most vivid examples of what he thought was a withdrawal symptom from smoking. now, what he said -- he had read donna fletcher's deposition, the youngest daughter. and you recall he said -- his interpretation of that, that what she said was that mr. kerrivan was prevented from smoking at that wedding, and he got so mad and irritable that he could not smoke that he actually left his daughter's wedding. and he found that to be striking. but what he -- what he ignored was karen's testimony from her deposition where she testified that she asked her father not to smoke at her wedding reception, but he did anyway, and she let it go because the last time they had a fight about smoking, when he was at her house and blowing it out the door, the sliding door, they fought over it and that they did not talk to each other for two years. so her story was she let it go. then mr. kerrivan said that he did smoke at his daughter's wedding. he went back. he convinced her later to give him a cigarette. he was holding it down and that she saw him. she came up. they got in a fight about it and that he -- that he left at that point, and he did not speak to her 92 for -- he said he did not speak to her for quite a while but that ultimately, i think he said, she got over it. now, my point in all that is simply that dr. grunberg, i suggest to you, cherry-picked one version of a family story and took that story and presented it as an example of withdrawal, the most -- but it did not have anything to do with withdrawal from mr. kerrivan's own testimony. he was smoking. he was -- this was not a situation where he was prevented from smoking and had a fit and got crazy, and it is just a family dynamic. i mean, we know about the issues that he and his daughter had from karen's testimony. we know how he felt about her husband, who she was marrying then. it is just a family dynamic. that is all it is. and i suggest to you that that is not a reasonable or valid or credible story that deals with any real withdrawal. now, the other notable thing about mr. kerrivan's two documented quits is that he clearly did not relapse in either one. he has not had a cigarette since he quit in november of '06. he testified, as you know, that he has not felt the need for one. when he did use the patch in '97, he did not relapse because he -- it was not a situation where he said he had to have cigarettes and could not use the patch. what he told us was that, if i'm going to have to spend $45 a week for 93 patches, i might as well get the real thing. so that was simply a choice that he made to give up the patch, and i do not think he liked the brown spot on his arm anyway, and go back to cigarettes. so what is the answer to the first question? well, the burden of proof is on mr. kerrivan to prove that the answer "yes" is more probable than not. if you think the answer to that question is "no," then the case is over and we go. i would also note a couple of things about those quit attempts that he testified to in the '80s and in some of those others, is that dr. proctor told us about recall bias. mr. byrd: i object, your honor, to the testimony "and we go." mr. davis: i do not know what testimony i was referring to, your honor. the court: all right. here's the thing: i'm not sure exactly what the reference "and we go" was to. but the deal is, whatever you do on the jury verdict form is what you do that is on the jury verdict form. so you just follow the instructions. if you answer "no" to the question, there will be an instruction as to what you do there, all right? and that is what you should do. mr. davis: thank you, sir. so i was offering a couple of thoughts about the 94 testimony that mr. kerrivan gave for the first time here about those quits in the '80s and some of the other stuff that happened in the '90s where he was quitting for a week or so. dr. proctor talked about recall bias. he did it in the context of those -- what he called retrospective studies. and you remember those are the ones where you take sick people, those studies that were done, and you look back in time and you ask them about their experiences. and he said that those are questionable studies because when people are sick and look back, there is a recall bias in the data, that sometimes you are looking for somebody to blame, i think he said. i also would suggest to you that there is no evidence in this case -- no corroborating evidence of anything relating to mr. kerrivan's quits and indeed -- these quit attempts that he is talking about other than his testimony, no corroborating evidence from any other witness that would have known or seen that. and i also -- well, just that. okay. so let us move on to question two. question two, as i think miss london suggested and explained to you, is this: if mr. kerrivan was addicted to cigarettes, was his addiction to cigarettes a legal cause of his copd; yes or no? now, miss london dealt with this. i'm going to 95 deal with this a little bit, too, because this is -- this is an important instruction to both parties, as you know. the instruction that judge erickson gave you is, that to be a legal cause -- for addiction to be a legal cause of his copd, not a medical cause, a legal cause, he must prove that his addiction directly and in natural and continuous sequence produced or contributed substantially to producing his copd so that it can reasonably be said that but for the addiction, his copd would not have occurred. it is not just a substantial contribution. it is a substantial contribution such that you can say reasonably that but for the addiction, he would not have gotten copd. take away the addiction, no copd for any other reason. now, it certainly does -- there can be more than one legal cause, no question. no question there can be more than one legal cause. but that language -- and we ask so much of you. we ask you to be judges of the fact, and then we come in and we throw these legal things that law students struggle with to understand. we all do. but that language "but for, but for," that is the key language to what legal cause really means. and it is very different than medical cause of something. all right. 96 mr. byrd: objection, your honor. the court: "but for" cause is such that there may be more than one "but for" cause. i just want to make that plain. and i believe that was the nature of the objection. and to that extent, i will sustain the objection. but i've explained it, and you may go on. mr. davis: sure. it has to be a "but for" cause, and there can be more than one "but for" cause, i believe is what i was trying to express, your honor. the court: i believe you were. mr. davis: i apologize if i misstated it. every legal cause has to be a "but for" cause. there can be more than one legal cause. that is the law, as i understand it. all right. so even if you decide that mr. kerrivan was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine -- and remember what dr. grunberg told you. he testified that even addicted smokers can and do quit smoking. his words. it is challenging to quit if you are addicted, but it is possible. each and every day, he told us, thousands of smokers quit. 60 million people today have quit smoking. and recall that dr. grunberg said that eighty percent of those -- the overwhelming majority of those people who have quit were addicted. 97 now, you may be wondering, was mr. kerrivan in some way different than that eighty percent? is there a reason that he was unable to quit when so many others were? well, dr. grunberg answered that question when he testified, because he was asked and he said, "there is a class of people, there are people who simply cannot quit." but he also testified that mr. kerrivan was not one of them, and we know that because he did. that is what dr. grunberg said. he quit cold turkey. so the issue here is whether addiction -- his addiction was a but for cause of him not quitting earlier in time such that his copd -- to prevent him getting his copd. as i've mentioned, dr. brodnan -- dr. gravelyn in his chart, although it was not as clear, which is why i wanted dr. brodnan to say it straight up, if he had quit by 1982, before he was 40 years old, the science, the epidemiology is that the medical probability, the medical evidence is that he would not have developed copd. 1982. and we know -- i suggest to you that the evidence is that he never tried to quit smoking before 1982. and we know he was not motivated to try to quit smoking. and if there is no evidence that mr. kerrivan tried to quit before he was 40, then under dr. grunberg's definition, they cannot prove that addiction was a legal cause of him developing 98 copd. they are missing a link in the chain, and that missing link, the failure of proof, i suggest to you, means that the answer to question two is no. how can mr. kerrivan prove that his addiction was a legal cause of copd if he never quit or tried to quit? he never even tried to quit during that entire period where if he had, he would not have gotten copd at all. let us talk about that even one link at a time. he could have quit in 1966 or tried to quit and seen whether he was addicted, with withdrawal symptoms and relapse. he could have done that in 1966 when the first warning went on the packs, and he started hearing the surgeon general on television saying smoking is bad for you and you need to quit. he could have quit in 1967 when he had that very personal warning from his mother, that experience with his mother, with her lung problem, that he thought was related to smoking and that he either then or later learned was emphysema; in the 1970s, in the 1980s when he was repeatedly and strongly warning his own daughter that smoking is bad for her and addictive; between 1964 and 1979, any time in that period when the undisputed evidence is that 30 million people, 30 million americans quit. but he did not even try during that period. now, we also heard from dr. brodnan, and i think it 99 was on dr. gravelyn's chart, but again i wanted you to hear it straight up from dr. brodnan, if he had quit in 1993, if he had quit in 1996 -- '93, when he was first diagnosed by dr. stevens, 1996 when he went back -- and we had that first medical record, because that is our first medical record when they did the chest x-ray -- then he would not have developed clinically significant copd. and dr. gravelyn explained very clearly what the positive effects would be. why did not mr. kerrivan try to quit, really? well, it certainly was not because of the lack of information about the risk of smoking. we have talked about what he knew from his family, from his friends. we have talked about the public information. now, the plaintiffs -- dr. grunberg and dr. proctor, to some degree, suggested that if mr. kerrivan had only known about the science of addiction, he would have quit, but the fact that smoking is difficult to quit has been known for a long time, and it was known by mr. kerrivan. 60 million smokers have quit, but dr. grunberg testified that he has no evidence that any of those smokers understood the science of addiction, such things as about how nicotine passes the blood brain barrier, how the ph of smoke affects the free molecules in the smoke that comes out, how brain receptors work, how neurotransmitters work and all the other aspects of nicotine and brain science. 100 millions of people quit before that 1988 report in which the surgeon general said for the first time that smoking is addictive and not a habit. but millions of people quit. and there is no evidence that every one of those millions of people understood all the technical scientific information that dr. grunberg has spent a life studying and presented to you. so why did not he quit during the '60s or '70s or '80s? because he did not have any interest in it. what happened on the few occasions when he did try? he testified about this, and dr. grunberg testified to a few other, again not specific, not tied to any time frame but just generally mentioning. well, we know about -- we know about that he used the gum for a while for two or three days. we do not know of any specifics of that. he said he tried acupuncture, but he was smoking 15 minutes later. no time frame, no specifics of that. he told us under oath here that he tried hypnosis, but in his deposition he said he did not do it. the legal cause of him not -- of him continuing to smoke was his decision to smoke, not addiction. dr. grunberg told you that a smoker is not going to quit until he has decided he is going to quit. a person who is motivated to quit smoking, he told us, is more likely to 101 succeed than someone who is not motivated. determination is an important factor. the determination like he had in 2005 when he made up that very strong mind of his that he was going to stop smoking; when his doctor told him that if he did not quit smoking, he had only six months to live, and we know what he did. he made up his mind, i'm determined. i'm going to quit, and he stuck with it, and he did it cold turkey. he could have done those things earlier but he did not. now, let me take a step back. this is important. i know i speak for ms. patterson. nothing that i am saying is meant to convey any disrespect of mr. kerrivan or in any way criticize the decisions and choices he made. he had the right to make the decisions that he did about his smoking, about everything else that he did in life. he had the right to continue smoking if he wanted to. those were his decisions, nobody else's; but he is the one who is responsible for them. and as dr. koop -- we showed you that excerpt from dr. koop, that famous surgeon general, who said, as he was advising people, this is his words: "ultimately, you are the one that has control over your behavior. the cigarette is not going to light itself and jump into your mouth nor are you going to go into a brain-induced trance and light the cigarette. no matter how much you have smoked or how much 102 you like to smoke, the choice to light up is always yours." so i respectfully suggest to you that the answer to question two is "no." if mr. kerrivan had quit smoking, he likely would not have developed copd, and he has not proven that his addiction was a legal cause of his copd. there was some reference to question three. the only thing i would comment there is that i think there was a suggestion by ms. london that you can use the findings to decide question three. i encourage you to look at your instructions. and what you will find is that the findings do not come into play until after question three. you will see that in your instructions. i do want to spend some time with questions four through seven on what will be your verdict form, and these are questions dealing with concealment and conspiracy, concealment and conspiracy. i'll read the questions to you and then you will see them. question four says this: "please state as to each defendant whether kenneth kerrivan justifiably relied to his detriment on statements made by one or more defendants that concealed or omitted material information concerning the health effects and/or the addictive nature of cigarette smoking. and if so, whether kenneth kerrivan's reliance was a legal cause of his copd." 103 then question six, which is the conspiracy claim, says: "please state as to each defendant whether kenneth kerrivan justifiably relied to his detriment on statements made in furtherance of that defendant's agreement with other tobacco companies or entities to conceal or omit material information concerning the health effects and/or addictive nature of cigarette smoking. and if so, whether mr. kerrivan's reliance was a legal cause of his copd." now, let us talk about reliance. the question is, let us talk about reliance. did mr. kerrivan rely? we have heard a lot of evidence about what philip morris and r.j. reynolds did, and we have heard a lot of evidence about what the american public knew or did not know. but when you get -- if you get to this point in the verdict form, this is a question you have to answer about mr. kerrivan: what statements affected mr. kerrivan? what did he rely upon to his detriment? another thing to focus on is any reliance under the law must be justifiable. in other words, mr. kerrivan would have to justifiably rely on a statement that concealed or omitted material information about the health effects or addictive nature of smoking. judge erickson instructed you at the outset of the case, and you will have those instructions along with the ones he gave yesterday, that reliance is not justifiable if the 104 falsity of the statement was known to mr. kerrivan or was obvious to him. the plaintiff never brought you any evidence that mr. kerrivan heard any statement from a tobacco company, much less relied on any statement from a tobacco company. certainly nothing after may 5, 1982. now, the plaintiff's experts spent considerable time talking about how bad cigarettes as a product are and how bad the cigarette industry was. and if you get to this point in the verdict form, you will have that finding from that previous jury about the past conduct of the cigarette industry. that is as it goes. but there was never any connection in the evidence in this case to mr. kerrivan. and let me talk just for a moment, let me stop for a moment and talk about dr. proctor. one of the instructions that judge erickson gave you yesterday was specifically addressing the testimony of expert witnesses, and he told you that the law is this: "when a witness has been or will be paid for reviewing and testifying concerning the evidence, you may consider the possibility of bias and should view with caution the testimony of such a witness where court testimony is given with regularity and represents a significant portion of the witness' income." dr. proctor has made over $2 million testifying in tobacco trials, $1.7 million of that is in the last six 105 years. he is testified in 50 trials. this year he is testified 33 times, 17 in trials like this, six times in -- times in depositions. in the last five years, he is testified 130 times. he told you that a substantial portion of his income, it comes from testifying. the law says under these circumstances you should view his testimony with caution. and you can consider that and should consider that when you decide how much weight to give to his testimony, how much investment he is got. but even more important, perhaps, than the money is the other reason these experts are here. dr. grunberg told you that he wants all cigarettes containing nicotine removed from the market. dr. proctor told you loud and clear he wants cigarettes banned. and in one of the important motives for this work that he does, day in and day out, in courtrooms everywhere, is that he testifies to put cigarette companies out of business and to do that by convincing juries like you to award high verdicts to plaintiffs because that would provide an additional tax on cigarettes and push them towards being out of business. he does not know anything about mr. kerrivan. he did not read the first thing about him, never a deposition, 106 never a medical record. dr. gravelyn told you that he wants cigarettes taken off the market. these experts make it clear that they think it is simply irrational to smoke cigarettes because cigarettes carry risk. and even though we all make decisions every day about how much risk we are willing to take from the foods we eat to the way we drive cars to what cars we drive, we decide what level of risk we are comfortable with. and they make it sound irrational that cigarettes should even be legal. they want you to hate the product, but they are legal. it is the way we have -- it is the decision that we have made, and you have an instruction that the manufacture and sale of cigarettes is lawful. now, it is okay for these experts to -- mr. byrd: objection, your honor; improper argument. the court: approach at side bar here. (bench conference as follows.) mr. byrd: your honor, there is no other reason to be making this argument that we have decided in this country that cigarettes are legal and to read that part of the instruction only. i would ask for an instruction that regardless of whether they are legal or not, they still may be held liable for their conduct, and it is an improper 107 argument. we have an order on it. and it should not be made. and it gives them -- it gives the jury this idea that somehow the fact that they are legal -- this is argument on whether he should they should be held liable or not -- the defendants should be held liable or not. that is what the argument is all about. mr. davis: your honor, it is argument about the bias of these witnesses, which just can -- i'm done with that portion of it. it has to do with the bias of the experts. this is all argument about their bias. the court: so far what i heard was, in fact, tied to the bias of these witnesses. now, the fact that their legal product is in front of this jury, the fact that they could be held accountable for the sale of this little -- legal product is pretty plain to these jurors at this point. you are going to get a chance for rebuttal. if mr. davis goes back into this, i'm going to stop it, because i think whatever legitimate purpose is there -- and we are done with this part of it, because it is an area that is, in fact, fraught with danger. so we are done with this, and we will move on to the next thing. mr. davis: thank you. (in open court.) the court: you may proceed. 108 mr. davis: people do have different feelings about cigarettes and cigarette companies. dr. gravelyn, for example, said he saw value. he did not see value in it, but he saw others that did and recognized that others do. but the important thing is that those feelings are not something that you carry into the jury box. and you have made that commitment in your oath that whatever attitudes you have, all of which are fine to have, are not something that will drive your decision. the question here is about whether, first, mr. kerrivan actually heard and justifiably relied upon a statement of the defendants that omitted information, concealed information about the health effects of smoking or it is addictive nature, and whether that was a legal cause of his smoking. now, you know that nothing a tobacco company did affected or said affected mr. kerrivan's decision to start smoking. let me turn very briefly to advertising. dr. proctor showed you ads, and he talked to you about advertising, but what is the evidence with respect to mr. kerrivan? what does that have to do with him? we know that mr. kerrivan did not start smoking because of ads. he started smoking because his friend leon del marco at a bus stop was a smoker, gave him a cigarette, 109 taught him how to inhale. we know that ads did not influence his brand choice. you heard he was not -- he testified he was not paying attention to marlboro ads because he knew what he wanted and he wanted marlboro. he wanted them, he told us, because everybody else was smoking them, and he liked the way they taste -- tasted. he liked the cigarette. and the fact is that the evidence is that mr. kerrivan chose and based his decisions on what cigarette to smoke based on his experience using the product, not looking at ads. he only smoked the brands that he liked the taste of. and if he did not like the cigarette, he would move on and he would not buy that brand again. now, take that story about kools. he remembered the ad with the penguin, and i think that was one of the ads that dr. proctor showed you. and he remembered it. but he said he tried the cigarette. he thought it might be easy on his throat, but he tasted one cigarette, and he hated it. he called it a joke cigarette. he said it tasted like a york peppermint pattie. and he threw away the rest of the pack and never smoked another one. mr. kerrivan was not relying on any cigarette advertisements to decide what brands to smoke. and we know he did not smoke lights because of ads. there was never a television ad at all for marlboro lights. and when we asked 110 him whether he could remember any advertisements for light cigarettes, he said he could not remember. we know that mr. kerrivan knew from way back when that smoking was dangerous. we went through all those dates on the timeline. and he admitted that he heard cigarettes were dangerous when all the warnings went on the packs in 1996. mr. kerrivan did not rely on anything philip morris or r.j. reynolds said because he already knew from his experiences in life that cigarettes were dangerous. he knew that cigarettes could be dangerous to his health both before and after 1982. and let me talk about one other theory that was alluded to. and somehow, plaintiff suggested to you that philip morris that makes marlboro lights fooled mr. kerrivan into switching to lights, that the word "lights" on the pack and the representation on the pack that it has lower tar and nicotine somehow defrauded him. now, the plaintiff's experts, and you heard them, testified that one of the reasons that they think light cigarettes are generally misleading is that smokers assume they are safer. but this case is not about smokers in general. it is about mr. kerrivan. mr. kerrivan never testified, and there is no evidence in this case, that he switched to lights because he 111 thought they were safer. he was asked, in fact, by miss london if he thought if he switched to lights, he would get less bad stuff; and he said no. he testified that he switched to lights, again, at some point. there is no tie in time to any of this. we just do not know. no specificity at all about when he smoked lights. but he switched at some point, we do not know when, because he thought they had less tar and nicotine, and he thought they would help him quit. there is no evidence that any tobacco company ever said anything to mr. kerrivan or that mr. kerrivan saw anything or heard anything from a tobacco company that if you switch to light cigarettes, it will help you quit. and we know from mr. kerrivan's experience that he understood the lights and ultra light cigarettes that he did smoke did have less tar and nicotine. how do we know that? because mr. kerrivan told us that immediately when he switched to light cigarettes, he smoked more cigarettes. he immediately knew that they were not helping him quit. and then when he went from -- he went from marlboro lights to marlboro ultra lights because he said he was looking for a lighter cigarette. and he smoked even more ultra lights than he smoked lights. and he realized this is not helping me quit, and he testified then he went back and smoked marlboro reds, now, 112 again, the regular cigarette. and again, there is no evidence in this. but, folks, he got exactly what he bought and was looking for. he got a cigarette with lower tar and nicotine, and he smoked more of those to get the nicotine that he wanted and to get, as he described it, the kick that he wanted. all right. i think he said that he smoked about a pack a day more with the lights and that it went up even more with the ultras. and then when he went back to the reds -- the ultras, he said he was getting nothing out of them. do you remember that testimony? then he went back to the reds, and he was smoking a lot fewer cigarettes. now, dr. proctor, who has never designed a cigarette in his natural life, told you that lights do not work because people do not smoke like robots. they cover up the vent holes. they get just as much tar and nicotine from lights as they do from regular cigarettes, that whole thing of compensation that makes them dangerous and unsafe. whatever that may be for somebody else's case, that is not mr. kerrivan. he got much less tar and nicotine from the lights he smoked. he knew it. he recognized it consciously. he knew immediately that is what was happening. he smoked more of them to get what he wanted, and then he went back to the 113 reds. he was not fooled by light cigarettes. he understood he was smoking more. it is like buying light beer and drinking twice the amount and saying, i'm still getting the same amount of calories. you would know that. there is not evidence in this case of mr. kerrivan being defrauded by a statement from philip morris about light cigarettes. and the other thing is that he never testified at all that he switched to light cigarettes instead of quitting. he never said he went to the -- he said he went to the lights and the ultra lights because he believed, for whatever reason, but certainly not from a tobacco company, that it would help him quit. and he knew instantly, as i say, they were doing just the opposite because he was smoking more. so what reliance -- no reliance there. so let us go back and think about what mr. kerrivan and what he knew about smoking. he knew smoking was dangerous from the time the first warnings went on the pack. all cigarettes had the same warning, regardless of the brand. and he was being told to quit smoking by his doctors, regardless of what brand of cigarettes he was smoking. he knew what he needed to know about the risks of smoking. there is no evidence in this case that he relied on any statement -- justifiably relied from any statement to 114 make the decisions he made. and remember that even if he justifiably relied on a statement, that reliance has to be the legal cause of his copd. and it is the same definition -- i think miss london mentioned this. it is the same definition of legal cause that you see in the other instructions. it means that if the legal cause -- if something is a legal cause of a person's injury, it means but for that something, the injury would not have happened. and in this context, what that means is even if you could find that mr. kerrivan justifiably relied on a statement from a tobacco company, the question is whether he would have quit smoking and avoided his copd if only he had not relied on that statement. and there is no evidence, as i've discussed, that mr. kerrivan would have quit at any time had he heard something different from a tobacco company. there is no evidence that mr. kerrivan made any decision about his smoking in reliance on any anything that philip morris and r.j. reynolds said, and there is no evidence that he would have quit smoking were it not for that reliance. mr. kerrivan was not waiting to hear something from philip morris or r.j. reynolds to tell him what he had known for decades, that smoking is dangerous to your health. so i respectfully suggest to you that your answer 115 to questions four through seven on the verdict form must be "no" based on the evidence in the case. plaintiff has failed to prove that mr. kerrivan justifiably relied, to his detriment, on any allegedly misleading statement made either before or after 1982 or that his reliance was a legal cause of his copd. question eight deals with comparative fault. i do not know if you will get to this question; but if you do, then you have to decide what percentage of fault you allocate to mr. kerrivan, to philip morris and to r.j. reynolds. the court has instructed you that mr. kerrivan's own acts or omissions are a legal cause of his copd, a legal cause. but as you think about this question, i suggest to you the question is, who was making the decisions? all of plaintiff's experts told you that it is up to the smoker to try to quit. mr. kerrivan never tried to quit in the '60s and '70s. he says he was not motivated to quit in the '80s. folks, all that other testimony about the quits that we all heard for the first time in this court, recall bias, sometimes when you look back as you get along in age, you wish things had happened differently to the point that you think they did. and dr. grunberg, after all his review of the record and interview of mr. kerrivan, found only two specific 116 documented attempts that we have talked about: the patch and the final quit. and when he did decide to quit, he was able to quit both times, both with the patch and the final quit. if you get to this question, the evidence suggests that you should attribute one hundred percent of the fault to mr. kerrivan, because he was the only person that could have made the decision to quit smoking. he was the only person who could have made the effort to quit. his smoking decisions were his. question nine deals with damages. and if you get to question nine, you are going to be asked to award some amount of damages. i cannot tell you how to answer this question. mr. byrd has asked you to award $10 million. it is an arbitrary number. it comes from nowhere, the best i can tell. and it is a lot of money. and i'm going to remind you of judge erickson's instructions here. compensatory damages must not be based on speculation or guesswork. only actual damages are recoverable. there is no claim in this case for medical expenses. there is no claim in this case for lost earnings. the damages that he is seeking, as mr. byrd showed you in that instruction, are from injuries -- damages like his injury and the resulting pain and suffering and mental anguish from his 117 injuries. now, no matter what number mr. byrd has asked you for, judge erickson has instructed you that any compensatory damages you should award should be the amount you, as the judges of the facts, find to be justified by a preponderance of the evidence as full, just and reasonable compensation for all of plaintiff's copd damages. no more and no less. as judge erickson has told you, compensatory damages are not allowed as punishment and must not be imposed to increase or penalize -- they must not be imposed or increased to penalize r.j. reynolds or philip morris. question ten. this last question on your verdict form, if you get there, is going to deal with punitive damages. and the first thing i want to be sure is that everybody understands exactly what is at issue there. and if you reach that point, what you are asked to decide is whether, under the circumstances of this case, mr. kerrivan may be entitled to more money for punitive damages. if your answer is yes, then as we have discussed, there will be another phase of the trial. there will be more evidence. there will be arguments. and you will have a separate deliberation on the amount, if any, that you award. so at this stage, it is not -- the amount of punitive damages is not for your consideration. what you are to focus on is whether the plaintiff 118 has proved to you by clear and convincing evidence that he is entitled to punitive damages, whether he is entitled to more money beyond what he receives, if he does receive any, for compensation. now, when you look at the instructions, you will see that clear and convincing evidence is defined. it is a much higher standard of proof than preponderance of the evidence. with respect to punitive damages, you will see this language: "the evidence must be compelling and persuasive. it has to be precise, explicit, lacking in confusion and of such weight that it produces a firm belief or conviction, without hesitation, about the matter in issue." it is a much higher standard. i think you heard that. you have to be really, really convinced that punitive damages are appropriate. and let me tell you something else. you have to decide, if you get there, that punitive damages are warranted based on the conduct that harmed mr. kerrivan, not the general public, not the rest of the world, not to all other smokers. mr. byrd: objection, your honor. that is not exactly true. the court: you may approach. let us talk about it 119 at sidebar. [#deleted sidebar#] mr. davis: folks, let us go back to punitive damages. the starting point for your determination, the starting point of punitive damages, is to look at the conduct that caused harm to mr. kerrivan. and then, as you know from the instructions, you move on to those other questions in the verdict form -- i mean, in the instructions that deal with the other issues. that was my only point. if you look at those instructions, that is where you start. it is not necessarily where you end. the instructions say what they say. now, let me suggest to you that as to punitive damages, this is a high standard that plaintiff has not met. there is no evidence that mr. kerrivan always had the -- there is evidence that mr. kerrivan always had the information he needed to make an informed decision about whether to try -- to continue smoking or whether to try to quit. mr. kerrivan did not rely on anything from the tobacco companies to make his decision to start smoking or to continue smoking. i respectfully suggest to you there is no clear and convincing evidence in this case warranting the imposition of punitive damages on philip morris or r.j. reynolds. and i respectfully suggest that the answer to that question is no. 126 i want to wrap up by thanking you for your diligence and your patience. this is an important case to mr. kerrivan. it is an important case to r.j. reynolds and to philip morris. we absolutely respect mr. kerrivan's right to bring this case. i've been part of this system for 40 years. i am very proud to be in a system where an individual citizen can bring two big companies into federal court and make a claim in a case against a jury drawn from the community. i'm very proud of that. and that system works because we have -- we go through the process that we went through a week from last monday to select folks that can absolutely decide the case without bias or sympathy or prejudice or sentiment; and when that happens, whatever the outcome, the result is the truth and the result is justice. i stood up in opening. the first thing i said to you, and the things i've said today is that this case is about mr. kerrivan. i respectfully suggest to you that he has failed to prove his case. he has not proved his addiction was so strong that but for that addiction, he would have quit smoking and avoided his injury. he has not proved that, because when he made up his mind to quit, he quit. now, i do not get a chance -- because the plaintiff has the burden of proof, this is the last time that i will 127 have a chance to talk with you. ms. patterson will make her presentation on behalf of reynolds, and then mr. byrd gets a chance to make a rebuttal presentation, and that is the process since they have the burden of proof. so i'm not going to have a chance to get up and offer any more thoughts, but i would ask that maybe as you are listening to mr. byrd, you do not know what he is going to say, you might think, "i wonder what mr. davis might ask or say if he were listening to this and had a chance to talk," and i do not know, but you know what i'm guessing it would be? what on earth does this have to do with mr. kerrivan? now, mr. kerrivan is the only person in the world who can make a decision to smoke or try to quit. those were his decisions that he made during his lifetime knowing the risk of smoking, and those decisions should not be disrespected or second guessed in this courtroom. those were his decisions. and it is those decisions, though, that he is seeking as the basis for you to award him a substantial amount of money. i truly appreciate the opportunity to have made this presentation. i thank you for your attention. thank you for all your hard work. it is been a real privilege to try this case in front of you. thank you. ms. patterson: may it please the court. counsel. good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. it is a pleasure to speak with you all again on behalf of r.j. reynolds tobacco company. first, i want to join the others in sincerely thanking you for your service. i want to thank you personally and on behalf of my client. now, during opening statements, i said that you would not hear from me a lot during this trial, and the first reason was because mr. davis was going to go first and cover the main points, and i wanted to be respectful of your time and not waste it. 129 now, mr. davis just thoroughly walked you through the evidence, and what he said applies with equal force to reynolds. so i'm not going to repeat that. but you also did not hear from me a lot during this trial because mr. kerrivan only smoked reynolds' products for a very brief amount of time. and that is very important, because the law requires you to determine whether smoking reynolds' cigarettes legally caused mr. kerrivan's copd. the evidence has shown that reynolds' cigarettes did not contribute substantially to mr. kerrivan's copd because he would have developed copd, even if he would never touched a reynolds' cigarette, and because the amount of reynolds' cigarettes that he smoked was not enough to cause his copd. so i want to focus on that this afternoon. the evidence has shown that to the extent mr. kerrivan smoked reynolds' cigarettes, it was very brief, and it was a long time ago. and mr. kerrivan's reynolds smoking was only a very, very small part of his total smoking. it did not substantially contribute. so mr. kerrivan talked about two reynolds' brands. he talked about lucky strike, and he talked about camel. we heard that mr. kerrivan had made the decision to smoke before he ever smoked a reynolds' brand. before he ever smoked a reynolds' brand, he had already been smoking with his friend leon del marco, and he had already started 130 stealing cigarettes from his uncle, those l&m cigarettes. we heard that mr. kerrivan smoked his first lucky strike after he had already moved out of his aunt and uncle's home. he was living on his own. he was supporting himself. he was working, and he was earning a living installing aluminum siding. now, mr. kerrivan's testimony about how much and how long he smoked reynolds' cigarettes is very conflicting. there is what he said under oath at his deposition before trial ever started, and then there is what he said this week at trial. and i want to talk about that. but before i do, i want to be very, very clear about something. i'm talking about mr. kerrivan's testimony because he brought this lawsuit, and he is asking for money damages, but nothing i say is intended in any way to criticize mr. kerrivan. now, before trial, mr. kerrivan answered questions at something called a deposition, and you have heard a little bit about depositions from judge erickson here at trial. and he is told you that at a deposition, the witness is sworn under oath, and he is sworn to tell the truth, and that is just like if he were in a courtroom where we all are here today. and we asked mr. kerrivan about his reynolds smoking, and that was our chance to find out the facts before this trial ever started. 131 and it was mr. kerrivan's chance to tell his story. but once we got to trial, we heard something very, very different than what we heard during his deposition, and that is why i played the deposition testimony for you all, so that you could hear it for yourself. now, the judge has instructed you about evaluating a witness' credibility. and when you make determinations about a witness' credibility, one of the things that you should ask yourself is whether there is evidence that at some other time a witness said something that was different from the testimony the witness gave at trial. now, mr. kerrivan's testimony at trial was very different than that sworn testimony that you saw at his deposition. there is no question about that. and judge erickson has also told you that the significance of your decision may depend on whether the misstatement is about an important fact or about an unimportant detail. let me be very, very clear about this. the amount of reynolds smoking that mr. kerrivan did is a very important fact to my client. so with that in mind, let us talk about mr. kerrivan's reynolds smoking. start with lucky strike. now, when mr. kerrivan's lawyers asked him at trial, he said he initially smoked lucky strike for a couple 132 years. he said maybe even four, but he did not seem sure. so on cross-examination, i had a chance to ask him, "are you sure it was not just one year of lucky strike? you testified at your deposition that you smoked lucky strike for one year." and that was under oath. and he said, "okay. one year sounds about right." i suggest that the evidence about mr. kerrivan's lucky strike smoking was that he only smoked lucky strike for about one year. now, let us talk about camel. when mr. kerrivan was asked by his lawyer at trial, he said, "i'd be guessing. i probably smoked camels for -- maybe i smoked them for ten years." this was a huge change in mr. kerrivan's testimony, and that is why i showed it to you all so that you could see it for yourself. so on my cross-examination, i asked him about that, and i asked him about the fact that at his deposition he said he only smoked one pack of camel. and mr. kerrivan said, "you misunderstood me. i smoked one pack a day, not one pack total." so let us see if that explanation makes sense. on cross-exam, i played mr. kerrivan's deposition about camel, and the very first question was -- mr. byrd: objection, your honor; local rule, 133 transcript reading. can we approach? the court: yes. (bench conference as follows.) mr. byrd: the middle district of florida is clear, and the judges in this district have been very strong on us and harsh on us that you cannot read from transcripts in closing argument. it is a clear rule. and it may sound like a strange rule to your honor, but it has been vigorously enforced on both sides, and that is what the middle district of florida rules say. the court: does someone have a copy of this local rule? it. mr. byrd: i'm sure ms. patterson agrees it says ms. patterson: the local rule says that you are not allowed to put testimony up on the screen or suggest to the jury that they should request the testimony to go back. mr. byrd: i think it is stronger than that, but i guess we need a copy of it. mr. davis: just for my own take on this, i agree that there are rules of procedure in the local rules of where you stand, where you sit, what you say. there is a pretty detailed set of those. but i do not think you are bound by it. i honestly do not. i think this is fargo, north dakota, your honor. i 134 mean, honestly, this is your decision, how you run your courtroom. these judges, it is a matter of their local process of -- i'll tell you they have gotten pretty persnickety about a bunch of stuff in there, and we do not tend to worry about that too much with a visiting judge because we kind of follow what the visiting judge wants us to do. so i think this is what your practice is. i mean, there will be something on this. i have not thought about this much, but there will be something in here, but it is your call. mr. byrd: i honestly did not think they would do it. we have had several judges come down on us about this. i did not have to have the rule. mr. davis: district judges will try you. i've had it. other day. mr. byrd: judge dalton, we had to hear from the the court: one at a time. mr. davis: judge dalton is very strict about some of this stuff. mr. byrd: that is why i do not do it. i mean, i would have done it. the court: i wish somebody would have brought this local rule to my attention before, because i think that would 135 have come up with a very different ruling. i would have said, "i just do not buy that rule." here's what i think you can do. you can paraphrase the testimony. you should not read it, because i think at this point if it was a local rule -- it certainly is a local rule -- people would have -- may have relied on it, and it is just not quite kosher. so that is how i see it. ms. patterson: okay. i can rephrase it. (in open court.) the court: you may proceed, ms. patterson. ms. patterson: so after -- after mr. kerrivan was asking if he ever smoked camel -- he was asked a simple question that was an open-ended question. i did not suggest an answer. he did not even ask how much or how long or how many. i just asked him: "did you ever smoke camel?" and i respectfully suggest that mr. kerrivan's testimony was that he tried. he tried them, and that was mr. kerrivan's opportunity to say that he smoked camels for a long time. that was his opportunity to say that he smoked camel for ten years, but he did not say that. all he said was that he tried. so let us think about those words for a minute, "tried." you do not try something for ten years. that is like the difference between going out and test driving a car. you go to the dealership. you do a test drive. you try it out 136 versus going out and buying a car, driving it every single day, and then keeping that same car for the next ten years. that is not trying something. now, the next question that he was asked, he asked how long was he smoking these camel cigarettes, and that is where mr. kerrivan said maybe one pack. and then you saw the deposition that was played, and i believe that it said something to the effect of, "so all the camel cigarettes that you smoked, it was just the one pack?" then again mr. kerrivan said, "yes." so that was the second opportunity for mr. kerrivan to tell you that he smoked camel for any substantial amount of time. that was the second opportunity for mr. kerrivan to tell you that he smoked camel for ten years. mr. byrd: objection to the deposition, what depositions are intended for, for opportunities or not, for the witness. the court: all right. i'm going to overrule the objection. on. i think it is been covered, though. you may move ms. patterson: okay. and then i also showed some testimony and asked mr. kerrivan some questions about the progression of his 137 cigarettes, the cigarettes that he smoked. and mr. kerrivan was asked about lucky strike smoking and about what the next cigarette that he smoked after lucky strike was, and that was marlboro. that was another chance to hear something about camel that we did not hear. i also showed another videotaped deposition clip, and during that part, we were asking mr. kerrivan about his regular brands; and we heard about lucky strike and we heard about marlboro and we heard about marlboro lights, but there was no mention of camel. so all that we heard prior to the testimony this week from mr. kerrivan was that he smoked one pack of camel. so four times under oath at his deposition he did not tell us anything other than the fact that he smoked one pack of camel. now, that is a summary of the extent of the testimony about mr. kerrivan's brands that he smoked made by my client. and mr. kerrivan's reynolds smoking did not substantially contribute to his copd. and i believe that there are a few different ways that you can come to that determination. first, you can believe mr. kerrivan's sworn deposition testimony when he said four times under oath that he only smoked camel for -- one pack of camel and that he 138 only smoked lucky strike for about a year. i believe that that is the best and the most supported view of the evidence. or you can accept mr. kerrivan's trial testimony, only his trial testimony, in which case the reynolds cigarettes still do not substantially contribute. according to mr. kerrivan's own treating doctor, dr. shah, he did not smoke enough reynolds cigarettes to contribute to his copd. and you also heard that he would have gotten copd even if he never smoked reynolds cigarettes. or perhaps you think mr. kerrivan was just confused, that he cannot remember how long he smoked camel. and while it may be difficult for mr. kerrivan to remember something from a long, long time ago or, really, for any of us to remember something from a long, long time ago, we are in a courtroom; and mr. kerrivan is suing to recover money. and you have heard judge erickson say it. we have all said it here. mr. kerrivan has the burden of proof. and hazy memories are not enough. only proof is. so however you choose to view the conflicting testimony that you heard in this courtroom from mr. kerrivan, i just do not think it has been proven that he smoked any significant amount of reynolds brands. mr. kerrivan only smoked a small amount of my client's brands, and he has not met this burden. so any way 139 you slice it, the reynolds smoking was a very, very small part of the total smoking. now, why is this so important? why are we talking about this? it is because of something called legal cause. now, as judge erickson has already told you, one of the issues that you are going to have to decide in this case is whether plaintiff proved to you that smoking reynolds cigarettes was a legal cause of mr. kerrivan's copd. and in judge erickson's instructions, he is told you what legal cause is. it is not a plain cause like you and i might use the word. it is a word that has special legal significance. there is a legal definition. do we have that up on the screen? thank you. i'm not going to reread this because you have heard a lot about this instruction here today, but i have highlighted a few things that i want to talk with you about as we move forward. so, first, let me show you where this fits in on the verdict form. this will be question three. and again, i'm not going to go over the things that mr. davis has already talked with you about. for the reasons that he is already told you, we do not think that you should even get to this question, that you should answer "no" to the first two questions. but if you get here, this is where you will need to decide whether 140 cigarettes smoked by mr. kerrivan made by my client was a legal cause of mr. kerrivan's copd. and as you know, plaintiff has the burden of proof. he has the burden to prove that reynolds cigarettes legally caused or substantially contributed to mr. kerrivan's copd. plaintiff did not meet that burden. he did not prove his case against reynolds. and that means that you check "no" to reynolds on question three, and you do not answer any more questions on the verdict form as to reynolds. so there are two things that i would ask you to think about when you are looking at this question. and the first thing is the limited amount of reynolds cigarettes that mr. kerrivan smoked, and that is what i just went over with you. but i'd also like you to think about substantial contribution in terms of pack years. and you have all heard about the concept of pack years several times throughout this trial, and it is the amount of cigarettes that a person smokes multiplied by the number of years that they smoked. and in filling out this verdict form, you should know how many packs of reynolds brands mr. kerrivan smoked compared to the rest of his smoking. so you heard from dr. grunberg and dr. shah, and they told you that mr. kerrivan had 150 pack years total. you also heard from dr. gravelyn, and he said he 141 was not quite sure, but it was more than 100 pack years. so we are talking about a lot of pack years here, and that is of all the of the brands that mr. kerrivan smoked. it is all of his smoking combined. but how much of that is reynolds? depending on which version of the story that you believe from mr. kerrivan, he smoked one, maybe up to four packs of -- or four years of lucky strike. and when he was smoking lucky strike, he was smoking less than a pack a day. that is where you heard about he was only smoking about five cigarettes a day, and maybe at some point he got up to a half a pack, and then he said maybe he got up to one pack. so if you fully accept mr. kerrivan's trial testimony only, then maybe you get four pack years from the lucky strike. but i respectfully suggest that the evidence shows that there was no more than one pack year total of the reynolds brands. now, even if you were to accept that mr. kerrivan smoked ten years of camel at one pack a day, that is still just ten pack years. and keep in mind, that is only if you accept everything that plaintiff said here at trial and that you completely disregard the earlier four statements under oath that he told you about camel. 142 so whether you believe mr. kerrivan smoked one pack year or 11 pack years or 14 pack years of reynolds smoking, out of the 150 years total, the reynolds smoking is just not substantial. now, the second thing i'd ask you to think about when looking at this question is dr. shah's testimony, and you only needed to hear from dr. shah on this. this was mr. kerrivan's own doctor. and he told you that there is a certain threshold that is required before someone develops copd. and he told you that that threshold was 20 pack years. and i believe that the best and the most supported view of the evidence is that mr. kerrivan only smoked one pack year of reynolds, and that is it. but if you only accept mr. kerrivan's trial testimony, he had, at the very, very most, a 14 pack year history of reynolds, and that is it. that does not meet the burden. that does not meet the threshold that dr. shah told you was required, his own doctor. now, judge erickson has talked to us about common sense. we talked about it during jury selection. and he told us that common sense is important and that you should filter all the evidence using your common sense. you should not check it at the door. the evidence showed that mr. kerrivan's reynolds 143 smoking was a very small part of his 150 pack years of smoking. now, you also heard that mr. kerrivan's other 100 plus pack years that he smoked were more than enough to cause his copd. and that is regardless of whether he smoked any reynolds product. so let me show you where that fits in with judge erickson's instructions. so we are going back to the legal cause instruction that we have talked so much about, and the key words here are going to be "but for." so what that means is, would mr. kerrivan have still developed copd even if he never smoked a reynolds product? so let us see if it fits. you heard the evidence. you heard that the other 100 plus pack years of smoking non-reynolds products is more than enough to cause the copd. in fact, you heard from dr. shah that you are at a significantly increased risk once you reach even 40 pack years. so there is no question that reynolds smoking was not a "but for" cause. he would have developed copd anyway, based on his other smoking. now, i'd also like to briefly address what plaintiff's medical expert, dr. gravelyn, said. and i stood here during opening statements, and i asked you to focus on 144 the term "substantial." so i do not think it is any surprise to anyone here that i'm talking to you right now about substantial contribution. so when we moved through trial and we were talking with dr. gravelyn, he was asked if all of the cigarettes contributed to mr. kerrivan's copd. and use your -- use your own recollection of what you heard about the testimony and what you heard in the evidence, but i'd respectfully suggest that he was not asked whether the reynolds cigarettes -- whether all cigarettes substantially contributed. he was simply asked were all the cigarettes -- did they all contribute? and contribute is not the legal standard. the legal standard is substantially contribute. if there was any evidence that smoking reynolds products substantially contributed to mr. kerrivan's copd, you would have heard it from plaintiff's own expert, but you did not hear it from dr. gravelyn. plaintiff did not meet his burden of proof on this issue. now, you also heard a lot about addiction and being part of a continuous chain, but that is not true for reynolds. mr. kerrivan was not destined to get copd after he just smoked his first cigarette. that is not a direct or continuous chain. reynolds cigarettes did not directly and in natural 145 and continuous sequence cause mr. kerrivan's copd because mr. kerrivan could have quit smoking, and we know that he could have quit because he did. had mr. kerrivan stopped smoking altogether when he stopped smoking reynolds cigarettes, he would have not developed copd; but he did not even try, and he did not even try for many years after he stopped smoking reynolds cigarettes. mr. kerrivan made the choice to quit smoking cold turkey in 2006, and he has not touched a cigarette since. it was mr. kerrivan's choice to start smoking, and it was mr. kerrivan's choice not to try to quit earlier, and it was mr. kerrivan's choice to finally quit when he did, successfully, in 2006, and it was mr. kerrivan's choice to never pick up a cigarette again. and why does this matter to reynolds? you heard evidence that if mr. kerrivan would have quit smoking by the age of 40, and that would have been in 1982, or at some point before he reached a 40 pack year history, he would have never developed copd. so no matter which version of events mr. kerrivan -- of mr. kerrivan's that you believe, if he would have stopped smoking reynolds cigarettes by this time, he would not have developed it. and the evidence showed that mr. kerrivan stopped 146 smoking reynolds cigarettes well before he was 40, in 1982. and the evidence showed that mr. kerrivan stopped smoking reynolds cigarettes well before he ever reached a 40 pack year history. so that means that if mr. kerrivan had quit smoking altogether when he quit smoking the reynolds cigarettes, he would have never developed copd, and we would not be here today. reynolds cannot be a "but for" cause of mr. kerrivan's copd because he would not have developed the copd if he had stopped smoking altogether when he stopped smoking those reynolds cigarettes. now, i do not think you should get any further on the verdict form than this question three for reynolds, but it is my job to talk to you about the rest of the verdict form. so i'm going to do that briefly. for all the reasons that you heard about mr. kerrivan's choices and the messages that he received throughout his lifetime about the dangers of smoking, reynolds should have zero responsibility. but the evidence also shows that reynolds should have zero responsibility for an additional reason, and that additional reason is the one that i've been talking with you-all about this afternoon, and it is the limited amount of smoking reynolds cigarettes. now, i'd like to take a look quickly at question 147 four and question six on the verdict form. again, i do not think that you should get here; but if you do, i would ask that you focus on one word in these questions, and that word is "relied." now, plaintiff's experts testified for almost five full days, and they showed you advertisements, and they showed you documents from tobacco companies, and they showed you a lot of other irrelevant information to reynolds, things about filters and lights and ultra lights. and they all have nothing to do with the reynolds cigarettes that mr. kerrivan smoked. mr. kerrivan never smoked a filtered cigarette made by reynolds, and mr. kerrivan never smoked a light cigarette made by reynolds, and mr. kerrivan never smoked an ultra light cigarette made by reynolds. you heard no testimony, none, that mr. kerrivan ever relied on anything that reynolds said. instead, what you heard was that mr. kerrivan thought that taste was important when he was deciding whether -- what to smoke. if he did not like the taste, he did not smoke the brand. you heard that he saw that kool ad. but he did not like the taste of kool. he said it is terrible. and he threw that pack away, and he never smoked it again. so whatever that ad was, he was not relying on it. 148 whatever that ad was, he was relying on his taste, and he was relying on his personal experience smoking the brand. so these two questions on the verdict form come down to one thing, and it is did mr. kerrivan rely on something reynolds did or did not do? and you heard no evidence that mr. kerrivan relied. plaintiff did not meet his burden. now, mr. byrd has suggested to you-all an enormous amount of money against reynolds despite the fact that mr. kerrivan only smoked reynolds cigarettes for a brief amount of time. so i'd ask you to think about the common sense instruction that the judge has talked with you about when we first got here during jury selection. you should not award mr. kerrivan any money from reynolds for the limited amount of time that he was smoking reynolds cigarettes that he smoked nearly six decades ago. that means checking "no" to reynolds on question three. the reynolds cigarettes did not substantially contribute to mr. kerrivan's copd. and the reynolds cigarettes did not directly and in natural and continuous sequence cause mr. kerrivan's copd. if mr. kerrivan had chosen to quit smoking altogether when he stopped smoking reynolds cigarettes, he 149 would have never gotten copd. so for all of these reasons that i've talked with you about and all of the reasons that mr. davis talked with you about, i'm asking you to return a defense verdict in favor of reynolds. thank you again for your attention and for your service. the court.