mr. kaczynski: well, we are finally winding down. and you are probably going to guess that mr. gary and i have not agreed and will not agree on a lot in this trial. but one thing we do, is that we are all thankful and appreciative and grateful for your attention and service. you know, 4300 in this country there are a range of ways that people make sacrifices for the privilege of being here. and they could be as simple as paying your taxes or as serious as the ultimate sacrifice given by people that rest in arlington and places like that. your service is on the upper end of that scale. and whatever the verdict, whatever the verdict, when it is done you can go back to your family and your friends and your coworkers and tell them that you contributed to making the system work, because you did. and again, i do not think people could thank you enough, but i want to thank you once again for your service. two weeks ago i told you this case was about leroy kirkland and the choices that he made. two weeks later it still is. two weeks ago, actually two weeks and a couple of days, i guess, i told you that the plaintiffs here would try to retry the engle class action to prove to you some things that the judge said are already decided. in fact, yesterday you saw the big boards that mr. socias had up here, and he pointed to them and he said, the things on this board are conclusively established. the things on this board are not up for discussion. but for the last two weeks they 4301 tried to establish them and they tried to discuss them. i told you they would inundate you with video and with live testimony that had nothing to do with mr. kirkland. and they did. two weeks ago i told you, you would see dozens of philip morris documents. and you saw 10 of them again yesterday. and the ones you saw were designed to get you mad. they were the ones designed most to get you mad. the document that you saw that talked about a dose unit of nicotine, that was a philip morris document, not reynolds. the "bury-it" document. that was a philip morris document, not reynolds. the ones about the rats pulling the levers, that was a philip morris document, not reynolds. and i said it before, i'll say it again, philip morris is not my client. i told you you were going to see ads for brands that mr. kirkland never smoked. and you did. i told you you would see ads that he never saw. and you did. testimony about organizations he never heard of. and you did. hours upon hours of what you heard is about what went on in winston-salem or richmond or louisville or washington, but not a whole lot about what went on 4302 in tampa, florida. two weeks later you saw memos from a dr. osdene and dr. dunn and dr. wakeham, all philip morris scientists who had nothing to do with r.j. reynolds. again, you saw 10 of them again yesterday. a video of dr. farone, a former philip morris scientist who never had anything to do with r.j. reynolds. a memo with advice from a law firm that represents philip morris. ads for winston and camel and marlboro and that johnny roventini, the guy in the bellhop outfit for philip morris. my client is not philip morris. and all those brands, all of them are brands that mr. kirkland never smoked. dr. proctor was here on the witness stand impugning the research funded by the council for tobacco -- council for tobacco research, an organization mr. kirkland never heard of. you heard about tobacco institute white papers that went to doctors, not longshoremen or shipyard workers like mr. kirkland. yesterday you heard a little bit about world war i soldiers and their ration packs. world war i started and was over before mr. kirkland was ever born. and remember in opening i asked you to ask 4303 yourself this question as the evidence came in. here it is. what has this got to do with leroy kirkland? and for two weeks the answer has largely been nothing. yesterday mr. gary talked about the scales of justice. well, here are the scales of justice that reflect what happened in this trial. lots of things that had nothing to do with mr. kirkland and very little that did. i also told you two weeks ago that you get half the story from the plaintiff's witnesses. and you did, especially from dr. proctor and dr. henningfield. first of all, neither of them said a word, not one word about leroy kirkland or what happened in tampa, florida. everything they said related to that other case, the case -- the case of generic smokers, the case of the general public. you did not get the whole story from the plaintiff's case. for example, on direct examination you heard dr. proctor say that the companies met in december 1953 motivated by greed. it was on cross-examination that you heard the tobacco companies were called upon to fund research by an editorial in the new england journal of medicine in september 1953 and again by the american college of surgeons in october 1953. and 4304 we, not them, showed you the evidence of those calls. and in december the companies responded. but i asked myself over and over again, what has this got to do with leroy kirkland? dr. proctor said that the companies secretly believed in 1953 that cigarettes caused cancer, and their meeting was designed to set up a front organization to mislead the public about it. on cross-examination, you found the companies had no desire to set up a front organization. the industry was convinced that there was no scientific basis, and they thought the national cancer institute agreed with them. how do we know that? this is a plaintiff's exhibit they did not show you. plaintiff's exhibit. that says all those things that you just saw on the chart. in fact, we saw even eight years later dr. rodgman from r.j. reynolds in an internal memo sent to scientists inside reynolds, not designed to go to the general public, where they expressed what they really thought. and here, even in 1962 dr. rodgman is saying, it seems as likely or stronger in favor of air pollution than it does cigarettes. now, you can call him wrong, you can call him stubborn, but what you cannot call him is a liar. 4305 but again, what is this got to do with leroy kirkland? on direct examination, dr. proctor told you about the frank statement to smokers and made it out to seem to be a big deal. on cross-examination you learned it ran only once, once, one day. and we found on cross that frank statements were common. fur prices, people over 35 who retired, baldness and constipation. but you also learned on cross-examination -- they did not show you this either -- for those people that did pay attention to the frank statement, it scared them. people -- it reminded them of what they were seeing in the newspapers and magazines around them about links between smoking and disease. people cut down and in some cases stopped. but again, what does this have to do with leroy kirkland? on direct examination, dr. proctor said there was a consensus in the mid 1950s that smoking caused cancer and that companies were lying to the public in the face of this consensus. on cross you learned the companies had plenty of company on that issue. a dr. wynder, a doctor who wrote the national -- journal of the national cancer 4306 institute, a top official in the national cancer institute; dr. hammond, from the cancer society; dr. hess, the president of the ama; the surgeon general, leroy burney; the founder of the mayo clinic, and dr. lewis robbins, a senior official in the u.s. public health service. well, what has this got to do with leroy kirkland? you heard from dr. proctor that the tobacco institute issued press releases. but you learned on cross that we do not know if anybody ever saw those or the substance of those press releases, whether it be the tampa tribune, the st. pete times or anywhere, because he never looked. now, mr. kirkland never heard of the tobacco institute, so again, what does this have to do with leroy kirkland? on direct, dr. proctor, who, let us remember, is a historian and not a scientist, he said ctr funded research designed to exonerate smoking. he called it distraction research that had nothing to do with smoking and health. but he did not show you a single example, not one to prove that point. but what did we show you? on cross-examination, we showed you the ctr funded studies that linked smoking to heart disease, lung 4307 cancer, and addiction in the 1960s. that is hardly unrelated to smoking and health. and that one article that talked about addiction, it called smokers "addicts." that was 25 years before the surgeon general concluded that. unrelated to smoking and health? i do not think so. you learned that ctr-funded studies were cited repeatedly in surgeon general's reports. how does something unrelated to smoking and health get repeatedly cited in a publication that is supposed to have everything to do with smoking and health? but again, what has this got to do with leroy kirkland? remember the "green monster"? dr. proctor called it -- and i want to get this right -- the bibliographic fundament of the conspiracy. i have no idea what that means. but whatever it means, if it came from dr. proctor we know it was not a compliment. but on cross-examination you learned dr. henningfield has cited this "green monster" in his articles; dr. benowitz has consulted the "green monster" in the past. and the surgeon general's report did not slur it like dr. proctor did. it called it a basic reference source and it was used in preparing the 1964 surgeon general's report. 4308 but what has this got to do with leroy kirkland? drs. proctor and henningfield both -- and this is very important -- said that nicotine levels were manipulated to maintain addiction. and ladies and gentlemen, that is the most cynical charge of all. on cross-examination you learned that nicotine levels were investigated in conjunction with a program with the national cancer institute to explore ways of making a less hazardous cigarette. this is an effort supported and encouraged by prominent scientists like dr. michael russell in britain, dr. sir richard doll, knighted by the queen of england for his cancer research, one of the most famous cancer researcher in the world. dr. schachter of columbia. dr. jarvik of ucla, co-inventor of the nicotine patch. and finally by the nation's top doctor, the top physician in the country. in 1981, the surgeon general of the united states said you should conduct this research. and the companies did. remember the words of dr. russell? people smoke for the nicotine but they die from tar. and the whole idea is get tar down as low as you can, because it is the tar that causes the disease. but 4309 since people smoke for nicotine, and nicotine goes down along with the tar, you have got to get a level of nicotine to maintain it so the people will smoke the less hazardous cigarette. i want you to pay particular attention to what dr. doll wrote in 1977. again, one of the most famous cancer researchers in the would. and what he said, the introduction of a low nicotine cigarette may lead a smoker to adjust his dose -- dose of nicotine by making -- by smoking more cigarettes -- as probably happened in the 1960s -- by inhaling more deeply or by puffing more often. it may be, therefore, that the most effective policy would be to produce low tar cigarettes with an artificially high content of nicotine, though care would have to be taken not to make the content so high that addiction is aggravated. now, there is two things i want you to think about what dr. doll wrote. first is the word "dose." you saw the word "dose" referring to nicotine in a philip morris document yesterday. it may be in reynolds' documents. but what this shows you is that referring to nicotine by the word "dose" was not something that tobacco -- was only the tobacco companies. it appears that it was 4310 common use in the scientific community, both inside and outside the tobacco companies, including by one of the most prominent cancer researchers in the world. the second thing i want you to pay attention to is dr. doll says i do not want it -- i do not want it so low that people smoke more, but i do not want it too high that it will aggravate addiction. that sounds awful familiar, does not it. does that sound like dr. henningfield's sweet spot? the sweet spot, only dr. henningfield said that the companies were going after the sweet spot to maintain addiction. dr. doll is calling for a sweet spot to make less hazardous cigarettes so they will smoke the lower tar brand but not smoke more. the documents they showed you from reynolds and from philip morris -- and you saw 10 of them from philip morris yesterday -- are from the 1970s and 1980s, which is exactly when drs. russell, dr. doll, dr. jarvik, dr. schachter and the surgeon general were telling them to look into the levels of nicotine, investigate the optimum levels of nicotine. but if you look at these exhibits, the doll, 4311 the schachter, the russell, they are in evidence. you will have them back in the jury room. this is not something i'm making up in the year 2011 to defend a lawsuit. this is what was going on at the time. calls to investigate nicotine levels in the 1970s and 1980s from people interested in the public health. and the companies responded to this. the public health community told them to do this research. and they did this research, and now they are being sued for conducting this research. damned if you do and damned if you do not. now, some of the language in these company documents i'll admit is stupid, but it was not evil. and it is absolutely cynical to say that it was. at the end of the day, though, again, what has this got to do with leroy kirkland? drs. proctor and henningfield suggest that raising the ph of tobacco smoke was designed to maintain addiction. on cross-examination you learned again that this was something suggested by the national cancer institute as a way to make a safer cigarette. and again the companies responded, and again they are being called evil and sued for doing it. damned if you do and damned if 4312 you do not. but again, what has this got to do with leroy kirkland? dr. henningfield, who has never -- he designed a cigarette in his life -- trashed filter ventilation. dr. farone, the plaintiff's expert who has designed cigarettes in the past and who designed cigarettes at philip morris, said filter ventilation worked. dr. proctor, who never designed a cigarette, called filters fraudulent. you saw that testimony on a board yesterday. dr. farone, the plaintiff's expert who has designed cigarettes, is proud of his filter work. dr. henningfield, who has never designed a cigarette, trashed expanded tobacco. dr. farone, the plaintiff's expert who did design cigarettes, said expanded tobacco worked. dr. henningfield said the ftc test for measuring tar and nicotine does not tell you what a smoker actually gets. guess what? back in the 1960s the federal trade commission and r.j. reynolds said the exact same thing, a half century ago. 4313 but what has this got to go with leroy kirkland? now, dr. henningfield did say that the surgeon general decided that mouse skin painting is the best test for the safety of cigarettes. what he did not tell you is that the national cancer institute tested almost all of the cigarette designs that he trashed. and what did they find? they used mouse skin painting. and what they found was cigarettes with high porosity paper made with tobacco stems only, reconstituted tobacco, all produced fewer tumors on the backs of mice and may be less hazardous. and the 1979 surgeon general's report found the same thing. in other words, they worked. dr. henningfield suggested that the companies had all kinds of information about addiction and nicotine that the outside world did not. on cross-examination you learned he never made a systematic comparison between the two, internal and external research so that he could come in and tell you under oath what he told you. he never looked. he never looked. now, you do know that, after hearing the testimony of dr. benowitz for the plaintiff and dr. 4314 hoffman, who mr. gary called that nice little lady -- and she is a nice little lady -- again, dr. hoffman for the defense, you learned that addiction and nicotine having no secrets for many, many years. dr. benowitz told us it has been known for over 100 years that smoking could be difficult to quit. difficulty in quitting smoking has been part of the popular culture for a long time. terms like nicotine fiend or nicotine fit have been part of our culture for a long time. you also heard from dr. benowitz, nicotine occurs naturally in tobacco. mother nature put it there. you heard some suggestion yesterday that the companies were pumping nicotine into cigarettes. mother nature put it there. and that is been known for over a hundred years. it is been known that it is a drug for over a hundred years. maybe that is why scientists outside the companies are comfortably using the term "dose." known that nicotine has a pharmacological effect, drug effect on the body for over 100 years. you saw florida health notes from 1906. today the cigarette is looked upon by all smokers as the very worst form of tobacco addiction. a hundred, over a 100 years ago. 4315 now if we line this up alongside one of dr. benowitz's opinions, it is a dead bang match. some secret. a hundred years ago. you saw the surgeon general reported that researchers concluded that nicotine is why people smoke in the 1920s and 1930s. and look at what that 1942 study by dr. lennox johnston said. smoking tobacco is essentially a means of administering nicotine, just as smoking opium is a means of administering morphine. this is decades before you saw a tobacco company document that made the same suggestion. not exactly a secret. and this news about nicotine and addiction was reported in a reader's digest in the 1930s and the 1940s. and reader's digest, as you heard, was the most popular periodical in america. ladies and gentlemen, you will have these documents in the jury room. the reader's digest articles, the florida health notes. you will have them. read them. we are not making this up. terms like "addiction" and "addicts" and "drug" were used almost 100 years ago. so what is the big deal here? well, apparently it is all about the waxman hearings. yesterday you 4316 heard mr. gary talk about lying to congress. his words, not mine. it is about the waxman hearings in 1994. the year, by the way, mr. kirkland quit smoking. so whatever happened there obviously did not have a big impact on him. and there is no evidence that he was sitting there watching c-span as the waxman committees took place. the question at the hearing was, did the companies believe that nicotine was addictive? and let us tell the whole story. in 1964 the surgeon general had to decide whether smoking was an addiction or a habit. and that -- at that time, back in 1964, to define something as an addiction, it had to be intoxicating, it had to promote socially deviant behavior, and it had to have severe or life-threatening consequences. and smoking did not then and does not now meet those criteria. if those criteria existed today, smoking would still be a habit and not an addiction. now, dr. benowitz in his video also told you that a certain stigma attached to the term "addiction," associated with people getting high, people getting frenzied, antisocial behavior, criminal behavior. and in 1964 the surgeon general did not want to attribute that stigma to smokers. 4317 so what happened? in 1964, because of those three criteria, the surgeon general decided that smoking did not meet the criteria for addiction and he called it a habit. then over the years what changed? well, the criteria for addiction changed. you did not need intoxication anymore, you did not need socially deviant behavior anymore, and did not need severe withdrawal symptoms anymore. and with those three criteria gone, the surgeon general in 1988 found it to be an addiction. there was no new science. there were no scientific breakthroughs. it is this simple. in 1987 smoking was a habit. in 1988 it was an addiction. nothing else changed. so let us fast forward to the political publicity stunt called the waxman committee hearings. you saw the clip of the reynolds ceo jim johnston, who was asked, is smoking addictive? and you heard that he was cut off as he was beginning to answer by congressman white. dr. henningfield, though, acknowledged what mr. johnston was trying to say. what he was trying to say is smoking and nicotine clearly do not meet the classic definition of addiction because there is no intoxication and then he was cut off. what he was doing clearly was 4318 quoting, or trying to, the 1964 definition by the surgeon general. he never said smoking is easy to quit. he never said that. he was simply saying he prefers to call it a habit rather than an addiction. in 1994, as in 1964, he did not want to call smokers addicts. he did not want to equate smokers with heroin users shooting up, or cocaine users sniffing or alcoholics on skid row. you can call his testimony stubborn, you can call it outdated, but what you cannot call it is a lie. because it was not. but again, this whole thing about the waxman committee hearings, what has this got to do with leroy kirkland? yesterday, mr. socias started off by calling the defense experts names. he called them a stable of experts, he said they do circuits around the country, and he called them a traveling side show. really, let us see who has the traveling side show. dr. myers testified -- has worked on a handful of cases and has testified three times. dr. bertino has consulted for a long time. he is testified three times. dr. hoffman has testified three times. now let us look at the plaintiff's witnesses 4319 lineup, shall we? dr. benowitz earns $4,800 a day and has testified, as he said, in over 20 trials. twenty. dr. proctor makes $4,800 a day, over $700,000 so far, and just this past week, he flew here on saturday, $4,800; stayed here sunday, 4,800; stayed here monday, $4,800; testified tuesday, $4,800; went home wednesday, $4,800. almost $25,000 for a half a week's work. and he is had 13 trials. dr. burns earns $500 an hour, over 1.1 million so far. he is testified in 40 trials and over 100 depositions. this is a man who writes surgeon general's reports and uses those credentials to market his witness services around the country. and when he writes the surgeon general's reports, he does not disclose that he is also a witness against the tobacco companies. now, dr. farone is $250 an hour. he is cheaper. maybe it is because you have heard and will hear again, he actually has some nice things to say about my client. dr. dolgin is $10,000 a day. now, which side has the witnesses who testify so often that their testimony is recorded on videotape and played all over the state of florida? 4320 you saw some of them here. to suggest the defense witnesses are a traveling side show or in it for the money, while on the other hand the plaintiff's witnesses are health advocates is ridiculous. it is profitable to testify against cigarette companies, and these folks have profited mightily. but again, this is itself a side show, because what does this have to do with leroy kirkland? now, i spent a lot more time than i planned -- and i get less time than they do -- to talk about things that have nothing to do with mr. kirkland. and i guess sometimes i wonder why you were made to hear this evidence. why did they retry the engle case? why did they retry to reprove things that mr. socias has already said has been conclusively established? why did they bombard you with philip morris documents and irrelevant ads? why did you hear yesterday over and over again about 440,000 deaths a year in the case of a living, breathing human being? and the answer is to get you mad. the answer is hope that you will violate your oath as jurors to try the facts of this case, to decide this case. because the facts of this case are suborn things, and if you focus on the suborn facts 4321 of this case, plaintiff loses. yesterday mr. gary -- and i'm not going to put his name up on a board like he did mine yesterday. which, by the way, when he did that, that put my name on a board one more time than leroy kirkland's name showed up on a board. he said this case is not about mr. kirkland. that mr. kirkland is an instrument; an instrument -- his words, not mine -- to get to punitive damages. now, first of all, when he said that he was dead wrong for two reasons. first of all, mr. kirkland is not an instrument. he is a human being, and it is disrespectful to call him one. but second of all, he is dead wrong, because this case is not about punitive damages. that is like trying to get to the super bowl without playing the season first. this is not a cause, this is not a crusade, this is not making the world right. this is a case about leroy kirkland. and because it is, their case crumbles. you heard, for example, in a few short answers, mr. kirkland told you that mr. proctor -- dr. proctor's entire day of testimony had nothing to do with him. it was this simple. he is never 4322 heard of the tobacco institute, never heard of the hill and knowlton, never read the frank statement, never heard of those organizations. and dr. proctor went on and on and on about them. irrelevant. he told us again and again that he never relied on anything that tobacco companies did or said. there is going to be a question on the verdict form that asks you if he relied on anything r.j. reynolds did or said. and the answer has got to be no. they did not -- he did not rely on his choice to smoke or his choice to continue to smoke. his choice to smoke, to the extent it was influenced by anybody at all, was by his cousin marie. remember that? he told us that again: she got you to smoke? she taught, not reynolds. and again: she taught you to inhale. it was nothing that reynolds did. and again: you did not smoke because of anything a tobacco company did. not because of the flintstones, not because of santa claus, not because of something he saw on tv or heard on the radio. it was his cousin. and again, he did not start smoking because of 4323 tobacco companies. no, it was not the tobacco companies. and yeah, he might have been young. but because he was smoking, started smoking when he was young does not make it my client's fault. these facts are stubborn things. mr. kirkland told us that nothing that reynolds did influenced his choice to continue to smoke. he chose to continue to smoke because that is what he wanted to do. he told us that reynolds did not influence his choice to smoke pall mall. a friend did. he told us reynolds did not influence his choice to smoke salem. a friend did. in fact, he told us he never bought a brand of cigarettes because of cigarette promotions, and he never saw an ad that said cigarettes are healthy. he told us why he smoked. he smoked because he enjoyed it. he liked to smoke, he enjoyed the smell, they made him relax, they helped him concentrate a little bit better. and even dr. henningfield admitted in his video that there are some people who get some pleasure of smoking, and there are some people who are smoking who do not want to quit. and these facts are stubborn things. 4324 when people got on mr. kirkland about him smoking, what was his response? oh, i'm addicted? no. mind your own business. mind your own business. he told us he knew smoking was unhealthy from an early age. he knew it was not good for him. he was warned by a whole bunch of people. he was warned by his parents. he was warned in middleton high school. remember that school? now, this was back in the segregated era in the south, but this was not an inferior school. in fact, as you heard from dr. hoffman who researched that school, it was at the time one of the best schools in the state. this was not a two-room schoolhouse with dirt floors. he was warned by his basketball coach, his wife, his aunt rosemary, his church, his brother otto, who ratted him out to their parents; his brother harry, who also ratted him out to their parents; cbs news, walter cronkite and edward r. murrow, the tampa tribune, and the st. pete times. these facts are stubborn things. you saw from the testimony of dr. hoffman that from the time mr. kirkland was taught to inhale by his cousin marie until he quit smoking in 1994, 4325 there was news coverage of the links between smoking and disease. and it was in newspapers. and i'm not showing you the new york times here. i'm showing you the tampa tribune and the st. pete times. and, in fact, in those two papers in 1964, the surgeon general's report was front-page, above-the-fold news. you heard that it was covered in magazines like life and time and newsweek and reader's digest. you heard there was coverage in the tv news. you heard that mr. kirkland watched the tv news. walter cronkite and edward r. murrow. now, you also may remember on redirect examination, mr. gary tried to get mr. kirkland to say he really did not know who these people were. and it kind of backfired. edward r. murrow or morrell. do you know who that is? yeah. that was a news reporter. and you listened to him? yes, sir. do you know who walter cronkite was? he was a news reporter. and we showed you some of that news from both edward r. murrow, the see it now program, sort of 4326 the 60 minutes of its era, as you heard, and from walter cronkite. and mr. kirkland was warned by the warning label that was on every pack of cigarettes he smoked for 28 years. this is the warning label from 1966, the warning label from 1970, and then the rotating warning labels from 1985. now, mr. kirkland testified that he says he never saw the warning label that was on his pack and carton of cigarette -- cigarettes for 28 years. but he also told us this. he ignored public information about the dangers of smoking because it was not what he wanted to hear, and he ignored it because he wanted to smoke. if it were otherwise, before 1994, if he wanted to quit, you saw there was plenty of information to help him do that. information about how smoke -- how quitting reduced the risks of smoking and information about where you could get help to reduce -- quit and reduce the risk of disease. and about that one day every year when people, millions of people stopped smoking for one day in the hope that they will stop smoking for good. the great american smokeout. the information was out there for everybody to 4327 see -- for you, for me, for leroy kirkland -- if they want to see it and if they want to heed it. and that is the key. he did not. he did not until 1994. now, folks, i'm going to stop talking about irrelevancies and i'm going to start talking about leroy kirkland. and you know why? because it was the defense, not the plaintiff in this case, that investigated the case of leroy kirkland, that gave you evidence about his case. and we did not treat him as an instrument. we treated him as the plaintiff. it was not dr. proctor or it was not dr. henningfield and it was not dr. benowitz and it was not dr. farone. in fact, you did not hear really that much about leroy kirkland yesterday. the person who talked about leroy kirkland was dr. hoffman, that nice little lady for the defense. she focused on mr. kirkland. she focused on his family, what they told him. focused on his schools, what they taught him. she focused on his church, what it taught him. focused on what newspapers he read and what tv news he watched. now, when dr. hoffman was cross-examined, you would think that the cross-examination would be 4328 about those things she talked about -- the schools, the parents, the church, the newspapers, the tv news. but it was not. it was about the irrelevancies again. she was cross-examined about women smoking during the roaring 20s. mr. kirkland was not a woman in the roaring 20s. she was cross-examined about that article in the new york times that he never read; about materials sent to doctors. he is not a doctor. three ads for philip morris, which, again, is not my client. but he never saw those ads. two ads for l&m. he never smoked that brand. a video of the tobacco institute spokesperson. he never heard of the tobacco institute. and a philip morris executive and face the nation and on and on and on. when they cross-examined dr. hoffman, they chose not to deal with the stubborn facts of this case. so they chose to present the irrelevancies from the other case. basically they cross-examined dr. hoffman with the direct examination of dr. proctor. and what that was was irrelevancies to this case times two. so it comes down really to the questions you are going to be asked on the verdict form. was mr. kirkland a member of the engle class? and as i 4329 told you in opening statement, that requires you to resolve two issues. no. 1, was mr. kirkland addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine? and no. 2. did addiction cause his injury? or was it caused by his choice to smoke and to continue to smoke. and yesterday you heard that "choice" is going to be a word not on the verdict form. and that is right. but "cause" sure is. and you are going to have to decide what the legal cause of mr. kirkland's injuries were, whether it was something reynolds did or whether it was his choice to smoke and to continue to smoke. now, let us address these one at a time. was leroy kirkland addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine? dr. dolgin told you yes; dr. myers told you no. let us compare the two doctors. dr. myers is a psychiatrist. dr. dolgin is an ear, nose and throat doctor. dr. myers read all the depositions. dr. dolgin only read the deposition of the person in this courtroom suing for money. dr. myers examined mr. kirkland for three hours. dr. dolgin examined him for 25 minutes, and part of that was a physical examination. 4330 dr. myers examined him and evaluated him using dsm-iv. dr. dolgin had no particular criteria. and by the way, even dr. dolgin, even dr. benowitz and even dr. henningfield acknowledged the dsm-iv is the bible for the psychiatric profession. this book. dr. myers was trained in addiction issues. dr. dolgin, on-the-job training. dr. myers teaches addiction treatment. dr. dolgin has not even taken a course in addiction treatment. in fact, dr. dolgin's principal qualification to give you an opinion on addiction seems to be that medicaid will pay him for it. dr. myers is not from providence, rhode island, as mr. gary at one point tried to suggest. he is from right here in tampa, florida. he lives today in providence, and this winter is regretting it. dr. myers has, in fact, diagnosed smokers as nicotine dependent. now, yesterday mr. socias said that nobody could meet dr. myers' definition of addiction because it included the term "impairment." well, if you listen to dr. myers' testimony, it is not dr. myers that requires impairment. it is this book. 4331 it is dsm-iv, the bible for the psychiatric profession. and people can and do meet that criteria. dr. myers has designated his -- diagnosed people as nicotine dependent, and he guesstimates that about half the 50 million smokers who quit probably also met the criteria for nicotine dependence. but not this one. not this one. not mr. kirkland. mr. myers testified that, according to the standards established by the psychiatric profession in dsm-iv, mr. kirkland was not nicotine dependent or addicted. now, what factors did he consider? yesterday mr. gary suggested that dr. myers' entire opinion was based on the fact there was no withdrawal symptoms -- his entire opinion -- and that he nailed him because he showed him in dsm-iv that that is not required; withdrawal is not required. he said he was busted. well, he was not busted, because dr. myers considered all these things. and it was not any one factor that tipped the balance. it was all of them. it was not just that he tried to quit before. it was not just that he was strong willed. it was not just that he enjoyed smoking. it was not 4332 just that he was successful on his first trial. it was not just that he quit cold turkey. it was not just that he had never smoked again. it was not just that he could not stand to be around cigarettes anymore. it was all of these together. do not you remember? he kept talking about another piece of the puzzle. it was all of these together. he said dsm-iv is not a cookbook. a psychiatrist has to evaluate the seven criteria for addiction in this book, and according to his judgment, his training and his experience. which is why an ent or a cardiologist or a pulmonologist or a pharmacologist or mr. kirkland's daughter or mr. kirkland's boss cannot make that diagnosis. it takes someone with dr. myers' expertise. and dr. myers applied the criteria to mr. kirkland, and he found that mr. kirkland was not nicotine dependent or addicted. we are not talking about addictions here the way we talked about them in jury selection. remember, all of us with addictions to food? we are talking about a medically grounded diagnosis. this is a diagnosis of legal consequences. and dr. myers was the only witness to step foot in this courtroom that is qualified to give that diagnosis. 4333 and he gave it to you using recognized scientific criteria, not something people make up along the way. you remember his cross-examination? it was that whole issue about whether he shredded his notes. where are your notes? well, his notes of the interview -- by the way, at which mr. kirkland's lawyer was present. this was not some secret proceeding. he said when he moved from tampa to the snows of rhode island, either they were put in the wrong box or he shredded some old notes. he did not know. but we all have his report. and his report captures what his notes had. irrelevancy. a red herring. but, folks, the best evidence on addiction and mr. kirkland quitting came right here from mr. kirkland when he said, made up your mind and decided to quit, and he did not have any trouble quitting. you made up your mind and you quit. is not that true? it is true. and he never smoked again. now, at this trial we also got a definition of 4334 addiction from dr. henningfield, the psychopharmacologist. and he called it -- and i use what is similar to what the national institute on drug abuse says. a chronic, relapsing brain disease or brain disorder. and we know that mr. kirkland stopped forever. no trouble staying quit. in fact, mr. kirkland never relapsed. so even under dr. henningfield's definition of addiction, mr. kirkland does not meet it. now, in this trial, mr. kirkland and his lawyers tried to salvage their addiction issue. on some key issues mr. kirkland told a different story to you than he told in his deposition or that he told to dr. myers. and every time, oddly enough, the different story he told helped his case. remember mr. williams having to constantly pull up the deposition and confront mr. kirkland with what he said before under oath with his earlier and different answer? there are a lot of them, but there is two. the two greatest hits are these. in his deposition and to dr. myers, he said it was not hard to quit. at trial in front of you, he said it was hard to quit. 4335 in his deposition and to dr. myers, he said he never tried to quit before 1994. at trial here he said he did try to quit before 1994. you are the judges of the facts. and you have to determine what is true. but mr. kirkland's deposition testimony and his discussions with dr. myers are stubborn, stubborn facts. now, we asked dr. myers on the witness stand, let us assume you were wrong and let us assume that you conclude that mr. kirkland was addicted. he smoked for a long time, and even though he never tried to quit, even though he quit on his first try, even though he did not have any withdrawal symptoms, even though he never relapsed, we think he was addicted. suppose you conclude that. is that the end of the inquiry? part of it. part of it. what did we learn from dr. benowitz. any smoker can quit smoking. three hundred -- i'm sorry -- 3,000 smokers quit every day, 60,000,000 smokers have quit smoking, and more than half the people who have ever smoked have quit. in fact, even the surgeon general that commissioned -- that issued the 1988 report on 4336 addiction, dr. c. everett koop, the guy with the beard and uniform you may remember from the news, hero of dr. henningfield, this is what he says on his website. and this is very, very important. when you are engaged in internal warfare with yourself about whether or not to light up a cigarette, you could fortify yourself by remembering this important fact. ultimately you are the one that has control over your behavior. ultimately you are the one that has control over your behavior. the cigarette is not going to light itself and jump into your mouth, nor are you going to go into a brain-induced hypnotic trance and light the cigarette. no matter how much you smoke or how much you like to smoke, the choice -- there is that pesky word again -- the choice to light up is always yours. this is from the surgeon general who called smoking addictive. now, in opening i showed you the word "choice" in the 1978 surgeon general's report, personal choice health behavior; the 1982 surgeon general's report, personal choice behavior; and the 1986 surgeon general's report, to decide whether or not to continue the behavior. 4337 and today you saw, and during dr. henningfield's testimony you saw, that the surgeon general who called smoking addictive, today on his website has that smoking is a choice. and remember this language. this is -- this is very, very important. ultimately, ultimately you are the one that has control over your behavior. it is a choice made by a smoker every time he lights a cigarette. which brings us to the chart dr. myers used during his testimony. this is a diagram of what he was saying, you have got addiction, and you have got disease. addiction does not actually cause the disease. it is the person deciding, choosing over the course of a long period of time typically to keep putting that poisonous substance or substances in their body and exposing themselves to the toxin and eventually it causes the disease. there is a person in the middle, and that person here was mr. kirkland. so let us go to the key question for engle class membership. was mr. kirkland's injury caused by an addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine or by his choice to smoke or continue to smoke? in his 4338 testimony, dr. myers answered that question. and on his website, dr. koop answers that question. ultimately, you are the one that has control over behavior. you. not r.j. reynolds, not philip morris, not john wayne, not santa claus, not the flintstones, not joe louis, not even cousin marie. as dr. myers and dr. koop tell us, there is a person between an addiction and injury -- a you, a me, a leroy kirkland. and you do not get a pass from your responsibility because of nicotine. look at what dr. benowitz, the plaintiff's expert says. nicotine does not affect your thought process. nicotine does not prevent you from understanding warning information. nicotine does not cause smokers to lose the ability to be responsible for their own actions. and that is what this lawsuit is all about. responsibility for your own actions. that is what dr. myers said. that is what dr. koop said. that is what dr. benowitz said, that is pretty much what everybody except dr. dolgin, the ear nose and throat doctor, said. mr. kirkland is responsible for his own actions. i know it is an old fashioned concept. it is almost retro in this era of victimhood. 4339 let us go back to dr. koop again. ultimately, you are the one that has control over your behavior. this is not r.j. reynolds saying that leroy kirkland is responsible for his behavior. it is not me with my name on a board saying that mr. kirkland is responsible for his own behavior. it is the former surgeon general of the united states who issued the 1988 surgeon general's report on addiction. every -- who says every smoker, addicted or not, highly addicted or not, is responsible for their own behavior. ladies and gentlemen, there may be people out there every day who struggle with addiction. there certainly are. there certainly are people out there who every day have an ordeal to keep away from cigarettes, who do not go to bars because it makes them want to smoke, who do not -- give up coffee because it reminds them of cigarettes. there may be engle class members out there, and there surely are. but mr. kirkland is not one of them. in fact, under mr. kirkland's own definition of addiction, he is not addicted. what is your understanding of addiction? 4340 addiction is something that is hard to stop using; is that right? yes, sir. and you did not have any trouble quitting, correct? correct. now, whether his daughter or his boss thought him addicted, mr. kirkland in his own mind never saw himself as addicted. until this lawsuit, of course, where he has become an instrument, an instrument for punitive damages. ladies and gentlemen, mr. kirkland was that man in the middle who stood between addiction and injury. as dr. koop might have said, mr. kirkland and only mr. kirkland was the one that has control over his behavior. not ten percent, like they told you yesterday, not fifty percent, but one hundred percent. ultimately you are the one that has control of your own behavior. if leroy kirkland's injury was caused by smoking, it was caused by his choice not to exercise that control. it was by his choice to smoke and continue to smoke. it was by his choice to ignore negative information about smoking, his choice to ignore the warning label, his choice to ignore the warnings of family and friends. 4341 this -- what this lawsuit is all about is asking you to second guess those choices. it is asking you to make him a victim. he is not a victim. for most of his life, he chose to live life in the fast lane. that was a choice. to drink, to smoke, to smoke marijuana. and that was a choice. life in the fast lane to the extent he had some problems with the law, to the extent he had problems that put him in an alcohol rehab program, to the extent he was told not to go to places that served alcohol. he lived his life the way he wanted to and lived it that way as long as he wanted to. and when he wanted to change it, he did. and that was a choice -- a good choice, a smart choice. he quit drinking without problems. he quit smoking without problems. and by the way, yesterday you heard that he stopped smoking when he was coughing up blood. that is not true. you remember. he stopped smoking before he developed his cancer. his cancer had nothing to do with it. and he returned to his church. and that is great. he is deserving of praise. but it does not make him deserving of money. and it does not make him an engle class member. 4342 so ladies and gentlemen, when you get the verdict form with the first question that asks you is he an engle class member, i'm asking you to check no. now, if we get beyond that first question and you find him to be an engle class member, you are going to have to decide whether anything that reynolds did caused his injury. you will have to decide, and judge levens will instruct you, or has actually in the instructions you have, on the meaning of legal cause. you have already seen evidence that nothing that reynolds did affected anything -- any smoking decision mr. kirkland made. you already heard evidence he did not rely on anything that reynolds or any tobacco company did or said. and there will be a question on the verdict form that asked you that, and you should check no there. but we also have the question of what caused his laryngeal cancer. was it smoking or was it something else? and we went through this in opening. the basic facts about laryngeal cancer. smoking causes laryngeal cancer. smoking does not cause all laryngeal cancer. asbestos insulation causes laryngeal cancer, alcohol consumption causes 4343 laryngeal cancer, and marijuana use may cause laryngeal cancer. applied to mr. kirkland, he smoked, he wore an asbestos vest for years while working as a welder, he worked in shipyards, which are notorious places for exposure to airborne asbestos fibers; he drank substantial amounts of alcohol for many years, and he smoked marijuana. as the trial unfolded, it became clear that until he quit drinking in 1993, mr. kirkland had a substantial problem with alcohol. it was not an occasional beer, as was suggested yesterday. we heard he liked his scotch, perhaps a little bit too much. and we learned the following: he began drinking in his teens. he passed out in a bar in his 20s. he had a liter of alcohol per week. and there was back and forth about whether it was a liter of hard liquor or beer. he told dr. dolgin, he told dr. myers and he told us in this courtroom, that scotch was his beverage of choice. his daughter asked him to stop drinking. it is so bad, dad, please stop. he was ordered to alcohol rehab, as dr. dolgin told us. ordered to avoid the use of alcohol, 4344 ordered to avoid places that served alcohol. this does not happen to social drinkers. this does not happen to people that have an occasional beer, as you heard yesterday. is a liter of alcohol a week enough to increase risk of laryngeal cancer? dr. dolgin says yes, and dr. bertino agrees. does alcohol bathe the epiglottis and supraglottis? dr. dolgin says yes and dr. bertino agrees. the only point of disagreement is whether alcohol comes in contact with that part of the larynx where the tumor was found. ladies and gentlemen, you do not need anybody's testimony on that. you saw the videos. dr. bertino showed you a tape that was not made for litigation, the tape of an actual patient. and you saw that when the tape was rolling, the green goop covered everything, everything including where mr. kirkland's tumor was found. dr. dolgin came back for a second try to try to convince you that he was right. and when he did that, dr. dolgin could be renamed, i think, dr. absolutely certain. you want to talk about advocates. dr. dolgin was dr. absolutely certain. 4345 absolutely certain that smoking causes the laryngeal cancer. absolutely certain that dr. bertino's swallow test was abnormal. absolutely certain that he is never seen a supraglottis cancer caused by alcohol. absolutely certain where mr. kirkland's tumor started. even the pathologist did not say that. dr. dolgin knows absolutely certain. he was so absolutely certain with his -- about his opinions that he disagreed with mr. kirkland's treating pathologist, the man who actually looked at the specimen. dr. stonesifer, you heard, the treating pathologist, said he that could not say that smoking caused the cancer. dr. dolgin can. neither did dr. wilbur. dr. wilbur could not say that smoking caused the cancer. but dr. dolgin can. and dr. stonesifer could not rule out alcohol as a cause. but dr. absolutely certain can; dr. dolgin can. you saw the battle of the green goop videos. you can decide for yourself. but consider this. last friday when dr. bertino was on cross and was being beat about the head and shoulders because in two other cases he gave an opinion that he could not tell -- could not tell the jury what -- what the 4346 cause was of a particular laryngeal cancer. and he made those opinions because the smoker had other risk factors. well, in this case he was able to identify the cause, and he said the cause was alcohol. and the reason for him saying that is the same thing you hear from realtors -- location, location, location. you have to be a pretty big believer in coincidences to believe that in a heavy and long-time drinker of alcohol the tumor is found in exactly the place where alcohol not only touches but where it lingers. huge coincidence to believe the tumor was not caused by alcohol in a case with stubborn facts about drinking like this one. ladies and gentlemen, the greater weight of the evidence in this case is that long-term and heavy alcohol use caused this tumor, not smoking. dr. bertino did not say, as mr. gary suggested yesterday, that smoking contributed to the -- to the tumor and there was this other stuff, these other risk factors. that is not what he said. he said the most significant cause was alcohol, and though these other factors were present, you could not determine how much they contributed, all because of the location. 4347 ladies and gentlemen, they have not met their burden of proving that smoking caused the tumor. now, if you find everything that i have said so far unpersuasive and you decide to return a verdict for mr. kirkland, you have to decide on an amount of damages. and this is hard. it is hard to put a value on the quality of life. mr. kirkland is cured. everybody agrees with that. but he is not functioning normally. mr. gary asked you for over $96,000,000. a lot of money. a lot of money. you were instructed, and it is in your instructions to take back to the jury room, if you should choose to give an award, that it should be fair and just in light of the evidence you have heard in the case. so what evidence did you hear? you learned that mr. kirkland lived life in the fast lane. he smoked, he drank, he smoked marijuana, and he developed a cancer that caused him distress and pain. even if you decide that smoking caused that cancer, you have got to also figure that drinking to the extent he did where he is ordered to refrain from drinking, and he is put in an alcohol rehab program, drinking to the extent your daughter comes and she says dad, stop drinking, that certainly 4348 could not have helped. and smoking marijuana, which he did as an adult, by the way, not as a child, certainly could not have helped. living life in the fast line as long as he did certainly could not have helped, though. that is the facts in this case. and it is facts in this case that have nothing to do with my client. but he did develop a cancer and the cancer did change his life. he was cured. he was able to return to work, the same job, the same pay. he worked until he was 65 part-time -- full-time and part-time after that. now he is retired. one of you asked the question, and it was answered. he has health insurance and prescription drug coverage and will for the rest of his life. yeah, his life has changed. he cannot swim, he cannot sing. he has restricted use of his left arm. thank goodness he is a right-hander. he is on pain medication, although in his deposition he said that it was for a work-related injury on his back. and at trial he said, well, it is for my back and my neck. but he beat the cancer. we all feel compassion. we all wish him the best. but neither of those is a reason to put aside common sense and good judgment. and 4349 yesterday mr. gary invited you to wildly put aside common sense and good judgment. i would suggest that the evidence in this case, the facts of this case, the facts about mr. kirkland, if you decide to award him anything, suggest an award in the thousands, not in the millions. if you make an award, compensate mr. kirkland, not his lawyers, and compensate him based on the evidence about him, not his lawyer's argument, not his lawyer's crusade -- mr. gary: i'm going to object to this and move that any reference to lawyers -- the court: the objection is overruled. mr. kaczynski: finally -- and i say finally, because for me i do not get to speak again -- if you get all the way through the verdict form, you are going to have to decide whether punitive damages are warranted. if you get that far, you will have already fully compensated mr. kirkland for his injury. punitive damages, as the judge instructed you, are not about compensation or making somebody whole. punitive damages are about money. more money. as judge levens told you, punitive damages is designed to punish and deter. punish for conduct tantamount to reckless disregard of human 4350 life. and the plaintiffs have a higher burden of proof for punitive damages. it is called clear and convincing evidence. now, from the earliest moments of jury selection through yesterday, mr. gary said this case is all about punitive damages. and yesterday he called mr. kirkland an instrument. in opening he called him a vehicle to get to punitive damages. and i'm obviously here to argue that punitive damages are not warranted and this case is not about punitive damages. punish reynolds? despite what dr. farone said, the philip morris guy, reynolds did try to take carcinogens out of cigarette smoke, and they tried from the 1950s forward. you are going to have evidence back in the jury room -- and by the way, this is a plaintiff's exhibit that the plaintiffs did not show you. from 1959, having confirmed and extended the early published findings on polycyclic hydrocarbons in cigarette smoke, we initiated a lengthy research program to develop methods to lessen the amounts of these potentially dangerous compounds in cigarette smoke. we investigated the following five main approaches to the problem. 4351 and there are five scientific methods they went through. okay. next, please. the experimental variations in these investigations were such that over 120 separate experiments were conducted involving almost one half million cigarettes. this is 1959. they were trying to make a better cigarette that far back. you heard evidence in this case that reynolds tried to cooperate with the federal government to develop a less hazardous cigarette. this is a memo from the president of the company to the head of research and development. areas of special emphasis. in cooperation with others, you should push the work concerning tobacco and health. you should prepare a plan to foster any relationship with government personnel in the quest for mutual understanding of facts, ultimately to gain their cooperation in proper research of this subject. if there is a safer cigarette, let us continue and increase our efforts in this program. please prepare a plan to carry it out. now, this was not written in 1968 to be a trial exhibit in 2011. it was written because this is what the president of reynolds wanted done. 4352 another one of those documents that was not supposed to see the light of day. another one of those documents that tells you what people were really thinking. and that is what they were really thinking: if there is a safer cigarette, let us continue and increase our efforts in this program. you heard that reynolds participated with the national cancer institute and public health authorities in the tobacco working group. among the people involved there, you see it was from the national cancer institute. you see the goal was a less hazardous cigarette. dr. rodgman from reynold's; dr. senkus from reynold's; dr. jesse l. steinfeld, a former -- a future surgeon general; dr. t. c. tso -- he was from the agriculture department; and dr. wynder, the famous man who did the skin painting. and at the bottom you see that reynolds is thanked for being involved. in conjunction with the tobacco working group, one of those efforts was the one i talked about earlier -- the efforts to come up with a low-tar, medium-nicotine cigarette, the one that was called for by the nci, national cancer institute. dr. doll, dr. jarvik, dr. russell and the surgeon general. here is a report on that, 1976. dr. gory 4353 from the national cancer institute. dr. owen from the national cancer institute, and dr. senkus from reynold's, the man who got the memo from the president of reynolds saying cooperate in the program and let us go after a safer cigarette. and this was one of those efforts, not to hook smokers, but to make a less hazardous cigarette in conjunction with the federal government. you heard that reynolds scientists have published articles. dr. benowitz has acknowledged as much. they have published studies on nicotine. and what dr. benowitz says, they published studies on nicotine: yeah, i've seen it from your company. less from the others. it is all still philip morris documents. here is dr. benowitz, a plaintiff's expert, saying your companies publish more on nicotine than anybody else. you saw that reynolds scientists would often wind up being cited by the surgeon general. and even dr. farone acknowledged that reynolds did and is making continuing efforts to make cigarettes safer. it began in the fifties and it is going on today. you heard about in dr. farone's testimony, a 4354 revolutionary breakthrough in a cigarette called premier. premier is a cigarette that heats instead of burns tobacco. has a remarkable reduction in the harmful substances in tobacco. dr. farone, the plaintiff's expert, on his video tape said: in your opinion, premier was a safer cigarette? correct. a safer cigarette manufactured by my client. and dr. farone, the plaintiff's expert, says so. this is why they only pay him $250 an hour. reynolds tested premier, and it published this book with the test results. it is called the premier monograph. and dr. farone says he is got a copy of the premier monograph. and he says it is a book that has information drawn up to explain an entire body of research or endeavor concerning premier. it talks about the basis for it. talks about the research. provides the results. talks about methodology. and the publication of that book, in my opinion, is a good thing. a good thing. punish reynolds for developing premier? for trying to get carcinogens out of tobacco smoke? for publishing this? i do not think so. 4355 and finally, dr. farone said that smokers should switch to premier. the plaintiff's expert is telling smokers to smoke the product made by my client because it is safer. well, unfortunately, they did not. and you heard that premier failed in the marketplace, after which reynolds introduced a product called eclipse. eclipse dr. farone says is a similar type of product developed by reynolds as a successor product. a similar product being a safer product. and ladies and gentlemen, eclipse is in the marketplace today. a safer cigarette in the marketplace today. and even though it is out there and even though even dr. farone says it is safer, dr. farone tells you they are still working to improve it. a safer cigarette in the marketplace that they are still trying to make better. and finally and most recently, you heard from dr. farone that philip morris and reynolds discovered that one of the methods that was being used to cure tobacco increased nitrosamines, carcinogens, in that tobacco. so they came up with a new way to cure. and they shared it with farmers. and this new way of curing tobacco reduced nitrosamine. you heard about it from 4356 dr. farone. they found out if you applied direct heat, you were increasing them. and when that was discovered, they went to tobacco farmers and told them to change the method. yeah, they started programs that caused that to be changed. again, trying to reduce harmful -- harmful elements in cigarettes. and this is not something you hear marketed. this is not something you see in advertising. this is something they are doing to make the product safer. here is the score card. from the 1950s they tried to reduce or eliminate suspect compounds from tobacco smoke. since the 1950s, you heard in the surgeon general's report they lowered tar and nicotine in response to calls from the public health community. in the sixties and seventies, they worked with the national cancer institute to develop a less hazardous cigarette. the president of the company ordered them to and they did. in the seventies and eighties they investigated nicotine's level to develop less hazardous cigarettes in response to calls from drs. russell and doll and jarvik and the surgeon general 4357 in 1981. in the 1980s they developed premier. dr. farone called it a step in the right direction and one of the best cigarettes ever marketed. in the 1990s they discovered and introduced eclipse, the successor, safer product to premier. in the 1990s they discovered and implemented a method of curing tobacco to reduce tobacco-specific nitrosamines. in every decade since the 1950s, reynolds was working to making its products better. now, i'll tell you right now the company's track record is far from perfect. you saw some stupid memos along the way. and maybe reynolds waited too long to admit what everybody else thought. but the record up there, work on safer cigarettes from the 1950s, over 50 years, is not a record of a reckless disregard of human life. it is not a record that requires punishment and it is not a record that requires deterrence. so i'm asking you, if you get to the end of the verdict form, to find that punitive damages, extra money, extra dollars, are not warranted in this case. ladies and gentlemen, mr. kirkland made 4358 choices throughout his life. he chose his lifestyle. he chose to expose himself to alcohol and marijuana and chose to smoke. the choice to smoke was made in another era at another time and in a place lost to history, starting with a cousin marie. we should respect that choice. he made a choice to continue to smoke. and he made it every day, every time he lit up a cigarette. and he made that for 28 years while staring a warning label in the face -- a choice to continue to smoke in the face of news reports about the risks of smoking, a choice to continue to smoke made in the face of warnings from friends and family about the risks of smoking. and we should respect that choice as well. and then in reforming his life, he chose to quit smoking. and we should respect that choice and we should praise that choice. but mr. kirkland is not a victim. he lived his life the way he wanted. he did what he wanted, when he wanted. do not make him a victim in this lawsuit. remember in opening statement i closed by talking about the railroad tracks. one railroad track was r.j. reynolds and one railroad track was leroy kirkland. i told you in opening statement 4359 that even though it may be an optical illusion in the distance that they cross, but they never did -- they never do. in this case, they never did. this is the only chance here i get to speak with you. plaintiff has the burden of proof. plaintiff gets a rebuttal. mr. gary yesterday asked you to do the right thing, and so am i. in this case, the right thing is to follow the law. in this case, the right thing is to find that those railroad tracks do not intersect, to find that what reynolds did did not have any effect on mr. kirkland. as mr. kirkland told us over and over and over again, nothing he did developed from r.j. reynolds; no smoking decision he made was based on anything r.j. reynolds did or said. because i do not get to respond to what comes after me, i would ask one of you to be my advocate in the jury room to answer as you think i would. ladies and gentlemen, as i said, this is the last chance i get to speak with you, and i'm going to end as i began, thanking you for your service, thanking you for your attention and thanking you for the hard work that you are going to put in in deliberating on this case. thank you very much. ms. hoffler: may it please the court, your honor. ladies and gentlemen. i'm c. k. hoffler. and i have been waiting for a chance to talk to you 4361 about some of the evidence in this case, and especially right after r.j. reynolds came into this courtroom and made a mockery of the justice system. ladies and gentlemen of the jury, r.j. reynolds and the plaintiff leroy kirkland agree on one thing. only one thing. and that is that this case is about choice. r.j. reynolds wanted to talk about choice. let us talk about choice. and i'm going to go through some boards here for purposes of demonstration to talk about what the evidence in this case revealed about choice. firstly, ladies and gentlemen of the jury, r.j. reynolds is the one that made the choice to manufacture and sell cigarettes to consumers in america. that was r.j. reynolds. that was not leroy kirkland. that was not anybody with the last name kirkland. that was r.j. reynolds. r.j. reynolds. we talked about choices. r.j. reynolds. and this cigarette is one of the most deadly drugs known to mankind. this is not just tobacco rolled in paper. this is a drug that has carcinogens. this is a drug that kills. we have heard testimony about that. r.j. reynolds is the one who made the decision to determine who to market its cigarettes to in the 4362 1940s, 1950s, 1960s when leroy kirkland was smoking. you heard the defense lawyers say, what does all this have to do with leroy kirkland? r.j. reynolds' decision to sell, to market to youth in the forties, the fifties, and the sixties has everything to do with mr. kirkland. because as you heard their experts say, there was a climate. there was a climate that existed where all this information, everywhere around. people got it through osmosis. that is what dr. hoffman said. so r.j. reynolds made a deliberate effort to market in the 1940s and '50s and '60s. that was during the time that leroy kirkland was smoking; in fact, when he first started smoking. who determined to which level tar and nicotine? we have heard about the dangers of nicotine. who made that determination? it was r.j. reynolds. not mr. kirkland. r.j. reynolds. and what type of tobacco? we heard about tobacco leaf and we heard about the reconstituted tobacco that was put in to make the nicotine more addictive. you know, they deny that. because the one thing that was absolutely astounding about r.j. reynolds' presentation here -- and they are nothing 4363 if not consistent -- was that they failed to take responsibility. they act as though they manufactured and sold some type of a nice feel-good instrument, feel-good product, not a deadly weapon that kills people. we have heard of 440,000 people today in america. we heard of 300,000 people when the 1980 surgeon general's report was released. but what we did not hear about is the people like leroy kirkland. they do not have a voice. they do not have part of their neck. they do not have part of their tongue. they cannot talk every day. he cannot use both hands and talk at the same time. yes, they do not want to talk about that. so who made the determination on what type of tobacco leaf to use? that was r.j. reynolds. who made the determination on the chemical additives to use in cigarettes? you remember that long list? dr. henningfield went through this long list of chemical additives -- formaldehyde, ammonia. that was r.j. reynolds. who made the decision to make a product that, when burned, produces smoke containing thousands of chemicals, including hundreds which are toxic, toxic, 50 which cause cancer? that was r.j. reynolds. 4364 and what about a product, that when it burns, it contains radioactive polonium? that was r.j. reynolds. they knew. this was not by happenstance. they spent millions and millions of dollars over the years, decades, perfecting this cigarette, perfecting it so it could hook its smokers. and they did. they succeeded. but you did not hear r.j. reynolds talk about that, because they do not even take responsibility for that. and then let us go further. talked about ammonia in the cigarettes. formaldehyde. now, leroy kirkland came into the courtroom and he looked at you in the eye, members of the jury, and he told you, i take responsibility in part for my actions. he told you that. he is taking responsibility. you heard mr. gary yesterday talk about perhaps an apportionment of fault. he is not running away. he is not perfect. but he did not manufacture these cigarettes. so mr. kirkland did take responsibility for smoking cigarettes. mr. kirkland did take responsibility for buying his first pack of rjr cigarettes. and by the way, that whole discussion about premier, eclipse -- and we will get to that a little later if time permits -- mr. kirkland never smoked 4365 premier or eclipse. premier failed. in fact, it was not even allowed to be marketed here in florida. so that little notion about the good corporate citizen that rjr is because they tried to make a safer cigarette that failed, that did not come to florida, that he did not smoke? that is a ruse. you talk about a red herring. defense counsel used the term red herring. that is a red herring. look here, not there. look everywhere. it is everybody else's fault but the person who manufactured cigarettes. so let us go further, ladies and gentlemen of the jury. let us talk about other choices, other choices. this is what the evidence has reflected. the boards are a little big and heavy. ladies and gentlemen of the jury, who chose to promote products through television and print ads in the fifties when mr. kirkland was smoking, in the sixties, through celebrities, sports figures, doctors, nurses and counting? that was not mr. kirkland. he is not an ad person. he did not do that. that was r.j. reynolds. that was part of their campaign when mr. kirkland was smoking. it does not matter whether he saw the television programs. that was the climate and that 4366 was the environment that they created, r.j. reynolds, so their smokers would smoking their deadly -- their deadly drug. and then who denied for decades, for decades that nicotine in tobacco products or cigarettes were addictive? i guess they want to blame that on mr. kirkland. but it was not mr. kirkland. you have heard the evidence. r.j. reynolds denied for decades. denied. it was not me. we did not do it. it is not addictive. and, of course, you saw the spin, you saw the spin that r.j. reynolds gave you today on that testimony that their ceo gave to members of congress. you remember that video when the congressman said, do you find cigarettes to be addictive? those other ceos, they just said no, no. r.j. reynolds wanted to explain: well, you see. no. yes. kind of. so no. no. no. the bottom line is in 1994 their ceo told members of congress, told the american public, told everyone and took an oath that cigarettes were not addictive. and do you know when they finally admitted? forced to. when they admitted? that was in the year 2000. in the year 2000, r.j. reynolds finally 4367 admitted, yes, cigarettes are addictive. yes, cigarettes can cause lung cancer. yes, cigarettes can cause laryngeal cancer. 2000, 11 years ago. eleven years ago. but if you listen to them, ladies and gentlemen of the jury, everybody knew about it. the native americans knew about it. right? the native americans knew about it. in the 1500s. john quincy adams knew about it in 1485. he knew it was addictive. it was everywhere. if you listen to dr. hoffman, everybody knew it was addictive. well, if everybody knew it was addictive, ladies and gentlemen of the jury, why did their ceo deny it publicly before congress under oath? why? why? because of money, that is why. because to admit to addiction would cause people certainly to stop -- to stop smoking. but they wanted people to continue smoking so people would continue to buy their cigarettes. and 2000 is an important year. because, you see, their expert on causation, dr. bertino, he testified that it was not until 2000 that he, a laryngeal expert, their expert, that he believed -- 2000, 11 years ago -- that laryngeal cancer is caused by cigarette smoking. 4368 now, what kind of sense does that make, ladies and gentlemen of the jury? this is their expert that they brought into this courtroom. now, i guess what he did is they coordinated. he admitted it when they admitted it. now, let us talk about dr. bertino, since defense counsel has talked about him. the clerk: ten minutes, counsel. ms. hoffman: i'm sorry? the court: ten minutes. ms. hoffman: thank you very much. i do not have a lot of time, ladies and gentlemen of the jury. so if i have to talk quickly, please forgive me. dr. bertino. dr. bertino took the position in the beginning until five days before trial, i really do not know what causes laryngeal cancer. i cannot tell. i read the documents. i looked at this, this, this, this, blah, blah. that was his testimony. but interestingly enough, right before trial, five days before trial, january 19th, we get the document. he said, oh. okay. now i know. it was caused by alcohol. that is what it is. alcohol. now what happened, what transpired over that 4369 two-year period when he read everything, he saw everything, records conflicting to five days before? of course, what happened is he knew he had to come up with something. but that is not how it should work. that is not how it should work, ladies and gentlemen of the jury. and while we are talking about dr. bertino, let us talk about that swallow test. he sat and he looked at you in the eye, and he did that little green gook swallow test. and he said this was a normal swallow. normal. normal swallow. you remember that? dr. dolgin came back and he explained to you, members of the jury, why it could not have been a normal swallow. there was scar tissue, evidence of chemotherapy. part of the tongue was missing. that is not normal. that is not normal. that probably is what the leroy kirkland's, what that looks like after having his tongue removed, after having chemotherapy and radiation. but that is not a normal swallow. but he looked at you in the eye and said. and dr. dolgin showed you what a normal swallow is. so when they bring and parade their expert to come five days before trial to say, oh yes, it was alcohol, not smoking, do not go for that, ladies and 4370 gentlemen of the jury. and let us also talk, though, about what dr. bertino did admit. and this is going to be very important for the jury instruction. he did say, however -- dr. bertino -- that he agreed with mr. kirkland's treating physician, dr. jimmie wilbur, that mr. kirkland's nicotine use contributed to the development of laryngeal cancer. he did say that. he did say that when pressed on cross-examination by my partner, ms. sperando. so let us continue, ladies and gentlemen, about these choices that r.j. reynolds made. they implemented a marketing campaign in the fifties and sixties for filters to give people a sense of, oh, yes, cigarettes are safer. well, you heard testimony that that was just a ruse; that did not mean anything. because, in fact, filters, there is no evidence that filters actually were safer. you also heard and you saw evidence that they designed cigarettes and added chemical compounds to make it easier to inhale. that is just -- that is not disputed. no one came into this courtroom from r.j. reynolds to dispute -- mr. kaczynski: objection, your honor. motion 4371 in limine. the court: sustained. the jury will disregard that last remark. ms. hoffman: there was no evidence that came into this courtroom -- there was no evidence that you all heard to dispute that the designs, the cigarettes designed by r.j. reynolds added chemical compounds to make it easier to inhale. no evidence to dispute that the flavoring compounds like chocolate and menthol were added to cigarettes for there to be a better taste so that people could overcome the aversion to inhale. that was all the choice of r.j. reynolds. also, there was no evidence to refute that press release of the ftc. they talked about how they cooperated with the government. remember, the ftc issued a press release, and they said in 2008 they rescinded that ftc test and they said, the ftc will not be a smoke screen for tobacco companies' shameful marketing practices. shameful. that was a choice. those shameful marketing practices. that was a choice of r.j. reynolds. and then there are other things they chose to do. paper porosity, like the holes in the paper, that -- to determine the placement of those vent 4372 holes. remember, dr. henningfield dissected a cigarette and he had the vent holes. well, who knew about the vent holes? did the smokers know about the vent holes? they did not want the smokers to know about it, because if the smoker knew, they would know where it was placed and they would not cover it because it was supposed to reduce the amount of tar and nicotine. they did not want them to know, because if they knew they may take in less. and guess what. at some point they may stop smoking cigarettes. that is not what they wanted, so they just did that to kind of satisfy the government. reconstituted tobacco. these are all choices that rjr made. they denied for decades nicotine was addictive. they hired a public relations firm to snow the country to counter the negativity of respected doctors who first linked in the 1950s, early 1950s that there was a linkage between cigarette smoking and cancer. they did not want that, so they got together. you heard about at the plaza hotel. they started this ctr thing. that was their choice to create this controversy and doubt, much like they have 4373 created a controversy and doubt -- do not focus here, focus there. do not focus on addiction. do not focus on nicotine. do not focus on us. focus on them. these doctors are crazy. that is what they did. the clerk: five minutes, counselor. ms. hoffman: the frank statement. and i can go on and on. they issued a frank statement, and they are the ones that put together the tobacco institute. they created confusion and doubt. they engaged in this marketing. they decided what information to share with the federal government. and that is not much. ladies and gentlemen, this conduct is reprehensible. now, r.j. reynolds came in this courtroom. they do not dispute they did all those things. they cannot, because those secret documents, they reflect that. and this is not going to be a trick question, but who made the determination to sell cigarettes that eliminated nicotine and tar from cigarettes? that would be no one. because even though they had the power, resources and ability to manufacture a cigarette that had no nicotine, they never did it. 4374 do you mean to tell me, with all of the money and resources, scientists from all over the world, research centers overseas, that r.j. reynolds could not manufacture a cigarette that did not contain nicotine? it does not make sense. because they do not want to. because if they do that, and if people start smoking, people who are hooked start smoking it, guess what. they will start buying the other cigarettes. they do not want that. because that is responsible for their brinks trucks, brinks trucks filled with money. this is all about money. it is not about health, in consideration for health for the people, for mr. kirkland. this case has everything to do with kirkland. all of these choices that r.j. reynolds made impacted mr. kirkland directly, indirectly, in every way. lying, misrepresenting to members of congress, misrepresenting to the federal government. the federal government washed their hands at some level of many different things of the tobacco industry. you heard the testimony. because their information was simply not credible. they concealed documents. and it was only until the mid 1990's that they got those documents. i'm not going to go over all that again. 4375 you know, ph labels. they did not inform the smokers that diseases like laryngeal cancer are side effects of nicotine addiction. and you heard mr. kirkland. now, we had witness after witness, including dr. dolgin, including the treating physicians, say that mr. kirkland was addicted. that he was addicted. mr. kirkland said he was addicted. he had cravings. they did not talk about that. he did have previous quit attempts. that is what their expert, dr. myers said. he did have nicotine fits. he did try to quit. he went to the lord, he went to church, he had his church praying for him so he could quit before he was diagnosed with cancer. why would he go to church to seek the intervention of the church to quit unless he had tried to quit and did not do it? the clerk: two minutes, counsel. ms. hoffman: you do not need to leave your common sense at the door, ladies and gentlemen of the jury. now, you are going to be asked in this case to evaluate whether r.j. reynolds acted in a reprehensible manner. there should be no -- there should not be two different standards, corporation, 4376 individual. if a corporation lies and cheats, conceals information, hides health effects that kill people, they should be held accountable. that is what this case is about. that is what this case is about. mr. kirkland smoked his cigarettes. two packs a day. whether he was -- there is no question he was addicted. he bought these cigarettes. he did. he takes responsibility for spending his money and buying those cigarettes. but he was hooked when he was 17, before warning labels. before warning labels. and it was not even a warning label that came out at first. it was a caution label. all those labels. caution. very, very mild. and the cigarette companies were fighting and kicking against those warnings labels. they did not want to do it. they were forced to do it. reprehensible. and all the while denying, when mr. kirkland was buying and smoking those cigarettes, up to 40 a day, up to two packs a day, the cigarette industry still denied that there was anything harmful. when he stopped smoking, they were still denying that there was anything harmful. reprehensible. reckless. they just did not care. it is about mr. kirkland, ladies and gentlemen 4377 of the jury. this case is about mr. kirkland and it is about r.j. reynolds taking responsibility for what it did. all those choices, all those choices. he made the choice to start smoking. they made the choice to manufacture, to sell, to market a deadly drug that they knew would kill people eventually. consequences of your actions. those are the consequences. mr. leroy kirkland has taken responsibility. consequences. r.j. reynolds came into this courtroom and has taken no responsibility. not one. not even for manufacturing this cigarette. not even for the 440,000 americans that die every day in these united states of america. they do not believe in taking responsibility. and they are nothing if not consistent, because they failed in history to take responsibility. but you have the power, you have the power in this case about mr. kirkland to change that, to say in america, if you are going to be a corporation, you have to take responsibility. if you are going to lie, there are consequences. if you are going to cheat, there are consequences. if you are going to conceal, there are consequences. there should be a level playing field. mr. kirkland had 4378 accepted -- the clerk: your time has expired. ms. hoffler: excuse me. the court: your time is up. ms. hoffman: thank you very much. i know you are going to do the right thing. i know you are going to do the right thing.