mr. socias: may it please the court. good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen of the jury. as you may recall, my name is manny socias, and i'm a member of the trial team, the lawyers that have had the privilege over the last three weeks of representing the gentleman sitting right here, the plaintiff, leroy kirkland. it is hard to believe, but we have been here for three weeks already. and all of you are painfully aware you have taken three weeks out from your lives, from your problems, from your families, to come to court every day and listen attentively to witnesses, people you have never met, people you have never seen before. you have paid attention, you have seen dozens of documents, you have looked at dozens of videos. and, basically, you have put aside your lives for three weeks, the things that concern you the most personally, to come here and help resolve the dispute between two parties that are strangers to you. 4209 and on behalf of mr. kirkland, on behalf of, i think, all of the attorneys in the courtroom, we want to thank you. well, we want to thank you for being so attentive for the last three weeks, we want to thank you for your time, and we want to thank you for the obvious effort that you put in to listen to the evidence and try to understand the case so that you can come up with a fair and just ruling at the end, which we are at now. there is absolutely -- there is really nothing more that anyone, any lawyer, any party, could ask of a jury than what you have given us. and without reservation, we deeply appreciate your service. and without people like you that are willing to come here and sacrifice weeks of your lives to listen to evidence like this, we in the united states could not have the justice system that we have. and, again, thank you. the evidence is over. and you have heard from our witnesses and you have heard from the tobacco industry witnesses. and i want to start by talking about the tobacco industry witnesses you have heard from. every single witness that you saw come in to testify on behalf of r.j. reynolds, the tobacco 4210 company, was an expert, an expert witness. they were part of a stable of experts that have made the circuit around the country for over a decade testifying in tobacco trials for r.j. reynolds and other tobacco companies. and they came to court and they told you that, yeah, cigarettes are addictive. sure, they are addictive, but not mr. kirkland; he was not addicted. sure, cigarettes cause cancer, but not for mr. kirkland; they did not cause mr. kirkland's cancer. and when you think about it, what they presented here for you today is really just a tweaking, a tweaking of that pr campaign that they started -- mr. kaczynski: objection, your honor. pretrial ruling. the court: come up. approach. (the following bench conference took place outside the hearing of the jury.) mr. kaczynski: i said what i said because i did not want to make a speaking objection, but, your honor, this is the old defending the case is another part of a conspiracy and part of the pr campaign, it is part of 50 years of deception. mr. socias: my position is, and what i intend 4211 to argue is, that this is a tweaking of the position they have been defending cases on for 50 years. the court: it is not saying that they do not have -- i mean, what i ruled pretrial was, yes, they certainly have a right to defend themselves. based on what he said and where he is going, i'm going to overrule the objection. (end of bench conference.) mr. socias: and, basically, what you have heard is a tweaking of a pr campaign that the tobacco company started to defend themselves way back in the '50s. in fact, when you look at the documents, and you have seen the documents already, you will see that the defense that they have mounted in this case against mr. kirkland is something they came up with when mr. kirkland was 14 years old. mr. kaczynski: objection, your honor. this is what is the subject of your pretrial ruling. the court: objection overruled. mr. socias: and this is a document that goes back to 1979. and i'll show you some that go all the way back to the '50s where the public relations counsel for the tobacco industry was laying out their position. and this is what it was. 4212 "the counsel exists today because the complex etiology of these constitutional diseases remains unraveled," the report said. "the overall importance of genetic factors is being increasingly recognized, accepted, and studied," the report continued. "much recent and current research supports the statement of many years ago that we live in a sea of carcinogens," the report said. and that is the defense you have heard here today, a sea of carcinogens; asbestos where he worked, alcohol whenever he had a beer, viruses whenever he walked outdoors. anything in the sea of cancer caused, according to the tobacco industry, mr. kirkland's -- mr. kirkland's cancer. anything. this goes back into the '50s. a report by six u.s. scientists citing evidence showing, they say, that air pollution played a definite role in causation and rise in the frequency of lung cancer during recent decades. and they go on to say, "20 times more frequently among patients with tuberculosis than in the general population." again, they are going to any other cause of cancer, anything that they can come up with that causes cancer, except the obvious. 4213 here's another document, tobacco industry document. "the scientists said the results would seem to detract from the importance of cigarette smoke as an injurious agent." then it goes on to say, "the study by four british scientists suggests that smokers live it up more. this may lower their resistance and expose them to conditions that may cause cancer." and you have heard that here today. mr. kirkland liked to drink. mr. kirkland liked to occasionally have a beer. he liked to occasionally have a scotch. he liked to have a gin. he liked to live it up. so they come -- they have experts who come here today and they tell you, well, that is the cause, that is the cause of the cancer. in fact, they come here and they tell you that the cause of the cancer is anything and everything except the fact that for 40 years, 40 years, mr. kirkland, day in and day out, bathed his larynx in r.j. reynolds' products, r.j. reynolds' smoke. 40 years. that, they do not mention. they want to talk about an occasional drink, a possible virus, asbestos, everything under the sun except 40 years of heavy smoking. and they use dr. bertino, an expert that came 4214 in to talk about that, to talk about what it is that he thought caused mr. kirkland's cancer. and following the game plan, following their pr campaign, he said alcohol, asbestos, viruses. but you saw dr. bertino's been part of the tobacco company's traveling side show for over a decade. before 1994, he was making the circuits around the country, wherever anyone would sue a tobacco company, saying cigarettes cannot cause cancer; therefore, it could not have caused this plaintiff's cancer, because there is no link between cigarettes and cancer. now there is a court order. now it is been determined that it does cause cancer. he cannot come in here and deny that anymore, so he does the next best thing; he conjures up another cause. and he is still part of their traveling side show, part of the tobacco company dog-and-pony show that makes the circuit around the country. in fact, he is never found a plaintiff, he is never found anybody that sued a tobacco company where he thought their cancer was caused by cigarette smoking. that is his job. he goes and finds something else. and nothing could be easier, because we all live in a world that has things like 4215 pesticides. it has things like beer. it has things like scotch. it has things that can be carcinogenic. and this expert goes around the country, ignores the fact that someone is smoking heavily, saturating themselves with r.j. reynolds' products, and simply blames the cancer on anything else that he can. that is what he did, and that is what he started doing when he could no longer and was no longer allowed to testify that cigarettes do not cause cancer. and he comes up with a claim that alcohol did it in this case. alcohol. alcohol was the substantial cause. and you heard the -- excuse me. you heard the cross-examination. he conjured that up just a few days before the trial. he decided, well, it has to be alcohol. blames it on everything, everything except mr. kirkland puffing r.j. reynolds' cigarettes 30 -- i mean -- pardon me -- yeah, 30 to 60 cigarettes a day every day of his life right up until the day he started coughing up blood. r.j. reynolds, ladies and gentlemen, has done everything it can to smokescreen what is the obvious and commonsense cause of his cancer, 40 years of 4216 heavy smoking, 40 years of chain smoking. now, after the tobacco company spent half a century -- and you have heard that testimony from dr. proctor, the historian -- half a century spreading lies about their product, they come here. they come here into court, and through their experts and through their arguments, they tell you, well, it was mr. kirkland's choice. mr. kaczynski: objection, your honor. your pretrial ruling. the court: i sustain that objection. mr. socias: okay. they argue that it was mr. kirkland's choice to begin smoking. they gloss over the fact that that happened when he was 11 years old. and then they blame him for his choice to continue smoking. in essence, they tell you that he was stupid enough to buy their products and now whatever happens is his problem. but even the tobacco industry, ladies and gentlemen, as you saw, recognized a problem with that choice defense, with saying it was the smoker's choice to smoke, it was the smoker's choice not to quit, it was the smoker's choice to continue smoking. internal tobacco company document, september 9, 4217 1980. i just want to focus on this bottom bubble there. "we cannot defend continued smoking as free choice if the person was addicted." the tobacco industry knew that if a plaintiff was addicted, they could not come in and convincingly make any kind of argument that there was free choice. and that is because, when someone is addicted, the addiction influences the choice, physiologically influences the choice. you have heard testimony that the addiction actually changes the structure of the brain. it hinders and affects an individual's ability to exercise his free will. you have heard from dr. farone, who told you addiction always affects free will. it is something that decreases your ability to stop doing that which you are addicted to. no one refuted that. no one refutes that from the tobacco industry. no expert refuted dr. farone on that. you heard from dr. burns, and he said, "and then, as they move through the adolescent process" -- talking about a smoker -- "they are using the nicotine often enough that they are dosing their own brains repetitively, and now, all of a sudden, they have an increase in nicotine receptors. they have now a perception of unhappiness, of not feeling 4218 normal when they stop smoking, and they have difficulty quitting." this is the pattern. you start when you are a kid, you start when you are young, and before you know it, it is changed the structure of your brain. you have extra nicotine receptors. becomes hard, and for some people, almost impossible to quit. not a single expert, no witness on behalf of the tobacco industry, has come in and contradicted a word dr. burns said on the subject. you heard the testimony of dr. henningfield. he said, but what a drug does, an addictive drug, it is a biological pressure, it alters your choice. again, consistent with the other two experts. unrebutted by the tobacco industry. unrebutted by any of their experts. so r.j. reynolds comes here, and they do the only thing they can do. they cannot win, and they know it. if leroy kirkland -- if you believe leroy kirkland is addicted, they lose, because there is no free choice. that does away with their defense. so what do they do? what is the only option open to them? they come in here and they say, well, he is not addicted. 4219 but what you are going to see is, and what you saw in the evidence is, that leroy kirkland was the typical addicted smoker. he is a poster child for how people become addicted and stay addicted to cigarettes, according to the tobacco industry's own documents, according to their own version of events. you will see that mr. kirkland started smoking in the very early '50s. and this is when the tobacco companies were targeting children in their marketing. at this time, mr. kirkland was 11 years old. not even a teenager. he was a child. and you heard the testimony of dr. burns, "people who were in adolescence in the '40s and '50s would have received a much higher frequency of exposure to very powerful tobacco advertising images." that was unrebutted. this is -- and this is when mr. kirkland was an adolescent. this is when mr. kirkland was growing up. this is when mr. kirkland started experimenting with smoking. this is when mr. kirkland increased his smoking to the point where he finally became addicted. unrebutted. unrebutted by anyone on behalf of the tobacco industry. and you saw how mr. kirkland went on to smoke 4220 pall malls. then he smoked salem, almost two packs a day, day in, day out, for 34 years. all of them r.j. reynolds products. he smoked them and he smoked them and he smoked them until one day he just started coughing up blood in 1993. now, you heard testimony that salem was a menthol cigarette, and you heard why menthol was added to cigarettes. menthol is an anesthetic. it cools the throat. it makes smoking easier. dr. proctor, you remember him saying -- he said, when you put the menthol in the cigarette, the menthol does not hurt you, but it helps the poison go down easier. you can smoke without hurting your throat. it has a cooling sensation. you put menthol in a cigarette, it makes smoking two packs a day easier, just like mr. kirkland was doing. it makes selling cigarettes easier. you sell more cigarettes. people smoke more when it does not hurt their throats, when it cools their throats. and it makes getting cancer easier because you smoke more cigarettes. two to three cigarettes, ladies and gentlemen, mr. kirkland smoked for almost 40 years, every day of his life. first thing in the morning, last thing at night. and they come in here and they tell you 4221 he is not addicted. their own documents show that he fits the -- he fits the industry, the tobacco industry, own definition of addiction. this is a tobacco industry march 20, 1984 document. the cigarette consumer. what did the tobacco industry say about their customers and why they kept coming back and buying their product? "for the most part, people continue to smoke because they find it too uncomfortable to quit." here's an industry that is saying people buy our stuff because they just cannot handle not buying our stuff. and they recognize over 85 percent of their customers agree either very strongly or strongly, i wish i had never began smoking. over eighty percent have attempted to quit. a unique industry, ladies and gentlemen, and an industry that knows internally that the only reason people buy their stuff is because they cannot stop using it and that most of them wish to god they would never started buying their products. another internal tobacco company document. this is what they are talking about is happening to their customers. "we sell a product that is bought often and used from 10 to 60 times a day." that is mr. kirkland. 60 times a day. day in, 4222 day out. "we provide a product that is an essential commodity in a habitual act." they knew what they were selling to mr. kirkland. a habitual act. "it is inevitable, therefore" -- and this is inexcusable. this is inexcusable. "it is inevitable, therefore, that we focus upon habit formation." this is how they want to sell their cigarettes. this is how they want to market. this is how they want to present it. they want habit formation in their customers. habit formation. that is for the young smokers. once you get started, what they want to focus on, a habit maintenance. they want you to form the habit, then they want you to maintain the habit. code word for addiction. they want to addict their customers, and they are focusing on how they can make that happen. "and that we make use of a conceptual model specifically designed to explain habit formation." this is how the tobacco company was talking internally about the addictiveness of what they were selling to leroy kirkland. and they knew this was addictive. 4223 i mean, this is -- smoker psychology research, 1969. cigarette industry. "the cigarette will even preempt food in times of scarcity on the smoker's priority list." they knew that what they were selling was so addictive that people would rather have a cigarette -- a smoker without a cigarette would rather smoke a cigarette than have his dinner. that is addiction, ladies and gentlemen. that is what they were selling. that is what they knew they were selling. that is what they intended to market. another tobacco company document. they come in here and they say mr. kirkland is not addicted. "with the exception of sleeping, eating, smoking is the most regular and most repeated part of a cigarette smoker's life. indeed, among the great majority of cigarette smokers, it outstrips sleeping and eating in frequency of repetition." addiction, ladies and gentlemen. that is addiction. they knew what they were selling. that is what they were intending to sell. this is their words. these are their documents, their secret documents that only recently came to light. if there is any doubt, if there is any doubt, look at how their people talked about what they were 4224 selling internally. you saw the ads. you saw the ads with the doctors saying so many doctors smoked cigarettes. you saw the beautiful people lighting up cigarettes on the beach during a clambake. internally, they know what they are selling. they are not selling taste. they are not selling a fun time at a clambake. the cigarette should be conceived not as a product, but as package. what are they selling? the product is nicotine. that is what the cigarette companies knew was their product. "think of the cigarette pack as a storage container for a day's supply of nicotine. think of the cigarette as a dispenser for a dose unit of nicotine." that is the way doctors talk. that is the way drug addicts talk. that is the way drug dealers talk. mr. kaczynski: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. stricken. the jury will disregard, please. mr. socias: a dose unit of nicotine, that is what they are selling. that is what they were selling leroy kirkland for 40 years, dose units of nicotine. and they knew it, and that is -- and that is what they called it. they made no bones about it internally. 4225 they go on to say, "smoking the cigarette is the lever press. the effect of the smoking act" -- well, let me back up a little bit. and you saw that leroy kirkland, after 40 years, really became exactly, exactly what the tobacco industry knew he would become and intended that he would become. and that is basically a rat pushing a lever to get that cigarette, to get that next fix to make himself feel better. smoking a lever is -- "smoking a cigarette is the lever press." they are talking about those rats that you put in cages and they press a lever and they get a pellet of food. the effect of that smoking act upon his person is the reward. he comes to push the lever 10 to 60 times a day. that is what happened to mr. kirkland. he came to push that lever, open that cigarette pack, pull out 40 cigarettes a day, and smoke them. kept pushing that lever. and then the cigarette companies go on to say, "our task is to understand the reinforcing mechanism or process whereby the habit is established and maintained. such is our model." not only did they turn leroy kirkland into a rat pushing a lever time and time and time again, 40 4226 times a day to get a cigarette fix, that is what they wanted to do with their marketing. that is what they did with their marketing. their task was to understand that process where that habit was established and maintained. that was their goal. they were selling dose units of nicotine, and they wanted mr. kirkland to keep hitting that lever to get his dose and pay them for their pack after pack after pack of cigarettes. now, you see that r.j. reynolds comes to defend this case with really a red herring. they spend a lot of time, a lot of time talking about choice; which, ladies and gentlemen, really is a distraction that has absolutely nothing to do with any law or any instruction that judge levens is going to give you. in fact, he is already given you most of the instructions, and you have not seen the word "choice" in it. they are going to argue to you that leroy kirkland made a free choice to continue smoking because he showed he could quit cold turkey in 1994. but you are going to see nothing in the court's instruction that is going to suggest to you that an ability to beat an addiction, even cold turkey, means you are not addicted. 4227 and you heard the testimony from the witnesses. heroin addicts quit. happens all the time. cocaine addicts quit. happens all the time. alcoholics quit. happens all the time. you hold a loaded gun to a heroin addict's head and he is convinced the trigger will be pulled if he has a heroin fix, a lot of heroin addicts are going to beat the addiction. it does not mean they were not addicted. it just means that some people can beat addictions, given enough motivation. now, just because leroy kirkland, in 1993, after he starts hemorrhaging blood from his throat, when he becomes terrified for his life -- obviously, who would not be -- when he turns to god and church for help and to prayer for help, he was able to beat the addiction. that does not mean he was not addicted. and while rjr, reynolds, claims that smoking is choice, is always choice, they ignore what they knew and what you have heard in evidence, which is that most smokers start smoking before the age 16. most smokers. sixty percent start by age 16. these are kids. these are high school kids. r.j. reynolds knows that. the tobacco company knows that. by age 18, by the time they graduate from high 4228 school and are starting college, 89 percent of smokers are already smoking. this is how they get them. and you saw it in the documents. you start as adolescents. they start when they are young. and before you know it, they are hooked, they are pressing that lever time and time again, buying that pack of cigarettes to get the nicotine fix. in the case of leroy kirkland, ladies and gentlemen, we are not even talking about an adolescent. we are not talking about age 12. he is off the charts. he started at age 11. age 11. he is a child. and they call it free choice. reynolds brought in one of their stable of experts. remember dr. myers, the psychiatrist? he talked about addiction to claim that leroy kirkland was not addicted. now, he is an expert. he is another one of the traveling side show that the tobacco company has that makes a circuit around the country and says whoever is suing the tobacco companies, cancer came from something else, the person was not addicted, whatever they have, whatever they have to say. now, if you recall, dr. myers has never seen a tobacco plaintiff that was addicted to nicotine. 4229 never seen them. not surprising. he is on the tobacco company payroll. he is one of their experts. but you see, it is obvious why he can say this. it is obvious why he can say that the plaintiffs are not addicted, that mr. kirkland is not addicted, that plaintiffs in tobacco cases are not addicted. because if you look at his definition, the definition that he used of addiction, it required impairment. and that is very important. this is dr. myers. he said you have to look at the use of the substance, this would be nicotine, and whether it is impairing the person or not, whether it is causing them significant distress. so if the substance is not impairing you and it is not causing you significant distress, well, then, you are not an addict. you are not addicted to it, according to dr. myers. which is why he is never found a tobacco plaintiff to be addicted to nicotine. and ladies and gentlemen, use commonsense. nicotine does not impair. nicotine does not make people drunk. nicotine does not cause people to lose their jobs. cigarettes do not cause people to lose their families the way cocaine, the way heroin, the way alcohol does. it does not cause people to lose their homes. it does not change their personalities. 4230 it is not that type of drug. that is what makes it deadly, that is what makes it dangerous, and that is what makes it sneaky. because when you are addicted to nicotine, everything feels fine. you are in good health, you are with your family, you have your job, everything is good, until then, all of a sudden, like with mr. kirkland, one day it is not; you are coughing up blood, and then the nightmare of cancer begins. no impairment along the way. and that is just what happened to leroy kirkland. and the fact is that dr. myers is still reciting the playbook, the tobacco company playbook going back to the '50s. now, he does not say that. he cannot say that, because by court order it is been found to be addictive. and the court has already instructed you that cigarettes are addictive. so he cannot say it is addictive. so, like i said, he comes in the back door and he just sneaks in impairment as a requirement for addiction; which, of course, nicotine does not qualify. and whoever happens to be suing the tobacco company, he testifies under oath, yeah, they are not addicted, no impairment. how can you possibly get impaired smoking cigarettes? it 4231 just does not happen. ladies and gentlemen, do not fall for reynolds's word game, not when we are talking about life and death, not when we are talking about the health of leroy kirkland, not when we are talking about the health of people in our society, and not when it is contrary to the law that the court will read you and has read you. the court already has instructed you on the law and will give you some additional instructions before you go back to retire. judge levens is not going to say a single word about addiction requiring impairment. that is a fabrication. that is not going to be in your instructions. he is not going to say a single word of those instructions about choices. he is not going to say a single word in those instructions about the ability to quit. that is a ruse. it is a red herring. it is not the law. it has nothing to do with this case. the only thing he is going to ask you to decide in this regard is whether leroy kirkland was addicted to cigarettes. nothing more. everything else is just smoke and mirrors from r.j. reynolds. now, a long time ago, the courts recognized that simply compensating people for certain personal 4232 damages in some types of cases was not enough. was not enough to protect society from corporate bean counters, people that place a dollar value on human life and suffering and then weigh that dollar value against their profits. and that is why our justice system came to recognize and recognizes punitive damages, so companies cannot profit from intentional, from malicious, from reprehensible acts that hurt others. punitive damages are designed to punish bad acts, to deter companies from continuing to do those bad acts, and to make an example of them for the harm that they cause to the plaintiff. in this case, for the harm that they caused to leroy kirkland. and ladies and gentlemen, in this case, we want compensatory damages. but the real heart of this case, the real heart of this case are punitive damages, because only punitive damages can bring justice to leroy kirkland and justice to the situation that you have seen unfold here over the last three weeks. r.j. reynolds would be happy to pay leroy kirkland's medical bill in pain and suffering because they know they can do that and still come 4233 out ahead in dollars, in dollars and cents. that is all they care about. their bean counters made that decision years ago. but by your verdict, by a decision to award punitive damages, you can clearly tell reynolds that their actions are not acceptable in our society, that what they did to leroy kirkland is not acceptable in our society. you can punish r.j. reynolds, you can deter r.j. reynolds, and you can make an example of them. mr. kaczynski: objection, your honor. williams. the court: sustained as to the last remark. i will instruct the jury on punitive damages. and if there is -- this is right now entitlement, right? mr. socias: yes, your honor. the court: okay. mr. socias: i'm not going to get into dollar amounts. the court: proceed. mr. socias: only you, ladies and gentlemen, no one else, not the judge, not the lawyers, not anyone in this courtroom, can bring justice to leroy kirkland. now think, how do you get the attention, how do you get the attention of a cold-blooded company 4234 whose greed -- whose greed for money exceeds their concern for human life, for human health; whose greed exceeded their concern for the health of leroy kirkland? how do you get the attention of a company that values money more than life? well, there is only one way to do that. you take away some of that money. you award punitive damages. only when it is more expensive for a company like r.j. reynolds to kill than to do the right thing can you be sure that they do the right thing. now, let us just look at what r.j. reynolds has done. this is not up for discussion. the court has told you that these are the engle findings. they found that smoking cigarettes causes 16 general disease conditions, all types of cancers, including laryngeal cancer, lung cancer, pancreatic cancer. i will not read all the types of cancers, but it goes on for a page of cancers. that nicotine in cigarettes is addictive. that r.j. reynolds placed cigarettes on the market that were defective and unreasonably dangerous. that reynolds concealed or omitted material information that was not known or available, knowing that the material was false or misleading, or failed to disclose a material fact concerning the 4235 health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes or both. that reynolds agreed to conceal, conspired to conceal or omit information regarding the health effects of cigarettes or their addictive nature with the intention that smokers and the public would rely on this information to their detriment. that reynolds sold or supplied cigarettes that were defective. and that reynolds sold or supplied cigarettes that at the time of the sale or supply did not conform to the representations. that is already been established. they cannot come in and tell you that did not happen. it is not up for discussion. and, ladies and gentlemen, what is really shocking, what is really horrible is the reason they did it. let us look at the reason they did it. this is a memorandum to the planning committee where, if you recall, research directors of the tobacco industry were interviewed. i'm just going to focus on this last bubble. said another, "suppose everybody smoked just one cigarette less a day, that would be maybe 40 billion a dollars a year." that is why they did it. everything that is on 4236 that engle board, that is why they did it. people started quitting. billions and billions of dollars would be lost to the tobacco industry. and you heard dr. proctor, a man that is made his life studying the history of the tobacco industry. and he started studying it before he ever testified for the first time in any tobacco case. this was his specialty. he started testifying because people knew he had this specialty. he was not hired and then came up with this opinion. and what did he say? "making cigarettes is like printing money. and it was like printing money, so they wanted to keep doing it." and that is why they did it, ladies and gentlemen. they killed people for money. they killed people because the bean counters told them they could kill people and make money. that is reprehensible. i submit to you, that is as reprehensible as any conduct can be. oh, and they were successful. they were successful. you remember when the first news report started coming out into the public around 1953, when you heard the stories linking cigarettes to cancer of the airways and lung cancer? and the cigarette companies responded with their conspiracy, their 4237 massive pr campaign. when the news, when the bad news first hit cigarettes are dangerous, right around '53, there it started happening. people stopped smoking. they got worried. that was a little bit of a gun to their head. hey, we are killing ourselves. then the tobacco companies kicked in with their pr campaign, with their conspiracy, with their people that fanned out across the country and said, do not listen to the attorney general [sic]. it is a publicity stunt. there is no proof. we need more research. maybe it is viruses, maybe it is alcohol, maybe it is air pollution. it is a sea of carcinogens. that did not stop smoking. it went right back up. 40 billion dollars for every cigarette that people kept smoking. it was like printing money. for the money. this is the testimony of dr. burns, where he was asked -- and it relates to this -- what would happen if the tobacco -- basically what he is asked is, what would happen if the tobacco companies had been honest, if they had not done that -- their conspiracy, if they had not done that massive pr campaign. "doctor, if that chart had continued down, 4238 right here, at the slope that we saw in the early '50s, instead of rebounding, what effect, if any, do you believe it would have on today's incidence of cigarette-related diseases?" this is what dr. burns said: "if that decline had continued with the same slope, the vast majority of tobacco-related disease and death that is occurring currently would have been avoided. probably close to 90 to 95 percent of the 440,000 deaths that are currently occurring" -- and this is yearly -- "could have been avoided." 95 percent, ladies and gentlemen. hundreds and hundreds of thousands of lives would have been saved. instead of being where we are eventually going to be here, if this had not happened, thousands and thousands. hundreds of thousands of lives a year would have been saved. and not one witness, no one from the cigarette companies, not one of their experts came here and took issue with that math and with that statement. that is completely unrebutted testimony as to the number of lives that would have been saved had the tobacco company behaved decently instead of the way they behaved. and, ladies and gentlemen, you saw the tobacco 4239 company's own document showing that that was their strategy. that was their strategy, to keep people smoking, to keep this slope from going down and going up. this is a 1972 document. for nearly 20 years, this industry has employed a single strategy to defend itself on three major fronts; litigation, politics, and public opinion. it has always been a holding strategy consisting of creating doubt about the health charge without actually denying it, advocating the public's right to smoke without actually urging them to take up the practice. what do they say themselves? how do they evaluate their own actions? on the litigation front, for which the strategy was designed, it has been successful. no one can sue the tobacco companies. they can sue, they bring in their cadre of experts that back then could testify cigarettes do not cause lung cancer, cigarettes are not addictive, and that was the end of the story. people kept dying. the slope started going up and they made billions and billions of dollars. and, ladies and gentlemen, it is not over yet. it is not over yet. you heard the testimony of dr. proctor. he said the conspiracy is ongoing. i 4240 think it is just more of the same from the tobacco industry. doubt, doubt, doubt, you know. you know, side show. this side show, that. you know, dismissing the truth, covering up the truth. my fundamental views have not changed. it is a side show that dr. proctor was telling you they took across the country, a side show that they brought here today and displayed in front of you. the conspiracy is ongoing. has anyone -- has anyone -- think about it. has anyone come in and said that the conspiracy is not ongoing? that is unrebutted testimony, completely unrebutted testimony. now, you remember dr. henningfield, he was an expert witness. but in a sense, he was also a fact witness because he was there when the surgeon general reports were being drafted. he was part of the drafting. what did he say? "we had no idea the extent to which the product was being manipulated to deceive people. the federal trade commission had no idea. and we are still getting information. we still do not have all the information." the conspiracy is ongoing. did anyone -- did you see -- did you hear a single witness from 4241 reynolds come in and say -- mr. kaczynski: objection, your honor. mr. socias: -- this is wrong? the court: sustained. you want to approach? mr. socias: yes, sir. (the following bench conference took place outside the hearing of the jury:) the court: i explicitly ruled that there was to be no comment on the absence of a corporate representative. did that message not get to you? mr. socias: yes, sir, but i did not comment. i said it is unrebutted by anyone he called as a witness. i have not said anything about a corporate representative. i think none of their experts -- mr. kaczynski: you said a witness from reynolds. mr. socias: well, i mean, that is semantics. it was not my intent to suggest the corporate rep, just that it is unrebutted. the court: i think the best way to handle it is just to -- mr. socias: i'll reword it. the court: -- just to tread lightly and stay away from what now is restricted information. mr. socias: can i just refer that this is 4242 unrebutted? the court: that is good enough. just do not talk about who reynolds brought -- mr. socias: i'll stay away from it. mr. kaczynski: your honor, he already put the idea in the jury's head. i have to move for a mistrial. this is a direct violation of the order. the court: understood. denied. (end of bench conference.) mr. socias: unrebutted. unrebutted. ladies and gentlemen, today you can help end this travesty. today, really, you have the power. as i said earlier, not the judge, not the attorneys, not the government. you. you have the power. you have the power to change leroy kirkland's life. you have the power to change r.j. reynolds. you have the power to help fix some of the damage caused by half a century of lies by r.j. reynolds and its co-conspirators. and leroy kirkland is here today looking you in the eye and asking you that by your verdict you bring justice to this situation, and that you do it by awarding him punitive damages. mr. gary: thank you. judge levens, ladies and gentlemen of the jury, good evening. good afternoon. jurors who responded: good evening. mr. gary: let me express my thanks, just as my partner did, to all of you for just being here. you see, because i know that for some and for many, it is not easy. and i know jury service is not easy. and i thank god every day for people like you all, because at the end of the day, without you, the system would not work. and i thank god for you because we have a system that gives you the power to make a terrible wrong right. you can do that. that is what you are charged to do. i remember about 17 days ago, we stood here and 4245 we talked to you. a lot of people. do you all remember that? a whole lot of people. but of all the people that -- there were over a hundred, and all the questions came down to you all. came to be here, because we knew one thing. no matter what happens in this courtroom, you are going to do the right thing. you are going to do the right thing. now, members of the jury -- and i say that, because you have a lot of power. and do not take it lightly. you have a lot of power. and that is the jury system, because sometimes that is the only way you can get things done is through the jury system. you have the power, members of the jury, to see wrong and make it right. and you know you have seen some wrong in this courtroom. and what i like about it is that, you know, when it comes to you, no matter who it is, no matter how big they are, how much money they have, it really does not matter. mr. kaczynski: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. mr. gary: because at the end of the day, when you come here, it is judgment day. it is judgment day. so members of the jury, do not you take your 4246 power lightly. and i know you will not. as i indicated, you have the power to see suffering like you have seen here with mr. kirkland and to see senseless killings. you can stop it. you are going to have to be bold, courageous, but you can do it. that is what you are going to have to do, because that is the only thing. can you imagine 450,000 senseless killings all because of the love of money, the dollars stuffing their pockets? they have the cleverness to put together what they put together here. and it is hard. it is tough. they have the best of lawyers. and you have seen their experts. they have gotten the best. because as they indicated early on, the strategy was on the litigation front, and it is been working for them. mr. kaczynski: objection, your honor. your pretrial order. the court: sustained. mr. kaczynski: and, your honor, i renew that motion i earlier made. the court: jury will disregard the last comment. mr. kaczynski: sorry. the court: motion denied. 4247 mr. gary: and members of the jury, let me just say this before i go any further. on behalf of our trial team and on behalf of mr. kirkland, we want to say thank you. as a matter of fact, mr. kirkland can barely talk and he cannot even breathe through his nose, but he said to me, "can i say something?" and i said, "no. evidence is in. now is final time for the jury to hear the arguments of the lawyers." he said, "but can i just say something?" mr. kaczynski: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. mr. gary: members of the jury, he wanted me to tell you thank you. now, this service that you have rendered, obviously, is good for the country, for mr. kirkland. but it is been good for you because, you know, when this case is over and you have rendered your verdict, you have done your job, in years to come, you are going to look back on this service and you are going to be real proud to say i was there. i made a difference. i helped save some lives. mr. kaczynski: objection, your honor. the court: overruled. 4248 mr. gary: that is what you are going to be able to say, and you are going to be proud of it. then on top of all that, you made friendships that is going to last here, so it is been good for you too. you know, you made friendships that will withstand the test of time. so it is been a good -- it is been a good coming together. now, members of the jury, mr. kirkland is really an instrument. he is a catalyst for change in the way big corporations do business. mr. kaczynski: objection, your honor. williams. the court: that objection is sustained. mr. gary: you can make a difference, members of the jury. you can say to this defendant, no more. and you have an opportunity, really, in a real sense, to be just like a former president of ours, abe lincoln, and dr. martin luther king, jr. they were drum majors for justice and righteousness. you can be just like them. you can be a drum major for life and for good health, because that is what this is really all about. had his voice box cut out, tongue partially cut off because of these defendants and their greed. 4249 and that is what it is, members of the jury. 440,000 working patriotic americans died just last year, in one year. one year, members of the jury. all because of this defendant and the tobacco industry was greedy and money driven. and you cannot get around it. one thing -- you are going to base your decision on the evidence and the law, but one thing the instructions may tell you is that you do not have to check your commonsense at the door. and you know what has gone down over the last 50 years. american people, including mr. kirkland, have not been treated right by these people. they have not played fair. now, if i make a decision, i make it. if i perish, let me perish, if it is my decision, but do not lie and cheat and mislead and misinform the little people, innocent people, voiceless people. it is not right. you know it is not right. members of the jury, mr. proctor said -- dr. proctor said -- and i will not go over his qualification, but he said, "this is the largest and deadliest conspiracy in the history of america." that is what he said, members of the jury. and then he went on to say, "they encouraged cigarettes to be distributed to soldiers on the 4250 front." and then, "many of them did not even want to smoke. a whole generation of soldiers came home from world war i addicted to tobacco." a whole generation. you heard him talk about the packs, the rationings. here it is. breakfast, dinner. even for breakfast, what they have? cigarettes. cigarettes. cigarettes. free. free. because they get you hooked, they get you addicted, and they let you die. they let you die. that is what they do, members of the jury. and that is why punitive damages in this case is more, more than -- and we are going to talk about that. but we are going to talk about compensatory damages in just a minute. you remember the doctor. they exploited addiction. for what? for money. why would you get somebody hooked? even if they should, why would you get somebody hooked on a drug that you know is a drug and you lied. you even go before congressmen, put your hand before man and god and you lie. it is not right. people are dying. people are losing their lives. oh, sure, you bring experts in here like 4251 dr. myers and these other people. that is not right, members of the jury. this is about what is right. maybe you can get away with it through the law. how do they go to sleep at night? mr. kaczynski: objection, your honor. the court: overruled. mr. gary: the cigarette industry -- listen to this. now, this is serious here. this is serious. they knew how to remove or reduce harmful agents in the cigarettes, but they refused to do so. that is not right, members of the jury. i do not care who makes the choice. you cannot do that to people. these are -- these are hard-working people, full-blooded hard -- these are not addicts in the sense of people that is doing nothing or just laying around. these are -- i'm talking about hard-working people. you saw those people in those commercials who were making -- smoking and puffing on cigarettes. they sucker-punched everybody. but the part about it is, they could have done something about it. well, members of the jury, if they have to make a cheaper cigarette, they have to make less money, so what. if you are going to stop the gravediggers from digging for 440,000 people, is it worth it? 4252 you know it is if it is just for one. if you save one lung, one voice box, is it worth it? to them, why are they still doing it? because they are going to fight. and they got a right to fight. but you are going to have -- you do not have to buy it, members of the jury. you can say enough is enough, and you are going to change -- you are going to have changed the way they do business. you are going to make them do it the right way. and the only thing they understand -- a smack on the wrist does not get it. members of the jury, without smoking, they would not have those diseases. you know it is nicotine. it is the nicotine. and they pump it in and they pump it in. they find ways to add more. more. and members of the jury, now, this is -- when they went to new york, and they had their big meeting, and they got to planning and plotting, and they put their planning sessions together, and this is one of the statements from one of their documents they thought would never see the light of day. "confidential. highly private." members of the jury, they were like high-fiving. they were like, gee, this is great. 4253 what does it say? one of the men said -- this is one of the tobacco men now, "it is fortunate for us that the cigarettes are a habit that they cannot break." and they -- they happy about it. they are killing people. it is not right, members of the jury. and you know it is not right what they doing. talking about it is fortunate. and members of the jury, they could have done better. they could have done better. and they can do better and they can do different. they can make a different cigarette. see, do not get -- we do not want to take -- people need their jobs. we understand that. we are not trying to cost anybody their jobs, but 440,000 people dying every year. that is a lot of caskets, that is a lot of tombstones, that is -- mr. kaczynski: objection, your honor. the court: overruled. mr. gary: it is not right, members of the jury. what did they say? could they have got -- could they do anything about it? could they get some of the nicotine out of those cigarettes? could they? if forced to. who is going to force them to do it? it ain't 4254 going to happen. you are going to have to make it happen. all you got to say is just do the right thing, clean up your act. members of the jury, they make a lot of money. billions and billions of dollars. billions. that is why 440,000 dying ain't stopping them. it ain't stopping them because they are making a lot of money. they want you to -- mr. kirkland should be penalized because he stopped smoking without having any symptoms. he stopped smoking without having -- what is the word? ms. hoffler: withdrawal. mr. gary: withdrawals. that is a shame. the man decided to quit. now, that is what everybody is saying. and he took it to -- he told you he prayed about it. he got his church together and they took it to the lord in prayer. and they still -- they still tried to find -- you heard mr. -- dr. myers talk about his brain damage. they still want to trap him on this, trap him on that. you said this, you said that. little bitty stuff. but that is the way they do it, because they make you look bad. 4255 they know you got to go back -- what you did when you was 11 years old, what you did when you -- in 1955. they know they are going to get you. dr. proctor, why do they do this? why do they do this? greed. the only sin known to man is greed, members of the jury. making cigarettes is like printing money. they know it. it is billions and trillions of dollars. that is what it is. and members of the jury, maximize profits. maximize profits. you know, that lady, a very nice lady who testified the last day of the trial -- ms. hoffler: ms. hoffman. mr. gary: ms. hoffman. very nice lady. really nice lady. but members of the jury, why did not she -- she told you about everything that was in the newspapers, everything that was on television, on tv. but why did not she show you one time, talk about the school books? why did not she show you one time where big tobacco, those folks, went into the schools and said, look, to the kids, do not smoke? why did not she show us a program where they had on tv back during -- and then when we got the warnings on cigarettes, they did not agree to it. 4256 they fought them. they did not want them. but why did not they go to the schools? she talking about, well, it was in the school books. i have not seen the school book yet that she was talking about, but that is okay too. nice lady. and she -- you know, no doubt about it. but that is not what we are about. it ain't about being nice. it is about the right thing. members of the jury, why did not she have one article? if we want to talk about what the kids knew, and she said -- she even talked about a kid in first grade should be able to read the book and know that you should not smoke. but that is okay too. but why -- what about these companies? what about big tobacco? you can put -- you heard the word "cancer sticks" and "nails in the coffins." well, you can put a nail in their coffin. you can stop them. and you have the power to do that, members of the jury. it is about making profits to them. not one time have we heard anybody come in here and say what they did or how they had classes -- mr. kaczynski: objection. your honor, this is phase ii. the court: may i see that, please. 4257 mr. gary: i'm not asking anything. i'm just saying -- the court: objection sustained. mr. gary: okay. now, members of the jury, from day one, all that they have been concerned about is how to get the brinks trucks rolling, get the money to the bank. they promised, you can count on us. you can count on us. if we find anything in our cigarettes that is not good for you or that is a health hazard, we will tell you about it. have they ever -- even to this day, have you heard a single witness from the defense come in and admit that cancer is killing people? the only one that came close to it was dr. myers, and he basically just told them. he said it. he told you that you cannot sell cigarettes to children. because i asked him about it. and i'll show you his testimony in just a minute. but he said, no, i -- he did not even go for that. as a matter of fact, he said they should be banned. they should be banned, but they were not -- you know, i cannot feel for them making a living off of killing people. i'm sorry. people need their jobs and that is fine, but not at the expense of people losing their lives. 4258 members of the jury, 1968, one of their own is telling them. said, look, our position in the cigarette controversy is subject to the charge and may be subject to a finding that we are making, what, false and misleading statements to promote sales. it is their own people talking to each other. they knew what they were doing, and they knew it was not right, members of the jury. now, this was the biggest fraud that you can get. we are going to put a filter on the cigarette. you are going to be safe. we are removing the poisons from the cigarette. well, that was false. they knew they were not doing that. every way they could lead people to keep them interested, a crutch, a psychological crutch to keep them going, they did it, members of the jury. and they did it -- and they were excited about it. like the board i showed you just a few minutes ago, they were like, boy, am i glad, am i happy that we got them hooked and they cannot quit. 440,000 lives. mr. kaczynski: objection, your honor. could we approach? the court: yes, sir. (the following bench conference took place 4259 outside the hearing of the jury:) mr. kaczynski: just since mr. gary started speaking, we have heard "440, 450 thousand deaths a year" at least a half dozen times. your honor, this is not a death case. the court: well, if that is the objection, it is overruled. i know it is not a death case. but in terms of the williams case, the supreme court case, the action that pertains to nonparties can be mentioned, although the harm can only be directed to punishing for the plaintiff, for this individual. but it pretty explicitly said you could talk about other nonparties. mr. kaczynski: in the phase i or phase ii? i think it may be relevant to phase ii. but we have heard the deaths now about a half dozen times, and this is not a death case. mr. gary: sir, you do not get to phase ii without establishing the egregiousness of the situation. the court: i do not know in the state where that case was tried whether -- mr. kaczynski: oregon. the court: okay. i do not know whether they -- how they bifurcated it or trifurcated it or 4260 unificated it, but whatever it was, i think, for phase i purposes, my interpretation of the supreme court case is that it is not inappropriate. if it becomes too much of a theme, that is a matter for the appellate courts to deal with. mr. gary: thank you. the court: you can be cautious, if you like. mr. gary: thank you. (end of bench conference.) mr. gary: members of the jury, these people were bad. they were really real bad. it gets worse. it gets -- you think -- i mean, from agreeing to do underhanded kind of stuff to you name it. i mean, here they talk about -- and this is a -- well, a proposed study that it turned out that it could -- it may have shown that nicotine was similar to what you find in morphine and caffeine and all of that. and they say, look, i've given carolyn approval to proceed with this study. if, however, the results with the nicotine are similar to a morphine and this other, then we want to do what to it? bury it. that is the way they do business. bury it. so, accordingly, there are only two copies of it, one attached and the original i have. if it 4261 does not come out like we want it, you bury it. that is the way they do business, members of the jury. that is cold-blooded, as my partner indicated. now, you are talking about lives. here's another study. this is their own people, the roper study. well, you know what that was about? they wanted to make sure that it did not turn out or did not -- did not -- did not verify that smoking was bad for people, that it caused lung cancer. they said, boy, this would open the door to legal suits in which the industry would have no, what, defense. shut it down. shut it down. stop it. that is what we are talking about with this defendant. members of the jury, this was intentional. this was not no accident. the way they went about orchestrating your right, killing 440,000 people, mr. kirkland having his voice box cut out, part of his tongue cut out, and they are making dollars. they are making dollars, dollar after dollar. and it was in -- they designed a cigarette to create and sustain addiction. that is what dr. proctor told you. and another thing about dr. proctor and all of our experts, one thing, do you remember, every time 4262 they had -- on cross-examination they would say, yes, yes, yes, yes. those people, the witnesses that they brought in here, you could not stop them from talking. i mean, you would ask them what time it was and they would tell you how to build a house. members of the jury, i mean, you could not shut them down. on and on and on. and the judge told you, you can judge the demeanor of a witness based on their frankness or lack of frankness. you can judge all of that. and, also, whether or not they are an advocate. so you think about it. and dr. proctor was straight up with you. they were denying that tobacco was killing large numbers. they really set out to deny this starting down in the -- what -- in the '50s. they knew it from day one. here, he gave you the numbers. the numbers. over 440,000. mr. kirkland, he ain't the only one losing his -- losing his ability to even talk or to breathe out of his nose or -- i mean, members of the jury, they knew these things were going on and they just do it over and over and over and over again. dr. wade was their witness. he knew about this. i said, have you seen those figures, 440,000 4263 in the united states alone? this ain't worldwide. correct, that is what i've seen. everybody knows about it. this defendant and the tobacco industry think they can get away with anything. they just think they can get away with it. they can fight it. and in more cases than not, you are not going to be able to stand up to them. you know, we are not going to back down from them, because it is the right thing to do. members of the jury, they want you, if you start out -- if you -- like my partner said, nowhere in those instructions are you going to see any word "choice." but they developed choice, because they know that that is where, with the propaganda and with the public relations, they can come in and bring folks like him, like the nice lady that came in, and show that cigarettes were out there and it is all your fault. forget about the drug that they sell, the nicotine that gets people hooked. but i said, let me just ask you; do you think it is fair to blame an 11-year-old child for making a choice? they cannot vote, they cannot think, they cannot go to war and die for their country, they cannot even drive a car. and they are in a position 4264 to make a choice? and even he agreed, no, they should not have sold cigarettes to an 11-year-old child. members of the jury, when mr. kirkland was starting smoking, smoking was everywhere. smoke -- you could get -- he went to the store at 11 years of age and these folks, these money-hungry folks, sold him cigarettes. a child. and i do not want to blame him for getting hooked. by the time he was 17, he was hooked, and you blame him. well, i wanted to say this, but i'm glad their own expert told you this. do you think -- i mean, do you think they should be done away with? and i'm talking about cigarettes. and what is his answer? yes. even he knew. now, this is a guy that they are paying $500,000 an hour -- i mean, $500 an hour. and why do you think that? i think it would be better for the health of the country and the population, yes. members of the jury, do you think all of these people, the people that they had in the ads and everybody, do you think that they are just all crazy? i mean, they just -- it is all their fault, tobacco has nothing to do with it? president ronald reagan, bob hope, joe lewis, 4265 henry fonda, john wayne, danny thomas, frank sinatra, bing crosby, dennis stewart, jack benny, all of these people? and lord knows, the faceless and the nameless numbers that you will never hear about because they are too small. they were not movie stars, but they are real people and they are dying. dying. it is not right and we know it is not right. and then what is their position? let me just say something before i show you this. mr. kaczynski: your honor, i object to this. this is not evidence in the case. the court: sustained. (the following bench conference took place outside the hearing of the jury:) mr. gary: he said he was one hundred percent at fault. this is what the attorney said in opening statement, he was one hundred percent at fault. i can comment on that. the court: your thoughts? mr. kaczynski: it is not evidence. to put it on the board, you have to have -- to put it on the board, you would need the evidence. our position is that. but not to display it on a board. the court: i do not know that it is improper. i'll overrule the objection. mr. gary: thank you. 4266 (end of bench conference.) mr. gary: now, members of the jury, i want to make something real clear to you right now. he accepted his responsibility. he accepted his responsibility. he is not trying to duck or dodge his responsibility, even though he was at the tender age of 11, on to 17. so that issue about -- that is -- you know, he is accepting some responsibility. but can you imagine that after all that these defendants have done in this case that they will get up here and say mr. kirkland is one hundred percent? they do not accept even one iota of blame. just think of it, not one iota. he is one hundred percent. now, that is what they said in their opening statement. members of the jury, when we were talking to you, you said that everybody, no matter who you are, you have to give an account for your actions. it is a two-way street. it is a two-way street. but that is the way they do business. that is the way they do business. and maybe they will get away with it. maybe they will get away with it. but, you know, somehow i feel that maybe this is the end of the road for them. this is the end of the road for them. 4267 so members of the jury, talk about choice. they know choice is compromised when you are drugged up. they know when you are drugged up, they get you drugged, they -- they orchestrated their cigarettes, they pumped the cocaine -- i mean, the nicotine in them more and more and more and more. they get you hooked. they let you lose your voice box, lose a lung, or you just die, and they come in and defend it because they are going to say you made the choice. well, let us see what the surgeon general said about choice. see what the surgeon general said about choice. this is the 1989 report. the age of initiation of smoking. y'all all -- i mean, even throughout this trial, in terms of when people started smoking, you know they were in their teens. i mean, they -- even back in the '50s, they went after teens like gangbusters. 11-year-olds smoked, 13-year-olds smoked. it just did not happen, members of the jury. this is a billion, a trillion dollar business. these people spent billions of dollars on advertising. but they said, look, if you are going to talk about -- especially, you know, the age of initiation of smoking, it is early. 4268 nicotine addiction, you have got to consider that if you are going to talk about choice. these two factors refute the argument that smoking is a matter of free choice. most smokers start smoking when they are teenagers. this is the surgeon general. that is the top doctor in america speaking about choice. members of the jury, back in 1980, their lawyers told them -- what did they tell them about this choice? said, look, we cannot defend it anymore, stop it. free choice. if a person is addicted, forget it. you cannot get someone addicted. you cannot drug them out, get them hooked on two packs a day. that is 40 cigarettes for every 24 hours. and over and over for years and years and years, and then you get them addicted, then you are going to raise that you made the choice, it is your fault, you could have stopped. they get you hooked, members of the jury. and speaking of addiction in this case, let us just talk about addiction. let us look at who -- dr. dolgin said -- mr. kaczynski: your honor, i'm going to object to this. there are people on here who did not testify in this case. 4269 mr. gary: yes, your honor, they testified by way of deposition, and the experts said what they said. mr. kaczynski: dr. goodman is on that list. the court: you can talk about the witnesses who testified and the evidence upon which they relied. i sustain the objection. mr. gary: yes. the court: i sustain the objection as to the board. mr. gary: i can talk about them, but not the board. okay. members of the jury, okay, but other than dr. myers, who did you hear say he was not addicted? think about it. other than dr. myers, who did they bring in here and say he was not addicted? now, dr. myers, he is -- this guy, he is testified over 300 times, 300 times in depositions or court testimony. he is a professional testifier. and he was good. he got 15,000 -- that is what i said. and he said, i think it is more than that. he is a money machine. three hundred times. if you did -- just think, 300 times. if he made over 15,000 or more, that is a lot of money. and he is good at it. you saw how he sit there and he looked 4270 at you. and, boy, you know, he knew his -- he knew his trade. but even dr. myers had -- and i went over his -- i said, look, show me one time have you written on nicotine related to tobacco. not a single time. show me one time -- well, how many people have you treated solely for the purpose of cigarette addiction? not a single one. but he is the top gun. he is the man. but members of the jury, he is the one that his opinion was that because there were no withdrawals, because he did not have any problems, and this man had gone to his church and he prayed and prayed about it and he was able to get off of the cigarettes, and thank god he did, but he is -- they want to blame him for that, because, well, you did not have any withdrawals so, therefore, you could not have been addicted. well, he got busted on that one big time, because look what i said. i'm going to show you in his own book. is withdrawal necessary in the determination of whether or not somebody is addicted to nicotine or not? what was his answer? no. i said, based on your book -- where is it, the book he brought in 4271 here? mr. acosta: right there. no, that one. mr. gary: this one. y'all remember the dsm-iv, his book? his bible that he relies on? he got busted on this one. right? because i said, "based on your book" -- because he knew i had it in here. "based on your book, withdrawal within itself is not necessary -- necessarily a requirement -- a required criteria, is it? "that is correct." but he had said it. i mean, he got caught right in the thick of it. and then, again, members of the jury, he did not -- sounds familiar, does not it? he did not even come in here with the file, a complete file. and before i asked those questions, his file -- his notes are so important and helps him to do this and helps him to do that -- i said, "where are your notes? "some of my materials i shredded that were no longer anything that i'd be using again." well, he knew he was coming to court. why would you shred evidence? if there was a question about something that was said or some history, you took the notes, you took the records, 90 minutes, 4272 you gave him a test, you did all of this stuff and you shredded the records? take my word for it. i typically keep my notes in every case. now, members of the jury, back to -- i know it is getting late. please bear with us. it will not be long. when you puff a cigarette, you inhale the vapor and the nicotine is absorbed very quickly. it gets to your brain in 10 to 15 seconds. and they orchestrated it that way, members of the jury. they orchestrated it that way. they knew they were getting people hooked, they were getting addicted. it goes along with the concept -- and this is dr. benowitz talking -- your brain is really different. they can get you. they can get you for the rest of your life. that is what he is saying, members of the jury. and members of the jury, to this day, why do they have to still keep pumping and pumping all of this nicotine into cigarettes? they could stay in business. we are not trying to put them out of business. they want you hooked because you spend more money and it is more dollars for them, billions and billions and billions of dollars. 4273 the surgeon general. now, members of the jury, our surgeon general has to account for something. it is our top doctor in the united states. it is our top doctor. and he said, look, smoking is one of the most addictive drugs in, what, society. addictive. addictive because of the drug that is in it. and he has voiced his opinion -- or his support for persons suing tobacco companies. he knows that it is not right. he knows that it -- and members of the jury, they think they could use their money and do anything. they paid for the surgeon general's report. they give grants for it. that is the way they do business. the industry, who is the industry? the tobacco industry. they recognized that the average smoker, just a regular guy, a regular lady, a regular person, just regular people -- they are not engineers, they do not have access to all of this information, they do not know that the -- no one was going around -- the tobacco company was not in the '60s and in the '50s saying, look, you know, smoking cigarettes could take your life, give you cancer or you could get addicted, you could become addicted to this, get hooked on it. then they did not know there 4274 was poison in it. he said, everybody knows that cigarettes are bad for you. sure. that is what the nice lady, dr. hoffman, said. they knew it was bad. they knew it was bad, cigarettes were bad. but members of the jury, people did not know that it could flat out kill you until later, until later. mr. kirkland, he was born in 1939. and she -- she showed you all of those articles about tampa and tampa and tampa. he was in georgia most of that time, in the country. said it is different. if you tell me that i've got a fifty percent chance of dying before you sell me, it could be a stick of candy or anything, i'm going to think twice about it. it is going to make a difference. they withheld that information. now, let us talk about his damages. his damages, members of the jury. and their own witness, dr. michael bertino, agreed with mr. kirkland's treating physician. because my partner, maria sperando, asked, "well, dr. jimmie wilbur said that nicotine contributed to the development of his cancer of the voice box. do you agree with that?" he agreed with her. he agreed with her, 4275 members of the jury. on that stand, under oath, he said he agreed with her. so in terms of that issue, as to his cancer coming from smoking, there is no issue about that. he gave in on that. what he did was, he just said, well, there may be some other reasons, like alcohol. and you heard the judge's ruling. so even if his cancer came as a result of smoking, alcohol, and something else, or whatever the case may be, that is it. it really does not matter. but we know, we know, that his cancer came from smoking, 40 years of smoking and smoking, two packs a day. members of the jury, two packs a day is 40 cigarettes in one day. and then i questioned dr. myers. i said, "well, dr. myers" -- i said, "are you saying that he could -- he smoked 40 years and could not be addicted? "that is right." i said, "well, if someone smoked 50 years, three packs day, based on your criteria, if they did not have withdrawals, they would not be addicted?" he said that is right. so, i mean, he is a tobacco man. he is a tobacco man, without a doubt. 4276 now, we talked about -- let us talk about his damages, members of the jury. dr. dolgin said every day is scary for him. he could choke. he could go to a restaurant and something go down that pipe. he has no control over it. he could die. it could be life threatening. "dr. myers, is it not implausible for him to have vascular disease of the brain? "i think it is a possibility, yes." mr. kirkland has really, really taken a beating, and he is accepted some of his responsibility. he cannot use both hands and talk at the same time. he got caught in a situation where he had to plead for his life and use both hands at the same time, he could not do it. he could not do it. and members of the jury, there is not a day pass, he feels like he is a walking time bomb. you know, and thank god. he thanks god every day that the cancer was -- they got the cancer and he is doing okay and he is making it. but he lives with it. can you -- the mental anguish that he has to deal with every day not knowing whether the next doctor visit is going to show up that he is back to where he started? hey, we -- members of the jury, you know, 4277 everybody's pulling for him, but he knows what he is dealing with. and the reason why -- members of the jury, this is -- this is an egregious case. his damages are awesome. really are. and not just -- i'm talking about compensatory damages. we will talk about the punitive damages later. because i could tell you about episodes -- here is another one where his prosthesis fell down into his trachea and blocked part of his airway. that is down his throat. he had to be rushed to the hospital then. this is after -- this is way after they had cut his voice box out and part of his tongue he lost. and sometimes the opening will stretch or it will pop out. and the first thing it could do is go right down your windpipe. that can kill you, members of the jury. this is nothing to play with. taking a shower? he needs to protect it from the water. he could just drown from taking a shower if he does not watch it. "are these disabilities that you just described, are they permanent? "yes, they are permanent." you all saw the diagram here. this is what that cancer from smoking is like. you saw it. 4278 that is what it is like. it is a serious condition. 60 to 80 pack years. that is basically saying that for almost 47 years, he smoked one and a half to two packs of cigarettes a day, and they want to say that he is not addicted. he is not addicted. members of the jury, then they get creative. they are clever. they drum up this, well, he drunk a beer here, he had some scotch. he liked scotch, he liked this, he liked that. and before you know it, they try to snow you. 40 cigarettes a day for over 30 years, members of the jury. with ten puffs in each cigarette. that is millions and millions and millions of doses of the drug nicotine. as a matter of fact, recap of his smoking history. from 1955 to 1994, one and a half to two packs a day. that is between four and five million doses of the drug nicotine. between four and five million of the drug nicotine. the damages, members of the jury, he has a life expectancy of 17 years -- i mean, 12.3 years. the past, since 1974, 17 years. 29.3 years. you know, their own expert yesterday told you that for every pack of cigarettes one smoked, that you -- they lose six hours off of their life. six 4279 hours off of their life. for the -- on this case. on this case. for the permanent disability, the permanent disfigurement, the mental anguish, inability to lead a normal life, the pain and suffering, and the mental anguish that he is going through and will go through for the rest of his life and on this case, based on these people and what they have done to him, we are asking for $96,250,500. $96,250,500. not a dime less, members of the jury. because what they have done to this man, not right. now, you make a choice. it is your choice. you do the right thing, and he will live with that. he will live with that. because the damages, the real damages in this case is punitive damages. he wants to stop them. you do the right thing here. you do what you think is right. he want to stop -- he want them to change the way they do business. he want them to change the way they do business. $96,250,500. and members of the jury, he lives it every day. look. that is what he is left with. that is what he is left with. he has to breathe through the hole in his neck and his throat. the pain and suffering. the surgery they had to do on his neck and his arm 4280 and his shoulders and all of that has left him disfigured, and he is disabled there. but you know what? he is not a crybaby. even after this surgery, he got up and he went back to work. he went to work on a job where, members of the jury, just to talk to his coworkers, he did not have but one hand, because he could not talk and communicate and do everything. he had to use a hand just to talk. there it is. every day. every day. that is permanent disfigurement in the worst way, members of the jury. now, members of the jury, i mean -- how much time do i have, judge? madame clerk? the clerk: you have 20 minutes, sir. mr. kaczynski: your honor, you going to look at this one before it goes up? (the following bench conference took place outside the hearing of the jury.) mr. gary: and that is not a board. this is in evidence. it is a document that they say. the court: okay. can i see the whole thing? mr. gary: they say that they are selling drugs. that is what they say. and i'm prepared to show it to you. 4281 mr. kaczynski: i have an objection to the heading on this. mr. gary: they say that what we sell is drugs. the court: all right. just a moment. mr. kaczynski: the implication is clear that it is like selling drugs on the street. selling drugs. mr. gary: they got a point there. the court: the objection's overruled. mr. gary: thank you. (end of bench conference.) mr. gary: before i get into this, members of the jury -- before i talk about this, the drugs that they sell through this nicotine every year, let me just show you that i'm not just talking about it. this is real. this is one of their documents from 1963. and you know the real sad part about this? this was in '63 that they admitted that they were selling the drug nicotine and that it was addictive. some -- '63, '73, '83, some 20 years later, you saw them in washington d.c. before our congress under oath committing perjury. mr. kaczynski: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. 4282 mr. gary: you saw, members of the jury, they were up there saying that nicotine was not addictive. now, this is one of their documents all the way back in 1963. they never thought it would see the light of day in a courtroom. all of their documents, "confidential, private." selling -- "moreover, nicotine is addictive. we are, then, in the business of selling nicotine, an addictive drug." now, those are their words. and what have they sold? anyway you take it, for this defendant, if it is -- and it is over 25 million people and maybe close to 30, but let us just look at 20 million smokers. one pack a day, in a year, they sell 1,460,000,000 doses of the drug nicotine in their cigarettes. that is what they are selling, and they admit it. 25 million smokers, they sell 1,825,000,000 doses of nicotine. 30 million smokers, and they have that many. at one pack, ten puffs off each cigarette, that is 2,190,000,000 doses of nicotine. it is big business for them, members of the jury, and they sell it. they sell it. this is 4283 their document. stayed in their files for years. 1963. and they still admitting -- they do not want to admit. got up in washington, d.c. and said nicotine was not addictive. they do not know what the truth is, members of the jury. it is not right. after they had said that they were selling the drug that was addictive, here it is, years later, "claims that cigarettes are addictive is irresponsible and scare tactics." it is from their document. from their document. that is the way they do business. members of the jury, this business is so big for these folks, it is so huge, and there was talk -- and this is from one of their people. members of the jury, these are their documents to members of the planning committee. said, look, if we give up one inch, if we give up -- if all of our smokers give up one cigarette a day for one year, that is 40 billion. one cigarette. that is how big this business is. you do not touch them. you do not even -- you do not tackle them, because -- members of the jury, let me tell you what i think about this choice. he was 11 years old. if you want to say he made that choice, if you want to 4284 say after 11 he did not stop, maybe that is ten percent his fault. he was a child. he was a baby. you know what? everything you heard about when people start smoking in this courtroom, you heard the teens. you heard anybody start smoking when they were 30, 25? they are babies. and even back in the '50s, back in the '60s, they -- they orchestrated it that way to get the kids. get the children, because you get them, you got long-time customers, more money. and if you orchestrate the cigarette to get them addicted, you got them, you got them. you got customers for life. choice to smoke versus a choice to kill. 440,000. over 160-something thousand that lose their voice boxes, have their throats cut. they are really heartless people, members of the jury. they really are. you know, if you sell a bad ipad or you sell a bad telephone to a customer, they get upset. you exchange and maybe you make it right. you sell a product that you know is killing people, and you know it, you cannot make it right. he is a walking time bomb. cancer could come back any day. members of the jury, just one more here you got to see. got to see this. the date. see the date? 4285 1961. they knew. they knew it. but guess what they wanted? they want -- well, as long as you knew that we were killing you, you know, and you did not do anything about it, we should be able to get away with it. it is not right, members of the jury. in '61, their private document, confidential document, "there are biological active materials present in cigarette tobacco, and these are cancer causing, cancer promoting, poisonous." members of the jury, that was in 1961. and then they came up with this research center. it was their propaganda machine. keeping people guessing as to whether it does or whether it does not. because they kept you guessing that maybe it does not cause cancer, it kept you smoking, right? that was -- but at the end of the day, they said, "this is the best and the cheapest insurance the tobacco industry can buy, and without it, the industry would have to invent it or we would be dead." that was their propaganda machine. that was their -- that was that coverup. they were hiding behind that. said they were giving all kind of money to schools and to colleges and all of this and going to let them be independent and all of that. members of the jury, all of it was false. all of it 4286 was false. and i wish i -- one of their own members of the group said, look, wait a minute, we -- in the "frank statement," we told people that they could trust us. that is not right. we are not doing what we said we were going to do. we are hurting people. and members of the jury, mr. -- dr. wade -- dr. myers said -- now, i know this was playing on your intelligence. when you heard it, i know how you must have felt. he said that it is pretty clear from science that it is not the nicotine itself that people are smoking for. now, where has he been? everybody on god's earth knows that nicotine -- look here. if he felt that way -- and the powerpoint they put up there, and i hope they put it up again for you where he said that the reasons why people smoke, oh, they like it, it tastes good. i said, "what about -- what about the nicotine? "oh, that is mild. that is mild. that is not a big deal." well, evidently, he had not talked to the people that hired him, because they say they believe that the thing we sell the most is what? it is nicotine. 4287 and i could just go on and on. these people, 1973 -- mr. kaczynski: objection, your honor. could we approach? this board has got to come down. the court: please let me see the board. (the following bench conference took place outside the hearing of the jury.) mr. kaczynski: this is a document where you ordered the document redacted. that is the -- the version that you showed the jury was not redacted to take out the market part. right there. the court: yeah, he is right. mr. gary: i will not use it. the court: okay. (end of bench conference.) mr. gary: members of the jury, let me just close by saying this. i really think that, you know -- well, i do not think. i know you are going to do the right thing. whatever that is, you know, that is okay. just do -- do search your hearts. do what you feel is right. what the lawyers say is not evidence. you heard it from the witness stand. and i can tell you one thing. and i do not say this just to be saying it, but i feel confident that 4288 you are a good group. you do not make a decision based on -- i watch you taking the notes, i watch you looking, i watch you watching the witnesses. you are paying attention. you all are into this trial, and nobody is going to sucker-punch you. you are not going to fall for that no matter what the presentation is. and so just know we thank you, and we -- we feel without a shadow of a doubt that you are going to do the right thing. members of the jury, we talked about a lady when we were picking the jury, and we used her as an example. you all remember the lady with the scales, lady justice? we talked about lady justice. she is blindfolded. she cannot see. she does not even want to see. all she is concerned about is justice. justice. that is all. thank you. and may god bless you.