mr. reid: thank you. may it please the court. good morning, ladies and gentlemen. if it were not clear before, i think it has become crystal clear now, there is a clear distinction in this case, a clear dichotomy of positions. the plaintiff wants you to decide that smoking was a substantial contributing cause to mrs. koballa's cancer because smoking causes cancer and is addictive, based on statistics, based on probabilities from witnesses such as dr. rubin, he is the one that said probability, dr. doig who says statistics, dr. burns who said epidemiology. we, on the other hand, are going to ask you to make that decision based on ms. koballa's medical case and her life history, and that is the distinction in this case. and it could not be clearer, because you can carry around a stack of documents, and you can put them into evidence, and all that, but if you never pull one out, you never show one to a doctor or to any witness except for one, dr. sia's note about addiction, if you never do anything, it is clear that you do not want the jury to see what is in there, and -- or in the complete set over there. and i'm going to talk to you as to why the evidence supports the statement i just made -- the statements i just made to you. first, i want to thank you on behalf of the lawyers and folks that have worked with us in this trial, on behalf of the men and women who work for the r.j. reynolds tobacco company, i want to thank you for your attention. you have been very attentive. lawyers are not typically on juries, but i've been told that it is remarkable how, when you go back there, the synergy will be amazing, one will remember this fact, one will remember that fact, and pretty soon, you will remember everything, and that is why the system works, and that is why in every case where i have had the opportunity to make a choice since i have been a lawyer, i have asked for a jury trial because this country has decided that is the best way to resolve these disputes, and that is what we are doing here. now, mr. pantazis talked to you a little bit about burden of proof and he -- which the plaintiffs have in this case. that is why they get to go first throughout, and now they get to go last. i do not get to respond to what they might think up to say to you in the very end today. but he suggested this thing about a piece of paper, and it sounds like if the paper is the evidence, that they only have to produce one piece of paper's worth of evidence. well, we do not start with a hundred pieces of paper, we start with no paper. they have to produce 101 pieces of paper. they have to produce evidence, not just one little tiny bit of evidence that wins this case or shifts the evidence, they have to produce all that paper, if you want to think about it that way, and i'll submit to you they have not done that in this case. now, i'll talk with you later about the question that you have to answer, but if you remember at the beginning, i told you there are really four questions that were -- involved all the evidence that you would be hearing. does ms. koballa have c.o.p.d. -- and sometimes it is been referred to by emphysema, sometimes chronic bronchitis. does she have c.o.p.d. which was caused by her cigarette smoking? does she have lung -- did she have lung cancer that was caused by her cigarette smoking? was she addicted? and if the addiction, if she was addicted, is that the cause of her smoking, as opposed to some other cause. now, the judge has told you today what the definition of cause is. if we could have the next slide, please. that is the whole charge. but there are really two important parts of that. and the first part is "contributes substantially." so it does not mean any cause, it has to be a cause that contributes substantially. and you will have to decide if smoking in this case contributes substantially when you compare it to the other potential causes. and it goes on. it tells you what that means. no, please leave it up. "but for the addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine, the injury would not have occurred." what that means is, you could read it another way, without the addiction, in other words, if you take the addiction off, would there still be the same -- if you take the cigarettes away, would there still be the same injury. and i would submit in this case, and i'm going to talk about it, all of these medical records and all the medical testimony about these records demonstrate that if you take away smoking, you would still have the same injury. and that is the standard that you have to -- that you will have to apply in this case. now, let me summarize the evidence that i believe you will be -- that you will consider. ms. koballa's lung cancer and c.o.p.d. were caused by a substantial, significant history of inflammation, inflammation to her lungs over 50 some years of a variety of exposures. mrs. koballa was not addicted, regardless of what definition you use, whether you use the dsm-iv definition or another definition, whatever the definition is, ms. koballa was able to control her smoking when she wanted to control it, she was able to stop when she wanted to stop and when she was motivated, and finally, she was able to quit for good when she became motivated to quit for good. nicotine, the chemical that they talked about, and you have heard testimony about what happens in the body, nicotine plays no part in ms. koballa's decision to start every time after she had quit because it was all gone and it was not affecting her anymore. so nicotine could not have been the cause of her commencing to smoke again during those periods of time when she quit. and we will talk about those in more detail. this case is not about whether smoking causes cancer. it is not about whether cigarettes are addictive. we talked about that in opening and i asked questions -- i mean in voir dire and in opening again, and i asked questions, are you going to decide this case because of those two findings? and everybody said no, that you wanted to hear the evidence about ms. koballa, not just the general evidence. but most of what you have heard has been about those two questions. that chart of all of the carcinogenic substances that counsel keeps putting up, that only proves that smoking causes cancer. or, you know, it can in some people. that does not prove that mrs. koballa had cancer. they keep showing you that over and over, but that does not prove in ms. koballa. now, dr. burns, for instance, and he admitted it, spent about two hours, maybe an hour and a half, trying to convince you of one fact, smoking causes cancer. and i said, "dr. burns, i notice that you have spent a great deal of time." and he said, "that is right." and i said, "why? it is admitted." and he said, "well, i did not understand what was" -- "nobody told me," or whatever. but an hour and a half trying to prove. dr. doig told you that smoking causes cancer based on statistics. that is not about ms. koballa, that is about statistics. dr. bennett and dr. klein were the two experts who we presented, were cross-examined about that chart. that chart does not tell you whether or not ms. koballa has cancer, whether her cancer was caused by smoking or something else. and they read a document to you, not this morning but an earlier time, saying that -- oh, no, this morning, saying there was substantial evidence that smoking causes cancer. they did not need to read that document. i told you that no one would come into this courtroom on behalf of my client and dispute those two findings. that was off the table. and i would say seventy percent of what you heard this morning and 70 percent of the plaintiff's case was trying to prove those two points. that is what the plaintiffs have asked you to do. if those two points were the issues, there would be no reason to ask you to give up your valuable time to come in and sit for two weeks and decide this case, because it is already been decided, if that is the only question. but i think you understand there is a great deal more. this case is about mrs. koballa, her medical condition, her life experience, her exposures. i'll answer counsel's question. why are we here? we are here to decide whether or not -- something about ms. koballa's health, ms. koballa's condition and her life. that is why we are here. now, there are a number of facts that are not in dispute. lung cancer, c.o.p.d. can be caused by other things besides smoking. all the witnesses agree to that. mrs. koballa was exposed to many things in her life that would cause inflammation. inflammation can cause smoke -- can cause lung cancer and c.o.p.d. in fact, i made a little slide up here, counsel keeps talking about people being bathed in nicotine -- bathed in cigarette smoke and so forth. in fact, eighty percent of those smokers who are in the same boat that he is talking about, who are bathed in the -- in the substances, eighty percent do not get c.o.p.d. and 85 percent never get lung cancer. that is why it is -- you, in this case, have to determine is ms. koballa in the dark blue pie there, piece of pie, or does she fall within the blue and green, the light blue and the green? that is what this case is about. it is not about all the smoke -- what happens to all the people who smoke. it is about people who smoke and get these diseases, that is what you have to decide in this case. there are facts that were admitted about addiction. addicted people can and do quit. 60 million have quit. more people quit than do currently smoke. ms. koballa quit. so those facts are all admitted. so let us move to how did the plaintiff try to carry the burden to put the 101 pieces of paper on that scale, how did they go about doing that? well, they did it with a couple of witnesses. first they did it with dr. burns. now, we talked about c.s.i. a couple -- you know, last week. and in this case, i said dr. burns, he is a scientist, how do you go about deciding an issue such as the one in this case? if your job is to determine the cause of ms. koballa's conditions, how do you do it? well, he said you would review the medical records, you would review the depositions. he said that is important. he said his preference was to review all the medical records. he said the length of exposure to any substances would be important to know. now, that is when he is talking about how he would do it, if someone said, dr. burns, in the abstract if somebody comes to him and said, i just want you to make -- help me decide, make this decision, give me your opinion, that is what he would do. so your job is to test what he did in this case. did he do in this case what he said he was supposed to do? well, this is what he said. he said he only reviewed the medical records that these lawyers felt were necessary for him to see. that was his actual testimony. and when he was the on the stand, he was on the stand a few hours, he did not -- he did not show you a single medical record, he did not put one on the board, he did not show it to you, he did not ask about it. not a single -- not a single thing. because the records the lawyers chose to give him did not help what he was trying to convince you of in this case. and that is why you did not see dr. burns talk about, show you, and go through any of ms. koballa -- how can -- how can a witness who -- whose sole job is to determine the issue in this case, which is not does smoking cause cancer, it is does -- is ms. koballa's cancer substantially caused, how can a witness not talk about her medical condition? it is one thing, as i said, to carry around records. it is another thing to show them to the jury. now, i can say, folks, everything you need to see is in that pile of documents so have at it when you get back in the jury room. good luck. that is kind of what they did in this case. so what did dr. burns ignore? well, he did not -- he did not have any effect specific demographic type knowledge -- information, biographical information about ms. koballa. he never met -- before he did his opinions, he never met her, examined her, spoke to her family. he did not look at the pathology, but he said, if i were a treating doctor, i would always look at the pathology. in fact, i do it with the pathologist who did it. he did not look at that. he did not look at the x-rays. he said -- or any radiology. again, he said if i were treating, that is how i would do it. but in this case, i chose not to do it. he did not know anything. he ignored 31 years of her life when she worked in the meat wrapping department at heinen's in cleveland. he did not know what chemicals were released there. he did not know the duration. he said i did not make a note of the duration. he did not even know she worked there 31 years. he did not know how many pieces of meat were wrapped every day, that means how many times there were -- there were fumes emitted that mrs. koballa would breathe. he did not know how many packages were labeled. that was 15 years. he did not know how many packages were labeled over the 30 years. he did not even know about the deposition of dr. tuthill, the doctor -- now, that is interesting. they told you in opening statement that there was a dr. tuthill, and counsel said, "but we do not think he is relevant to this case." but they brought it in and they showed it to you, anyway, and lo and behold, there is dr. tuthill providing an alternative explanation for her condition. they did not show that to dr. burns before he gave his opinion. in fact, he told you the first time he even knew what dr. tuthill said was when he was sitting in the courtroom out here watching the tape with you. how can an expert not know about that or not look at that if he is trying to do an honest job of telling you what he believes happened in this case? he keeps talking about the eyewitnesses, the eyewitnesses. well, the fellow who runs down the street and is two blocks away is not a very good witness as to whether the red light was red or green. that is what we have got here. we have got a eyewitness, dr. burns, who is down the street, but he wants to come in and tell you the light was green or red, but he was down the street, he did not see it, and he did not see it on purpose. there is no other explanation. dr. burns has testified hundreds and hundreds of times. there was no explanation for dr. burns limiting his review of records to what the lawyers thought i needed to see. dr. burns is biased, there is no doubt about it. he is smart. he is worked in tobacco issues his life. he is never testified in a case involving a patient that he was really treating as a doctor. he is testified hundreds of times. he kept bragging about how well he was paid. you know, he said -- when i asked him about what he was charging and it came out that he had charged in this case, to give you the opinions, he said $40,000, and he said, "i am well paid." he said that twice during his testimony. and he told you that this same presentation for an hour and a half to two hours that he gave to you about can smoking cause cancer, he said he had done that a lot of times. same presentation over and over. they paid $40,000 to bring dr. burns here and to get him to give you this presentation about something that was admitted and not at issue in this case. he does not -- even all the surgeon general's reports, he does not disclose his bias, he would have to if he published it in a legitimate journal, but in that one, he can put things in there, he can edit things, and he can come into court and use it, and nobody who reads it would ever know about his history. but you now know about his history. he is worked with lawyers helping them learn how to try cases, help them find experts, helping them to do mock trials. that is dr. burns. but the primary problem with dr. burns is he did not look at the medical records, he did not talk about them. and if you do not look at something, you need to say i did not look at this, i closed my eyes, i put on blinders so i can say what the situation is, but there it is. the second one was dr. rubin. dr. rubin is highly credentialed, there is no doubt about it. he wrote the book that they had sitting out here the other day. so what did he tell you that he ought to do? i asked him the same question. what should you do to find out, if this is your assignment, what would you do to decide about causation? he said there are really two ways to go about it. you can investigate the occupation, where the person lived, where the person worked, and you can get a good history, you can find out about the person's life. so what did he review? he reviewed the documents the lawyers gave him. now, counsel told you that -- that -- that i pulled some documents out. no. dr. burns told you, remember, i showed him a small stack and said these were marked at your deposition as the documents you produced that you relied on in this case. and he said they were. and then he said there was a disc. it was not marked, it was not here. i do not know where the disc came from. but he looked at a small stack of documents which the lawyers chose. and again, other than showing you two or three slides, he did not go through the medical records, either. he ignored everything about ms. koballa's work experience. i made a slide. this is what dr. rubin ignored. all those things about her work history, he did not know any of that. all these things about her medical history, he did not know that. and i did not list all the environmental exposures or the risk factors, the chemicals and so forth or the other things, because you have seen that, and we will talk about them later. that is the evidence that he could have looked at if he were really going to come in and tell you smoking was a substantial contributing cause as opposed to all these alternatives. he said, i would take a history and i would look at all this stuff if i were trying to get the answer, and he did not do it. he did not do it. what did he conclude? he said, and he was open and honest about it, he said he did nothing, he did nothing to evaluate ms. koballa's risk factors other than smoking. so dr. rubin said smoking causes cancer, and that was his opinion, because of probabilities and statistics, he said, and that is all they had him do. and he ultimately at the end said, you may remember, this was the last question, i said, "dr. rubin, so it sounds to me like what you are saying is ms. koballa smoked a lot, she developed lung cancer, so it must be caused by smoking." and he said, "that sounds exactly right." that is dr. rubin. that is their case in a nutshell. now, on the addiction side, they brought in two witnesses. during their case, where they have the burden to prove their case, they brought -- they had one witness who talked about addiction, and it was dr. sia. and dr. sia was a general practitioner. he saw ms. koballa several times. he -- several times she called in and did not come back. and there was one entry in 1992 where he said addiction, cigarette addiction. and all he knew about ms. koballa was the amount and the length of time she smoked, and he was the wrong about both. he had it -- he had a different number of cigarettes and he had a different period of time. and that was the only evidence. he did not offer to help ms. koballa with addiction, to treat her, to give her medicine. he had done that when patients had come back before. she did not ask him for any assistance. and he was the only witness that they presented to convince you that ms. koballa was addicted, the only expert who they presented in their case was dr. sia. now, they brought dr. frazier in after the fact, at the end of the case, and it appears that she was brought in for two things. number one, she wanted to say dr. thompson did not apply the dsm-iv properly; and secondly, she wanted to say that -- prove that nicotine has an effect on the brain. well, she did not even use the dsm-iv definition, you know, we had that discussion, and she said, oh, there is no definition in there, and i showed her one. she said, i did not use any definition from the dsm-iv. and everybody agrees that nicotine can have an effect on the brain. it has what is called a pharmacological effect. so that was not in dispute either. but they brought her back to say dr. thompson did not do the dsm-iv. she -- dr. burns, once again -- i'm sorry, dr. frazier, like dr. burns, is really on a planning mission to eliminate the choice to smoke, and she admitted that, she would like to see the choice to smoke taken away. and she has never been involved in any litigation before until she became involved in smoking, that is part of her campaign, to eliminate the choice. and she said that in the five cases she handled, she said they were no-brainers. now, no-brainer to me sounds like you do not have to do any research, you do not have to know any facts, you tell somebody something, like you smoked 45 years, so many packs a day, bang, i'm ready to give an opinion. she tried to back away from that and said, well, i said that about one case, but then i read her testimony to her and she said it about all her cases. and then in this case, we discover that -- and she said that she would never give her opinions until she did this research and so on and so forth. and then we see the e-mail that she sent to the lawyer, and the e-mail said, "i think there is no doubt that she was addicted to nicotine after briefly reviewing her deposition." that is her opinion. now, she said, oh, i did other things later to make sure i was right, but in her mind, it is a no-brainer, this is another case in her mind where it is a no-brainer, no need to do anything else. that is what dr. frazier did. then she brought in her pet scan and said this is a really cool thing, but i do not understand it, it came out of a book. and it had to do with somebody who took one or two puffs. and she admitted that if you did one with milk, you would see some colors change because milk has something that reacts that same way, but she said you cannot do that because it would be too expensive, and i just got it out of a book. why was she so reluctant to admit how much she had been paid in this case? now, counsel is right, everybody pays experts. there is no doubt about it. and every other expert who came in here told you how much they charged. dr. burns was proud of the $40,000 he charged. why was she so reluctant? do you really believe that she is owed close to $50,000 on this case and she does not know anything about it, how much time she spent, how much she was paid? that was remarkable. and i think that suggests something that you can consider when you are evaluating the credibility of witnesses. is the witness here to give you a fair scientific opinion or the witness here as part of another agenda? there is a pattern. plaintiffs have brought in several very expensive experts, and they hope that this will relieve you of their burden. that you will relieve them of their burden, rather. they rely on statistics instead of the medical records. they say, trust me, trust me, believe me, i'm smart, i've looked at all of this material. because they all said they looked at things and this is the fact. but they did not show you any basis for those facts. imagine if a doctor said -- you are sitting in a doctor's office -- a person is sitting in a doctor's office and the doctor says, well, based on statistics, i think you have this disease, so i do not have to examine you, i do not have to get a history, i do not have to know where you worked, what you were exposed to, how long you have been exposed. statistically speaking, you would fall into the category that had this. would a person want to go to a doctor who treated him that way? that is what these experts in this case have done, they have said statistically, probabilities, i do not need to look at the medical records, this is my opinion. counsel talks about the eyewitnesses. well, dr. sia was barely an eyewitness. he might have been a half a block away. he saw her six or seven times for totally unrelated things. but dr. aneja that you have heard about was the treating pulmonologist. the most important medical issue in this case deals with pulmonary. and instead of bringing dr. aneja in, they brought dr. burns. they brought dr. burns. and dr. aneja, you will see his record, you have already, down at the bottom there -- in fact, they did not bring any of these doctors. these are the true eyewitnesses, people who treated her and made findings about her condition that relate to the issue of this case. and dr. aneja, i suspect, did not come because on 29 separate office visits, and they are all in the files, they are all in those over there, for sure, i did not go through these, between the first -- in about this period, 29 different times, he wrote no problem, no acute distress. that may explain why you did not hear from dr. aneja in this case. now, while an expert can be paid 40 or $50,000 to ignore evidence in a case, the good news is that our system provides that you get to see all of the evidence. you know, i told you something about c.s.i. well, the plaintiffs have given you the first ten minutes. you have now seen the last 50 minutes. and that is how you can decide this case. you have seen all of the evidence in this case. so i want to talk about the lung cancer and the c.o.p.d. specifically. i do not know how to make this any clearer. we are not saying in this case that all of those exposures that she had throughout her life that we will talk about, we are not saying that those exposures cause cancer, that they are -- all of them are carcinogenic. some might be. but we are not saying that. they keep telling you that is what we are saying. they put a chart up now to go down that list to say none of these are carcinogenic. we are not saying that. we are saying that the most important issue in this case is the inflammation. you know, counsel was asking the witness about red herrings the other day. well, you know, that came from back in england when they hunted foxes, and some people were animal rights people, even back in the early days, and they would take a bag and fill it up with fish, and they would go down the road where the fox had gone, and they would drag it along the road so when the dogs came, the fish would have -- they would lose the smell of the fox and they would go off the other way. that is where we get that expression. the issue of whether coal dust causes cancer is a red herring. we are saying that all of these exposures cause inflammation. inflammation. now, every -- every witness that we talked to, every witness that testified, we talked about inflammation. go back to that one, please. go back one more. yeah. inflammation, you see it, you know what happened because you see scars, and it causes -- inflammation causes lung cancer and c.o.p.d. that is what we are saying in this case. and their experts do not dispute that. dr. doig testified, dr. rubin testified, dr. burns testified that inflammation can cause cancer and c.o.p.d., and scarring is evidence of inflammation. there is no dispute, they all said that under oath. and if you look at the -- through all of their records, they made a number of findings. they found granulomas and scarring, they found emphysema, which they said inflammation increases the risk of emphysema. bronchitis can inflame the lungs, chronic bronchitis, remodeling, c.o.p.d., and asthma can change the architecture of the lungs, the environmental exposures, air pollution in urban areas can lead to inflammation. this is not in dispute in this case. i want to show you this timeline again, because it summarizes these things. now, if he gets back up and repeats again that ben reid or r.j. reynolds believes that all of these things at the bottom cause -- cause cancer, you will remember, and i cannot stand up and say, wait a minute, as i said before, we are not saying that in this case. that chart that he put up is a red herring. that is not the point. we are saying that all of these things cause inflammation. and inflammation causes cancer and c.o.p.d. and if you look at ms. koballa's life, 58 years of breathing cigarette smoke for sure and occupational exposure. and we will talk in a minute about how do you know that this green is not a substantial contributing cause? because that is really what we have to decide in this case. and the evidence, to make the decision you have to make, all starts and ends with ms. koballa and her condition. and that is why we put in all the medical records, that is why we asked every one of our experts to look at every single medical record, not just the ones we chose to send them. that is doctors, test reports, nurse's notes, x-rays, c.t.s, depositions of the medical record -- of medical people, and, of course, the fact people. that is why when our experts were on the stand, we displayed and discussed all the medical records. that is why when i cross-examined all of their experts, i put the medical records on the board and asked them to comment on them. that is why we did that. if this case is about evidence, why did not any of their experts talk about the best evidence of ms. koballa's physical condition, her medical records? there is a reason they did not do that. it is because the medical records do not support their theory of this case. dr. burns decided that smoking was the culprit here. dr. rubin decided it. dr. doig really was not in the -- in the business of deciding that or not, but they asked him now and he said based on statistics, he thought it was related or associated. medical records are different, however. now, if you think about evidence and trying to build -- your idea is to build and ultimately build a wall, you might say, of the evidence with individual blocks, you do that by looking at everything, trying to find out what was the cause of ms. koballa's condition. so you need to know what exposures existed, what effect on the lungs, what conditions can cause that effect and so forth. so the first block, you might say, would be exposure. and you have seen evidence of exposure. no one can dispute that every one of those exposures, there is either a medical record that specifically mentions it or there is testimony, and nobody disputed that. oh, they have tried to say, well, we do not know how much coal dust she inhaled and so forth. but there can be no doubt that ms. koballa was exposed to all of the things that you see on that list, and they are included on here as well. they keep saying there is -- we do not know what the names of the solvents were. well -- let us see the next slide. we know for a fact that as late as this period, which is -- now we are into the -- into the 2000 decade, ms. koballa thought, at least, and told her doctors, and we assume she was being truthful, that all this meat wrapper -- the meat wrapping, the p.v.c., the adhesive, that is when you stick on the glue, the -- and the fumes from the -- from the equipment, the collins they said was the equipment, all of that existed in this case. all of that existed. dr. doig did not dispute any of this because he did not know. he did not know either what her prior exposures were because that was not his job. it did not matter to him. his job was to take care of ms. koballa's condition when he did the surgery. they brought him in to try to turn him into something far beyond what he was, which was the doctor who did the surgery. and he did not know about all this. you know what dr. burns -- go back to the slide, please, the one before. you know what dr. burns called these? i wrote it down. he said ms. koballa had a series of dings and nicks. dings are like little tiny things you get on your car, hood maybe, when something falls on it. and nicks, that is like they say, you were nicked, you got a little bump or something. he described all of that exposure, all of this exposure for all of these years, he said these are dings and nicks, but he did not know what was there because he did not know a thing about her exposure in the meat wrapping business or other places. dings and nicks. now, the second -- that is the exposure. the second is, is there evidence of some impact on the lungs from these exposures? there has been substantial evidence of substantial impact to her lungs, of substantial evidence of inflammation throughout her lifetime. can we see the next slide, please? there is the medical record, severe infections, history of allergies, asthma, bronchitis, pneumonia. there is another one. chest -- old healed. in '71, they were talking about histoplasmosis. you see that was mentioned a number of times. they continued to see that. remember what dr. doig said -- oh, and then the x-ray. and that -- there -- there -- those are the dings and nicks that dr. burns wants you to believe were insignificant, and as you heard from dr. doig, you can see them there, you cannot see them at the top because of the -- because the lung is thinner there, but they are all over both lungs. and other than dr. rubin -- dr. burns, who refers to these as dings and nicks, everybody else says this is substantial scarring. and then if you recall, he talked about the signet, you know, used his ring in this area right here that you would not see, that is a significant finding when you are talking about whether or not lungs have been inflamed or not. i want you to remember what dr. doig said in his testimony. he said when i -- when i operated on ms. koballa and i opened her and i looked at her lungs, he said you would have to have been a coal miner to have lungs that looked like this. that is their eyewitness who was there, who saw it. now, you have seen lots of evidence of it. their experts, they kept that evidence from them, and the experts never talked to you about it, but dr. burns just tried to say, well, these were not important, anyway, because they were just dings and nicks. now you have seen the actual truth, the actual facts. so you have got the exposure, you have got the impact in the lungs. the third thing is, what happens to the lungs as a result of all this? and in this case, as early as '69, we start having chronic bronchitis, chronic productive cough, possible asthmatic bronchitis. and what is the date of the next one, please? i cannot see. excuse me, i'll walk over. '70 -- '70 -- '73. and you have seen other references to this. all of these -- every single -- i've said this before, every single thing you see on here you can find in a medical record. and we have shown most of these to you during the course of the trial. and then you see bronchitis, 10 to 20 times during this period, and then you start seeing lots of problems once you get into this time frame. and the point of this was, you know, they -- counsel was saying to dr. rubin, well, did you see in your slides any evidence of pneumonia or any evidence of bronchitis or any evidence of any of these fumes? you do not see evidence of the things, what you see is evidence of what they do to the body. and that is something that we -- we have no control over. we have the doctors who described this, and they all said this is what ms. koballa's situation is. so to say that -- ask all these later doctors, well, did you think that there was this or that, the bottom line is, the bottom line is we know what the evidence is because we know what the results are. the most significant insult to her lung, however, was clearly this meat wrapper's asthma. as you heard from dr. tuthill, when -- when this paper -- when this plastic is cut -- and could i see the next slide? you release a series of toxic substances, and those are the things that dr. tuthill told you are released when polyvinyl chloride is heated at 200 degrees on a hot wire. now, probably some of those are carcinogenic. i did not ask him, well, are these carcinogenic, because that is not the point. we are not submitting these, even though i think benzene would probably be, i think toluene may be. the point is these are all chemicals that assault the lungs that cause inflammation. and we know, we know that she was having all these problems at the time she was breathing this, breathing this. she wrapped a thousand packages a day for 15 years, and with every wrapping, she was breathing that material. the second 15 years, about the middle, that went away, and she was left with just the labeling. and, of course, the solvents and the cleaning materials, which everybody agrees, those types of things can cause irritation and ultimately inflammation to the lungs, and we have evidence that all of these things in combination. now, counsel wants to talk about and deal with these multiplications and come up with -- nobody knows how many puffs ms. koballa took. if she is ironing, she lights a cigarette, puts it down, she irons a while, the cigarette keeps burning, whereas if she smokes it without interruption or maybe she stopped smoking -- for him to make you think that this is an objective test, a calculation, a dose, it would be like my saying that, you know, an average person breathes 16 times a minute. ms. koballa would have worked 420 minutes every day, assuming a seven-hour shift, so she was exposed, we know, to a thousand wrappings. so i could do the calculations and i could say she breathes 16 times a minute when she was wrapping, and we know, without any doubt, that that -- those chemicals were released, and i could multiply that times the number of years, and you know what i would come up with? i would come up with a lot more than 5 million, i would come up with about 25 million doses of all of those chemicals that you just saw. but you cannot decide this case that way, just like his number -- that would be as ridiculous as his number to try to say we know today what the dose was. and he wants you to believe that the only substance that we know about in this case, the only substance that we know the actual dose of is cigarettes. and that is just not true. furthermore, we know the results of these other exposures that we see in all these evidence about her lungs. and then, of course, dr. tuthill diagnosed ms. koballa with meat wrapper's asthma. and the significant thing is -- if we could see the next slide. -- it only happened at work. now, remember, this is in the late '60s, right here. she is been smoking a long time so far. and when she goes home, when she smokes more, these symptoms all go away. so she is not having symptoms from smoking in this time, she is having symptoms because of meat wrapper's asthma. meat wrapper's asthma, because it goes away. and we see continuation of references to this throughout her lifetime. she continued to remind doctors, this was an important thing for ms. koballa in her life. it -- the period of treatment there was about five years when she was suffering from this, and she mentioned it in '82, in '96, and in 2000. she remembers. now, so we know what the exposure, we know the impact on the lungs and we know what conditions she has. so how does this relate to c.o.p.d. and lung cancer? was smoking the substantially contributing cause or not? let us talk about lung cancer first. and for that, you heard from dr. bennett. i do not know what to say. he came from montana. montana is a small state. i suppose he would say people that are from deland may be not as good as people from some other bigger city. i do not know that the size of the state where he works today has anything to do -- if he added up all the people in africa when he worked over there, in north carolina, in mississippi, and alabama, you would get a lot more people than the 900,000, i think he said half the population of orlando. i do not know what the point of that was. and to say he does not look at slides, he has done 8,000 -- over 8,000 autopsies. and when you do autopsies -- and he is also done a lot of clinical work where he regularly -- he ran the lab. he was the quality person who ran the lab at hospitals where they would look at slides. he was highly qualified. now, he does not write. he is a practitioner, and you have to evaluate, and he is testified a couple three times in tobacco cases and looked at a few more cases. did you get any cross-examination from him about going around trying to generate or take positions in litigation about tobacco or not? no. he was a -- ironically, he is the one witness in this case who has actually seen meat wrapper's asthma in a real patient when he did an autopsy, in a real person when he did an autopsy. and he went through all the slides that, and he showed you what the slides looked like and he showed you where the tumor was. nobody else did that for you. dr. rubin showed you a couple of slides. they did not ask him a question -- a single question about any of those opinions. they wanted to know why did you go out to -- you know, it is interesting, mr. -- counsel this morning was talking about california and all that. they are the ones that brought up this thing about where do you live. he said are not there a lot of pathologists in north carolina and at university in -- east carolina and wake forest, and why did they go all the way out there? and i'm thinking, well, you went all the way to san diego. the point is that is irrelevant. that is irrelevant. what is relevant is you watch the person, and more importantly, what did the person look at and what did he show you when he gave you his testimony. 13-8, please. that was the first slide. and if you remember, the most significant thing he said -- see, doctors can look at evidence, a slide, they can look at slides, they can look at how a condition's performed and a lot of things to give them an idea of whether something is related to this or that. he told you, if you remember, this section right here, that was a big scar or evidence of scarring across there. and he told you that if scarring -- and scarring can be caused by tobacco, but he told you that if you had tobacco scarring, it would not be thick and bold like that, it would be thin and wispy looking. and nobody contest -- they did not come in with a different slide and say, no, this is what tobacco scarring looks like. they just want you to believe them because they get paid a lot and they have got good credentials, they say, oh, it must be caused by smoking. well, he actually showed you the evidence of what a scar looks like that is not tobacco related. and then he looked at a number of things that all point to the conclusion that this is not smoking related. and those are the things -- that is the evidence. that is the later 50 minutes that we talked about, where it was found, that it had features of b.a.c. which is not tobacco related, it had substantial scarring in the tumor itself, it preexisted, the scarring, for years. it shows the inflammation. it had not spread. there was no -- he said it is rare for a smoking related cancer in this -- of this size, remember, he said it was a large lesion, not to have spread. and there was no treatment, chemotherapy or radiation afterwards, and it has not returned. and that is his evidence. now, nobody on the other side ever put up a list and said these are all the criteria from the medical records and from the reports that i glean that suggest or convince me that it is smoking related because they did not look at the medical records and they did not talk about the medical records. that is -- dr. bennett talked about lung cancer. now, he also talked about emphysema, and i want to show you, if you remember, he did a drawing. he did a drawing. he is the only one that talked to you about the three -- they brought in dr. doig to say she had emphysema, but dr. doig is the one that found the blebs. and he agreed and dr. rubin agreed and maybe dr. burns, i do not remember if i asked him or not, agreed that if you have blebs, that means bullous, and everybody agrees no smoking. dr. -- can you all see this with the thing in the way here? dr. bennett showed you the difference between -- this is what it looks like and the difference between panacinar, which is not smoking, he said that would be a hole through the middle, and centrolobular, which would be around the edge, and he said this is not smoking, and that is his evidence. and nobody contested that other than just dr. burns just to say -- i'm sorry -- dr. burns just said, well, that emphysema is caused by smoking. dr. rubin, emphysema, caused by smoking. again, they want you to believe because they have credentials and they have spent a lot of time working in tobacco cases, they want you to believe, trust me, it is in here. that is their testimony. dr. bennett does not say trust me it is in here. dr. bennett says this is what it is, and he showed you slides that supported this. and we had this whole discussion, to the extent there is emphysema, it is mild, which, again, does not suggest smoking related. we have another slide. dr. rubin or dr. burns, i forget which one, said it was serious or heavy or moderate or moderate to severe, whatever. well, these are the doctors who looked at it over the years. and as time passes, it gets a little better. at first they said it was mild emphysema. and dr. doig said it is a matter of degree. so when you say emphysematous changes, that means it is not as bad as emphysema. so by '09, it had got a little better, and then a month later, she has mild emphysematous changes. so her emphysema is actually getting a little better. that would not happen if it were smoking related. nobody has disputed that. no doctor has disputed that in this case. now, dr. klein talked to you about c.o.p.d. and remember, he talked to you about this normal p.f.t. after 22 years of smoking, and he agreed that there was evidence, based on dr. tuthill's records, of meat wrapper's asthma, he described what that would be, and he talked about remodeling. and that was the hose pipe. when you get your hose pipe, you move it, it is very supple. if you turn the water on quickly, you see it kind of bulge a little bit. but if you leave it in the sun too many days, it becomes hardened and it is not supple anymore and it does not bulge a little bit when water goes through. that is what happens to your lungs. and that is called remodeling. and that happens because of all of these exposures, all of this inflammation over all of these years, it changed ms. koballa's lungs to some extent. now, dr. klein, he practices, he does not write, he is from california, so he is from far away. he does not write, he practices. he has patients. yesterday, he said he saw 24 patients, or the day before he testified. and he told you that c.o.p.d. from smoking acts different from c.o.p.d. not from smoking. remember now, we are looking at -- we are trying to decide if she is in the small twenty percent pool of smokers or in the large eighty percent pool. and doctors, that is the part of science, doctors can tell you, if you have a certain disease, it looks a certain way. and if it looks this way, we think it is this, and if it looks that way, it is this. and their doctors never got to that point because they did not get the medical records out and show you any evidence from the actual medical records, they did not have a chart like the one i just showed you that dr. bennett did. go back to -- do not put that one up yet, i'm not quite ready. they did not have a chart that gave all the criteria and said this is why it does not appear to be smoking. they did not have a chart that said here is all the criteria that -- they did not have a chart like that the other way. nobody put up -- dr. burns did not put up -- pull out medical records and show you all of the reasons that it is got to be smoking except to say smoking causes cancer, which we all agree. and it is not the issue in this case. now, dr. -- dr. klein talked about the p.f.t., pulmonary function tests. and he showed you this chart, and it is kind of busy, but if i could walk over here, he said the important thing to look at are these. in '73, and i marked this one in '73, it was normal. and then by '96, and this is about the time of the surgery, and she had -- she had a lesion, a cancer, so you would expect it not to be as good, it had dropped. but immediately after the surgery, and that was one of the things all the doctors on our side said, the fact that she rebounded with less lung, remember, twenty percent is gone, but they told you the -- i'm doing the wrong side. twenty percent of the lung is gone, but it comes back and it adjusts and so forth, so after the surgery, she actually has a better result. and then from then on, as she ages, it changes a little bit year after year. the important thing, he showed you the -- i do not have the graphs up here. remember there is a graph, and if it is normal, it goes up and then it kind of goes that way, and if it is bad, if you have problems, it goes kind of like that (indicating). dr. klein told you, and nobody disputed this because they did not bring anybody -- they did not bring the pulmonologist in who actually treated her all -- who treated her as recently as last march, this march or this month -- last march, i guess, or last fall, they did not bring that person in for you to hear from. dr. klein pointed out to you that smoking related c.o.p.d. you would expect this number to get ten percent worse every year. and you can see from here down to here it barely moves. it should have gone from 1.8 to -- what is ten percent of that, .18, and another ten percent and another ten percent and on down. nobody disputed that. that is what happens if you have smoking related problems. this is not smoking related. and he then did a summary chart. once again, she had a normal p.f.t. in '73. she had, after the surgery, they called it mild to moderate obstruction. and that was after -- that was after smoking a lot of years. it was the most -- she had at that point, the worst case was mild to moderate. that she had improvement. again, she had improvements with a smoking history. and finally, you do not see the ten percent. they did not show you a chart that listed all the criteria that would cause you to believe the opposite is the case. and, you know, we sort of have a scientific test here. you know how when -- it is not scientific, but when you have little babies and you are starting to introduce food, you will introduce one kind of food and see if they break out in a rash. you know, sometimes you give a child eggs for the first time and they wake up with their ears bulging and red and all of that. so you try one, if that works, then you try another one, and you do that so that you can kind of keep up with what works and what does not. and you take one away and see what happens now with just this one. well, we have two examples of exactly that kind of test in this case. the first example is this right here. we know that ms. koballa had been smoking for 22 years when she had that p.f.t. if she were having problems with her lungs associated with smoking, and i could pull out mr. pantazis's calculations and we could figure out how many puffs she had by then, but if -- if she had been smoking, you would expect a problem, and you see none. you see none. at that point. a normal p.f.t. and then the second piece of evidence has to do with from the time she moved to florida. when she moved to florida, all the environmental exposures are gone. this is like taking the food away from the baby. all of the occupational exposures are gone. and the only thing left is cigarette smoking. so that ought to tell us what happens to ms. koballa if she only has a problem with smoking, if smoking is the issue. and we have an answer to that from dr. sia's records. next one. dr. sia, remember, saw her a number of times between '92 and '96. and when he saw her, she did not have -- had not had a chronic cough in a year, since she moved away from everything but still smoked. she did not have a frequent cough when she would lie down. she did not wake with shortness of breath. she did have trouble walking, but up stairs she did not have a problem, and again, laying down. and there were several records from dr. sia over those years where he found no acute distress, her lungs were clean. i'm not sure if i have another slide for dr. sia or not. and then we had six -- he saw her -- there were 13 interactions, half she came in, and the other half she called in and she said i'm doing fine. in '93 she is doing fine, i do not need an appointment. do we have another one? i cannot remember. the bottom line is, ladies and gentlemen, that when everything goes away except smoking, her condition stabilizes and now you have the evidence that she actually is doing better. smoking is not a substantial contributing factor in her condition. now, i do not have a lot of time left, but i want to talk -- the court: about two minutes. mr. reid: two minutes? may i have just a little bit more, your honor? you said -- i'm sure you will give him -- the court: i will not chop you off mid sentence. mr. reid: addiction. could i see the slide, please? as to addiction, the nicotine effect, it is out of the body in 72 hours. the withdrawal symptoms are gone. any effect on the brain, the receptors, are gone. back to normal. if ms. koballa stopped smoking for more than a couple of months, which she did on a number of occasions, you cannot say that nicotine is the reason that she started again, because she was -- nicotine was gone. ms. koballa knew how to smoke and knew how to quit. she found that she could quit by going to a hypnotist, acupuncture. she uses the patch. she controlled her smoking in places where she was not allowed to smoke. but the main thing is, she had a number -- and we quibbled, dr. frazier wanted to quibble about is that a quit smoking or a stop smoking. the fact is she went away from smoking, she learned how to quit, how to get away from smoking, and she then made a decision that she would smoke again, and it had nothing to do with nicotine. they say nicotine is so powerful, even her last one when she was nervous and fearful for her life, if nicotine has this enormous grasp of the brain that totally controls, the fact that no matter what the outward motivations should not matter, that is what they told you. they say it so affects the brain that it takes over and controls your brain. the day that she quit for good without help she was fully saturated with nicotine, she had been smoking the day before and for the several days before. there was no reason in the world that nicotine -- that you could say that there was less nicotine. but the other times she quit, every time she stops, the nicotine was gone. ms. koballa liked -- some people like to smoke and they choose not to stop. ms. koballa liked to smoke. and you heard evidence of that about her -- that she liked all the things about smoking. now, the last thing i would like to show you is the verdict form. and the first question -- the verdict form is written in the legal form. i've been talking to you generally about the facts. "was ms. koballa addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine?" and you heard the evidence that she quit, that she controlled her smoking. and i would suggest the answer to that question is no. the second group of questions deal with the medical case. "was her addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine a cause of her chronic pulmonary or her lung cancer?" and that is where you decide if you think that smoking did not substantially contribute to her condition, that the other things were the substantial contributors, your answer to these questions would be no. and i would suggest that is what is supported by this evidence. now, the last thing i want to say to you, ladies and gentlemen, is that i do not get to talk to you again. and as you can tell from all the lawyers, sometimes we like to talk and we like to make points, and it is really tough to sit over there and know that i cannot respond. i do not know what mr. pantazis might say to you. he may be waiting to say something to you that he has not said yet that i would have a great answer to. so i would only ask you if you listen to him, i hope you have listened to me this way. and does that make sense what ben reid just said to me? is it supported by the evidence? when he says things that you think i might have a response to, you might think what would my response be, because i cannot make it anymore and i cannot guess what he might say. i want to tell you one final thing. we have a pact, jurors and the litigants. we agree with you that you can go into that room and you -- and you can decide this case, and we are not going to interfere with that, we are not going to tell you how to decide it, you are going to do it. and you cannot -- there cannot be a wrong answer. you know i think in voir dire i told you back in the 1700s they used to put jurors in jail if they got the wrong result. that does not happen anymore. you are the kings when you go in there. however, you have agreed that you will decide the case only on the evidence. you will not decide the case because smoking can cause or that it is addictive. you will not decide the evidence because it is a big company. you will decide the case only on the evidence that you have heard in this case. and that is our pact. and that is why the -- that is why the jury system works, because we agree and you agree. and so as you retire, i have complete and total confidence that you will now go into that jury room and you will consider all of this evidence and you will do your duty and you will arrive at a proper verdict. and with that, i thank you for your just rapt attention this morning as i have been speaking.