mr. pantazis: -- that monitor? may i move it. good morning. i'm looking at my watch, and i apologize for the rudeness, but as your honor has said, both sides get an opportunity to speak to you this morning, conclusion, summation, of this part one, this qualification phase of the case. i'm looking at my watch because as i warned you in my opening, i talk too much. and while i get to go first, and mr. reid will follow me, the time that i spend with you cannot be any greater than his time. so we have equal amounts of time, i just go first, him next, and then i get a chance to chat with you again, assuming i do not talk too much in this first phase, and i have done that before. so first of all let me tell you on behalf of both parties, i'm sure mr. reid and his client as well, thank you for your time today and thank you for your service during the first two weeks and for the next week as we go to part two. i'm -- in looking at this case and -- my first communication with you, i said, you know, what is your job? what is the job of the jury? i talked to you a little bit about how we stand up when you come in. i know that is maybe a little awkward for some folks, but you are the judge of the facts, and that is why we are honoring you and honoring the positions that you hold. but what tools does the court, the court system give you to do your job? and his honor spoke about this. all the law comes from his honor. judge rouse instructed you on the law, i'm going to comment on the law a little bit, but all the law is from him. while i may comment on it and i may think i'm a big dog, i do not make the law, there is only one person in this courtroom that does that, and that is judge rouse. but the law in this case comes -- he gave you some instructions and i'm going to talk about those as we go down. the second tool that you have is evidence. evidence comes from that witness stand, and you have heard witnesses, both -- some of the parties, ms. koballa, you heard her daughter, you heard the treating physicians, or as i call them, the eyewitnesses to the event. you heard professional witnesses, people that have been paid to come in and give their opinions. there is nothing wrong with that. as you see, both sides use it. sometimes people like to throw up all the big, "oh, he got paid money." both sides do that for professional witnesses. that is not unusual. we do that so you can know the total picture of that witness. but you are to consider that. so the witness's talk is evidence, it is sworn under oath, it is evidence. we also have documents, documents that are marked as exhibits. we have put in, i do not know, 5, 600 pages of medical records. they have put in, i do not know, 800 pages. i'll tell you why there is a difference, but basically, the medical records have duplications in them. medical records, when you go from one doctor to the other, they sometimes incorporate the other doctor's medical records. we skim those out. these are the medical records that we felt was pertinent because it took out the duplications. but you will have both, so you can check it out yourself. another piece of evidence in the exhibits, and these are two very important, and i call them to your attention, it is document evidence number 4 and document evidence number 25. these are internal documents from r.j. reynolds, and we think they bear extremely important on the decision in this case, particularly the decisions and the evidence you have heard in this trial. and i'm going to talk about them. but you do not have to take my word for what these documents say. you will have them back with you. and they are their documents, one from 1962 from dr. rodgman, the other's from 1972, i believe, from dr. teague, talking to other r.j.r. people. now, you also have in evidence undisputed facts. this is a little bit unusual case. remember, i'm going to show you some boards where we had these pieces of evidence that were -- you were instructed that you must follow because this is a continuation of that two year long trial. this is just the qualification of the -- see if ms. koballa qualifies as a member of that class. so there are some findings that you must apply. so that is in both law and evidence. you also have admissions. i have two boards, i have a nicotine fact board i'm going to show you, i know you get tired of seeing it, but it has certain nicotine facts, you saw me go over it with witnesses, i wanted that to show you that those are not disputed facts. while they may have not said we admit to them, they did not put any evidence to say we disagree with them. and the same thing is true with the illness facts i am going to put on. they agree those facts are true. so those are two of the tools, but there is one more, and i think it is an important one. i think it is so important this qualification part of this case, i named it, it is the common sense part. the judge instructed you, and i think you heard him say very clearly, do not leave your life experiences outside. i'm not talking about prejudice. i'm talking about your common sense. where i grew up, it is what my grandparents and my parents taught me, it is a way of life, it is a way of viewing things and applying the facts. use your common sense in determining what is the truth in the evidence and how it applies to the law. i believe it is very important and i believe it will guide you. so what is the law. okay. well, we first have to answer some questions. miss thomason. can you make those a little bigger? your honor, may i approach the -- the court: you may. mr. pantazis: this is what you will actually be answering. this is what you will take back. and it really has two questions, and the second question has two parts. first question, "was stella koballa addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine?" you answer it yes or no. we believe the answer is yes. if you answer yes, then you go to the second part. "was ms. koballa's addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine a legal cause of her, 1, her c.o.p.d./emphysema, or" -- "and/or, b, lung cancer, adenocarcinoma." if you answer yes to either one of those, and yes to that, to number 1, we move on to phase two or part two. so that is what -- the questions that you must answer. now, the judge talked about, again, in his instructions, he said, "well, how do you -- how do you know what level of evidence meets the law?" he used the term greater weight. the greater weight of the evidence means the more persuasive convincing force and effect of the entire evidence in the case. it does not mean absolutely. it does not mean that you have got to have a specific number. it just means more convincing. one example that is often used is if you had two stacks of 100 papers in each hand, had a hundred pieces of paper, same kind in this hand, and a hundred pieces of paper, hundred kind {sic} in this hand, and the scales on both of those are even, but if you put one piece of paper more on this side, it tilts the scale. that is greater weight of the evidence. it can be that slight. that is a judgment call for you to use, observing the evidence, applying it to the law, and applying your common sense in doing it. the judge also talked about what is legal cause. this is an important -- very, very important in this case, because we know that reynolds tobacco company claims all these multiple things caused the injury to ms. koballa, and do not be confused, you do not have to find that smoking was the only cause. it could be one of many causes. and this is what the judge instructs you. it need not be the only cause. it only has to be a substantial contributing cause. it can even operate in combination with the acts of another or in other causes of the addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine. so hypothetically, i do not think it is true, i do not think any of the things that they put on their board through their witnesses contributed at all to the c.o.p.d. or the cancer, but if you feel like it played a role in smoking -- excuse me, and nicotine addiction to cigarettes played a role and it was a substantial contributing factor, it is okay, you can check yes. why does the court give us this charge? the court gives us this charge because this is not the first trial in the state of florida ever. it -- state of florida has created this court system and given this charge because it recognizes that plaintiffs -- mr. reid: objection, your honor, as to what the state of florida recognizes. the court: i think you need to rephrase it. mr. pantazis: excuse me. the reason we have this charge is because plaintiffs like ms. koballa come in this courtroom, they do not live in an incubator, they live in a real world, and this charge demonstrates that you come into this courtroom living in a real world. ms. koballa was born in 1933. she has had a long and healthy, productive life, thank for -- thankfully to dr. doig. but she is had exposures like we have all had exposures. those are not the issues in the case. the issues in the case is did the smoking play a substantial contributing factor, along with anything else. i personally think it was the only, that is my -- mr. reid: objection, the personal opinion of an attorney is irrelevant. the court: again, suggest you rephrase as far as -- mr. pantazis: i apologize, your honor. i think the evidence shows it was the only cause. so we are at part two -- excuse me, we are at part one. what are we going to do in part one? we are going to answer those questions. you remember what i put up in the opening. is stella koballa addicted to nicotine cigarettes? the answer is yes. did that addiction to nicotine substantially contribute to her lung cancer and her c.o.p.d.? the answer is yes. this is the common sense part. it just makes sense if you look at the evidence and look at the given facts and the law. the part two part of this case, once you answer affirmatively to part one to the two questions, is really the rest of the story, who knew what, when did they know it, and what did they do with that knowledge. and as soon as you come back with a verdict establishing that ms. koballa is a member of that class, we will go on to part two. the first thing you must answer is addiction, was ms. koballa addicted to nicotine, to cigarettes. i read you a quote at the beginning of the case, i said, "it is not the act of smoking that causes a person to be addicted, it is the nicotine in the cigarettes that r.j. reynolds manufactured that caused the addiction." that is a fact. it is not the act of smoking. the defendants tried to make it the act, but it is the nicotine. these are the nicotine facts. nicotine is a drug. nicotine is an addictive drug. nicotine causes a person to crave more regular doses of nicotine. nicotine addicts crave nicotine. r.j. reynolds cigarettes contain that nicotine. r.j. reynolds cigarettes are addictive. even if a person is addicted, addicted like ms. koballa, they can still stop. that is not a definition of somebody who is not addicted. it is how it affects the human brain, how it affects the body. if a person is addicted and stopped, it does not mean they are no longer addicted, it just means they are in remission. remember dr. frazier testified that is what the dsm-iv calls it. they do not say you quit, they say you are in remission, and that is true. so the first thing you have got to look at is how much smoke, what was the history of her smoking, that is one of the key components of addiction, how much nicotine did her body get. this fact is uncontroverted. one and a half packs per day -- it is really one and a half to two, but we took the lower one just because there was some time in between. one and a half packs per day, that is 30 cigarettes per day for 45 years, that is almost 5 million -- that is almost 500,000 cigarettes and 5 million hits or doses of nicotine. that is a fact. you heard no evidence to dispute that, and that is a very important fact because it establishes both addiction and it also shows something that you may remember from the experts, both theirs and ours, called dose response. in order to determine whether something causes something, you have got to know the dose, how much of it. you cannot guess. remember the judge said, do not guess. you do not have to guess how many cigarettes she smoked, you do not have to guess how many hits of nicotine she had, that is evidence and it is undisputed evidence. we also have another fact to establish addiction, an eyewitness. you remember dr. sia. i put his picture up here because after a week, sometimes all the people get blurred. dr. sia was one of the first witnesses that came in here. in 1992, dr. sia did a full evaluation on her, full workup, and what did he find? could i have the next chart? he found in 1992 cigarette addiction. that is in these medical records. now, dr. sia is not a paid professional witness. dr. sia is a treating physician. he is one of those eyewitnesses. you know, i consider the treating physicians that just come in here that have been treating a patient, they are eyewitnesses to what happened in her life. they are not like a professional witness that comes here for his or her opinion. dr. sia made that diagnosis in 1992, way before any litigation, way before any illness of cancer or c.o.p.d. or emphysema. and that -- it was never refuted by anyone. did you hear any one of their experts say i reviewed dr. sia's records and i think his opinion was wrong? i think they brought a guy named dr. thompson who basically does gambling addiction. nice guy. but he said ms. koballa was not addicted because she liked it. i do not know of an addict that does not like the substance they are addicted to, but that was his basis. he said, oh, we looked at the dsm-iv, but he did not show you how he applied the dsm-iv. dr. frazier did, and we are going to talk about that. no one disputed what dr. sia diagnosed her with. stella koballa was addicted in '92 and she probably was addicted in the mid '50s, based on dr. frazier's testimony, and she is addicted today. dr. frazier. she was the last witness. i thought i would bring her picture up as well. dr. frazier established a nicotine -- excuse me, an addiction center for the university. she is a medical doctor, she has her -- she is board certified in addiction. what did she do? she used the dsm-iv, which it is a mental disorder guide, but it is given to clinicians, like dr. frazier, to apply. she applied it, she reviewed the medical records, she did a preliminary opinion, a review, with just the three volumes of depositions, then later, she went for a review and interviewed ms. koballa and looked at all the depositions that she testified about. so what did she say? she said she is addicted, and she said, and they tried to make fun of her, she said it was a no-brainer. well, i agree with it, i would not have used that term. i think it is just common sense. i tell you what else she did. she brought in and showed you how nicotine binds to the brain. showed you in a pet scan, discussed how the different receptors are changed. if nicotine leaves your body, you are still addicted to it. those memories are permanent. and i do not know how you can say she is not addicted with the three, two or three of the fact patterns that you heard. one of them, she ran out of cigarettes, i think she was -- one of the times she was trying to stop. she goes through the trash to find butts. that is how strong that addiction was. she smoked those butts with toothpicks because she did not want to put her mouth on the butt. does that sound like a nonaddicted person to you? i do not think so. common sense. another time, she ran out of cigarettes in the middle of the night. she did not even bother to dress. she put her jacket over her pajamas and ran out and bought cigarettes. none of these facts are disputed. ms. koballa is addicted. common sense tells you she is addicted. that first question you should mark yes. did the addiction cause her lung cancer and c.o.p.d.? that is the second question. do you remember, the first question, is she addicted, answer that one yes and you go to the second question. well, this question really is asked in a different way. did cigarette smoking substantially cause ms. koballa's lung cancer and did it substantially cause her emphysema? so what did we do with that. well, we first -- why do not we go ahead and pull those other up. these are facts. these are not in dispute. r.j. reynolds cigarettes contain cancer causing chemicals. you heard no one dispute that. r.j. reynolds cigarettes contain chemicals that cause emphysema. no one disputes that. the vast majority, some say it is 60, most doctors say 80 to 85 percent, of adenocarcinoma lung cancer is caused by cigarette smoking. no one disputed that. the only thing they say, i think dr. bennett said it was closer to 60, where dr. rubin and dr. burns said it was 80 to 85. but no question, vast majority of all adenocarcinoma of the lungs are caused by cigarettes. so that means if you have a hundred people, eight of those -- 80 of those hundred that have that cancer, it is caused by smoking, only 20 are not. ninety percent of emphysema is caused by c.o.p.d. -- is caused by smoking. that is not in dispute. next slide. what does r.j. reynolds admit? they admit their cigarettes are addictive. they admit that their cigarettes cause adenocarcinoma of the lung. they admit their cigarettes cause emphysema. they do not dispute that. as a matter of fact, they affirmatively admit it. well, in order to understand what -- in order to understand what is -- what causes something, you first have to do what the experts said, you have to do a dose response. this is the dose response. this is how many cigarettes she smoked. this is how much -- how many times she bathed her lungs, almost 5 million. you must also know -- have to know what is in this 5 million hits. and by the way, there is only one substance that you heard any evidence of what chemicals cause cancer. you did not hear it on any of the other testimony, any of those other infections, you never heard r.j. reynolds once put up chemical charts that said she breathed -- she inhaled this much of this and it contained this. did not. said glue solvents. did not tell you what was in it. did not tell you how much. did not present any evidence that glue solvents cause cancer or glue solvents cause emphysema. but they did not dispute this. so when you look at whether something causes it, you look at the exposure and what is in the exposure. mr. reid: your honor, i object, this goes to the cigarette design, which is not part of this phase. the court: overruled. mr. pantazis: 70 different chemicals that destroy lung tissue are included in cigarettes. each time you puff, 70 different chemicals that will either cause cancer or cause tissue to disintegrate or become damaged and emphysema. they do not dispute that. you know the interesting thing about this? do you remember when i had dr. burns -- excuse me, dr. bennett, their experts, and dr. klein? do you remember, i think mr. corr asked, "have you ever seen this? have you -- do you know what is inside a cigarette? "oh, no. "did you ask r.j. reynolds what is -- what kind of cancer causing chemicals are inside their cigarette? "oh, no." how can you come in here and tell you that smoking did not cause this disease if you did not even know what cancer causing and emphysema chemicals are in those drugs, are in that cigarette? they not only did not ask for it, they did not give it to them. the next thing is, the third component is you have got to know, what did the eyewitnesses say. we know that she smoked this much and had this much exposure. we know that cigarettes contain this much damaging chemicals. dr. doig is an eyewitness to this event. he is not a paid professional witness. he is the man who actually had his hands inside ms. koballa's chest, not to be too graphic, but he saw the tumor, he saved her life. and when he looked at the tumor, he knew it was an adenocarcinoma because of the location, and he knew that it was caused by smoking, and that is what he told you. he is done over a hundred different chest sections, practiced 40 years, took out a third of her lobe. he also said something else. he said that he -- the emphysema in that lobe was so bad that when he tried to sew it back, the gaps -- you remember emphysema, i think dr. rubin talked about it as being like a basketball -- i mean a tennis net that has holes cut into it bigger? he did not have enough tissue to sew it, so air escaped and caused problems, so he had to spend extra time. direct eyewitness evidence of emphysema. now, we asked dr. bennett about dr. doig. and you remember what he said? he said dr. doig is the least relevant person in the event. least relevant. or least important, i think he used. but use your own memory. they tried to get dr. doig to say all these other factors cause -- had or caused ms. koballa's c.o.p.d., emphysema, or cancer. what did he call it? he said absolutely not, those exotic factors did not cause her cancer, smoking did. you know why a treating physician is an eyewitness? if we were trying a auto accident case about a red light, the key witness would be the person who saw -- who is not a party, but saw the red light, who ran it. that is what this guy is, he is an eyewitness. he is not paid by anybody, he does not -- he is coming in here to tell you the truth, and he saw, he is the only expert that actually saw it. dr. rubin. now, dr. rubin is a professional witness. we brought dr. rubin here and we paid dr. rubin to come testify. why did we do it? dr. rubin's a pathologist. could we have found a pathologist in florida? absolutely. but in coming here on this causation, we thought we would bring the pathologist who wrote the book, the pathology book that teaches all the other pathologists on lung cancer and lung disease. he wrote that book for many, many years, and it is carried in most of the med schools. he is somebody who has reviewed over -- over a thousand different lung tissues. that is what he did, his job was to review tissue, determine what caused the cancer or noncancer and where it came from. that is what he did. over a thousand of them he reviewed. he reviewed over 500 pages of medical records. now, you saw mr. reid hand him a stack like this (indicating), because he pulled out those and he said this is what i think is important, but he had a c.d. with over 500 pages. what did dr. rubin say? there is no doubt smoking caused ms. koballa's lung cancer and emphysema. dr. burns. mrs. koballa's lung cancer -- let me ask you this. or let me state this, i apologize. why did we bring dr. burns? he is from california. he is a pulmonologist. we could have found one here. but we brought the gentleman who has worked for i think seven different presidents, appointments of surgeon generals, both republican and democrat, 35 years he is authored, contributed to the surgeon general's report from 1975 until today, not on a topic about dead people, not on a topic about gambling addictions, on smoking and lung disease. we brought this man because he is the premier expert on how smoking affects the body. what did dr. burns say? it is no doubt in his mind ms. koballa's cancer and ms. koballa's emphysema/c.o.p.d. is caused by smoking. the defendants brought a gentleman by the name of dr. bennett and dr. klein. i'm sure they are fine people. but dr. bennett primarily does autopsies. if you have a question about who murdered somebody, dr. bennett might be a good guy to do -- to bring it. but he does not do tissues. he has not done a thousand tissues. he has not written medical books on lung disease. he works for the state as a person who discovers and decides how murders are solved, how -- why somebody died. not causation. can he do it? can he -- has he testified before for the tobacco companies? absolutely. but that does not mean he is qualified to do that and it does not mean that you should -- you weigh the experience that dr. rubin has, the man who wrote the book, the man who is done a thousand, compared to dr. bennett? common sense. ask yourself this. if you are going to look for a pathologist outside the state of florida to come and testify, i gave you the reasons why we did it, brought the man who wrote the pathology book, brought the man who worked for seven different presidents and surgeon generals, over 35 years, number one public health official on lung disease, they came a long way, but they are the best in their fields. why did they go to montana to pick this pathologist, a town -- a state that is smaller than orlando? you ask that question. common sense. mr. corr: 30 minutes. mr. pantazis: dr. klein. dr. klein, another fine gentleman, pulmonologist. dr. klein actually did not say much, he said ms. koballa's emphysema is from lung remodeling, but then he admitted smoking causes lung remodeling. dr. klein did admit this. smoking contributed to her lung remodeling. the only thing dr. klein disagrees with us, he does not think it -- it contributed to the same amount. he disagrees that it was a substantial contributing cause, but he admits it is a contributing one. in order to take a look at how and what caused it, you look at the two things: how much, how much exposure, and what were you exposed to? the only substance that you saw any evidence that causes cancer, in evidence, that is what we have, evidence, not guessing, not speculating like the judge warned you against, evidence, smoking that causes cancer is these chemicals and this dose response. so how does that apply to all of the factors and things that -- would you put this up? well, that is called dose relationship. dose relationship means what you have been exposed to, 70 cancer causing chemicals in each puff, and how many times, over -- almost 5 million times. and then what is -- what are these -- what are these chemicals, what do we know they do? 80 to 90 percent of all cancers are caused by those chemicals. 80 to ninety percent of all emphysema is caused by those chemicals. so what did r.j. reynolds say? r.j. reynolds says, oh, no, it is all these other things, emissions, coal mining, air pollution. by the way, did y'all hear anytime that ms. koballa worked in a coal mine? she lived in a house where her grandfather worked in a coal mine. air pollution, cleaning solutions, glue solvents, chloride fumes, asthma, infections, granulomas, pneumonia, bronchitis, and histoplasmosis. they did not tell you any dose response to any of that. they can speculate and guess if you want to violate the judge's order -- ruling. they did not tell you what, if anything, was cancer causing or emphysema causing in any of those doses. they did not have any and they did not tell you any. and they did not show you any statistical or medicine evidence that these things cause cancer. not one -- did you see one legal or medical treatise, did you hear one particular publication? none. the only thing that you heard was cigarette smoking causes cancer. the only thing that you heard that had any kind of credibility is that cigarette smoke causes emphysema. and by cause, substantially contributed. you could find, hypothetically, again, common sense, that one or more of these played into it, but you cannot ignore, you cannot ignore from the facts, from the law, and your common sense that cigarette smoke played a substantial contributing factor to the cause of ms. koballa's lung cancer and her c.o.p.d. how much time? mr. corr: 42 minutes. mr. pantazis: so why are we here? i asked that question at the beginning, in the opening, and i said because they deny that she is addicted, and they deny that her addiction to cigarettes caused her disease. as hard as that is for me to believe, that is what they say. now, you have heard the evidence and i think it is pretty overwhelming. but during the trial, we got an idea why they say that and why we are here. and i point you to exhibit 4. you will have this back in your room. this is a 1962 document from alan rodgman, r.j. reynolds. in this particular document, a lot of it is been x'd out, you may see it in phase two, you may not, in this particular document, they talk about why we are here today. this is 1962. they say, "obviously, the amount of evidence accumulated to indict cigarette smoke as a health hazard is overwhelming." so what are they going to do about it? it says, "well, the evidence challenging this indictment is scant," meaning we do not have anything to throw at it. so what are they going to do? attempt to shift the blame to other factors, ergo air pollutants. they were planning this defense in 1962, while ms. koballa was working, trying to raise children, working at a grocery store, being a full-time mom. they were planning this exact defense. if you look at what they say caused this cancer, caused this emphysema, is not it amazing what they say in 1962? so why are we here? we are here because they planned this defense, and they are going to use it to try to keep ms. koballa from being qualified as a class member. this first phase is very simple, a common sense qualification. ms. koballa deserves to be a class member based on the evidence involved. it is overwhelming. we ask you to apply your common sense. and if you could, verdict form. answer the first question, was ms. koballa addicted? yes. was ms. koballa's addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine a legal cause of her emphysema/c.o.p.d.? yes. was ms. koballa's addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine a legal cause of her adenocarcinoma? yes. thank you, ladies and gentlemen, i will try to save my time to speak to you after mr. reid. mr. pantazis: i heard a lot of things that mr. reid said, and i'm trying to write them down and talk -- so i can talk to you about them. so i do not have a smooth, here is what this story is about, but i do want to respond to some of the very specific things that he said. one thing he said, and i agree with him, but i think by agreeing with him i think i'm telling you that what he just told you is totally wrong. i listened to the evidence, and i hope you listened to the evidence. there was not one piece of evidence that showed that any of those items down there, whether it is directly or indirectly, cause smoking -- i mean, cause cancer. not one piece. why do i keep putting up those charts on the chemicals? because we put on evidence that what is in the substance that causes it. you just cannot say, well, i looked at that scar and it looks like it should not come from there. what scientific evidence did you hear? what study did you see? none. you cannot have a dose response. you want to know why some doctors did not look at medical records going back or did not investigate further? because meat wrapper's asthma never has been known to cause cancer. could i put dr. tuthill's slide up? i'm sorry. your honor, we have -- may i have a technical moment? the court: sure. mr. pantazis: we decided to put dr. tuthill's testimony. we do not think it is relevant because there was absolutely no evidence, did you hear one person take the oath, did you see one document, there is no question she had meat wrapper's asthma for a period of i think four to five years. and they keep repeating it in the medical record, like it is got some importance. but did you hear one person say meat wrapper's asthma causes cancer, meat wrapper's asthma causes emphysema? no. but they want you to give it consideration. this man testified, and i want you to remember, we did not put his testimony on willingly, we did not think it was -- mr. reid: your honor, i object to counsel's -- counsel put his testimony on and there is no -- mr. pantazis: i'll withdraw the statement. i do not think it matters. we put this doctor on because we wanted to give you all the treating physicians, all the eyewitnesses. he is an eyewitness. and he testified that she had meat wrapper's asthma in '73 and '74. now, did you hear him say "and because she had meat wrapper's asthma, she has cancer from it"? "because she has meat wrapper's asthma, she has emphysema"? their lawyers were the ones asking the questions. did you hear them ask those questions? did you hear those answers? the answer is no. it is a little bit concerning when he talks about evidence. there is no evidence that any of these things cause cancer. there is no evidence that any of those things cause emphysema. there is evidence, tremendous evidence, that 90 -- 85 to 90 percent of the people that have c.o.p.d., emphysema, get it from smoking, that 80 to 85 percent of the people that have adenocarcinoma lung tumor, just like ms. koballa, get it from smoking. that is not guess. those are facts. i did not see any statistical or any studies that show anything. now, he says something else that is kind of interesting. he says, well, dr. bennett says this cancer comes from scarring. okay. i do not think so, but okay. none of the other doctors say it came from scarring, but dr. bennett said it did. do you remember the follow-up question that we asked dr. bennett? "dr. bennett, what is the number one cause of scarring in the lung? "smoking." smoking. now, smoking is the number one cause of scarring -- excuse me, number one cause of inflammation that causes scarring. but smoking, because it causes inflammation, causes the scar, is it a substantial contributing factor? absolutely. but he does not want to tell you that. every one of the physicians that we -- the ones we brought, as well as theirs, we asked them -- except for the addiction experts, we asked them does smoking cause inflammation? yes. number one cause for inflammation in the lungs. does smoking cause scarring? yes, number one for causing scarring. mr. reid also said something else that was kind of interesting. he said we have got an experiment here. i'm trying to move this so i can show -- i agree with him on that, too. but there is a different experiment that that shows. do you ever wonder why his board stops at 2000? why does he want you to stop looking past 2000? you think that is coincidental? common sense. here is why this -- this experiment is here, but it is not the one he is pointing to. in 1996 -- let us be honest, 1991, whatever exposure she had from environmental, occupational, they all stopped, even if you think they contributed to something. they had no more exposures after '91. he agrees with that. the only exposure she had after '91 was smoking. she smoked from then until '96. what happened in '96? from '91 to '96, there is no evidence at all of cancer or emphysema before 1996 even with all those other stuff. but in 1996 she gets cancer. in 1996 she is diagnosed with emphysema. that is not where the experiment stops, though. so in 1996, what else happens? she stops smoking. and when she stops smoking from 1996 until 2011, we took smoking out of the equation. what happened to her lung? the emphysema stabilized. what was removed between '91 -- i mean '96 and 2011? smoking. never had another cancer, even though they have granulomas, they are all there. none of them. what was removed since '96? smoking. as a result of not smoking since 1996, no more smoking, no more development of cancer. it is amazing how those scars that supposably caused cancer from that other stuff all of a sudden stopped for the last 15 years. her emphysema has stabilized because she is no longer smoking. that is the experiment. he said something else that i -- mr. corr, would you give me a five minute? your honor, would you give me a five minute -- the court: i'll try. mr. pantazis: or tell me when do i go and i'll have mr. corr tell me. the court: i would say about five till. mr. pantazis: thank you. five till on the clock. thank you, your honor. something else that mr. reid said that concerned me. talked about the best evidence. i disagree with him. the best evidence is the person who saw the lung himself. he does not want to talk about dr. doig, but dr. doig is the only one who saw the tissue. dr. doig was not vague. could i have dr. doig's slide up? he was not vague. dr. doig was insistent. and he was -- as a matter of fact, he got a little cranky. afterwards he asked -- well, i will not say. he got a little cranky on the stand. he was insistent that this cancer was caused by smoking, and he is the guy who saw it. we asked him, because it is up here in this corner, does that have any effect on is it caused my cancer? absolutely not. it is caused by smoking. we asked him, what did the lung look like? he said it was so -- had so much emphysema, he had trouble stitching it. he just did not see it, he had to work with it. that is the best evidence. then mr. reid pushed him and mr. reid started pushing him on all those elements, do not those things cause cancer. he said absolutely not. he called them exotic factors. he said, your exotic factors do not cause cancer. there is absolutely no evidence that anything but smoking causes cancer of these elements, of these things. mr. reid did not like dr. rubin's testimony. could i have dr. rubin? dr. rubin, if you remember dr. rubin, what he basically did, and went with you, he went slide by slide with what the pathologist did. you remember, he said i agree with the local pathologist. must have said that four or five, six times. why did we do that? because we wanted dr. rubin, the pathologist, to take a look at the local pathologist, eyewitness, and see what he saw and was it correct procedurally. and he absolutely said yes, it was. and what did dr. rubin say after reviewing the pathology? both the actual tissue itself as well as the pathology notes, he said no doubt caused ms. koballa's lung cancer and he said no doubt in his mind caused her c.o.p.d./emphysema. now, again when i say caused, substantially contributed. that is the standard. it does not have to be the only cause. if you were to believe mr. reid that some or all or part of those contributed as well, you can still find for the plaintiff in this -- in this common sense qualification phase. you just must find that smoking substantially contributed to the cause of the disease. dr. bennett. dr. bennett was pushed a little bit, asked dr. bennett, you have got all these things on here, and i think you will remember this, we pointed specifically to -- because he was talking about polyvinyl chloride fumes. we said, "dr. bennett, has there been any studies or any research that polyvinyl chloride fumes cause cancer? "no. "does it cause emphysema/c.o.p.d? "no. "does it cause you to cough and wheeze sometimes? "yes." but that is what they want you to believe. the reason that the dose, and i'm not going to pull my charts up, i know y'all like them, but i'm not going to do it, the reason the dose and what is in the dose is so important, because you have got to know from the science community does the substance that you bring into your lungs cause cancer? there has been no evidence that any of these do. does the substance you bring into your lungs cause emphysema? they did not bring you any evidence of that. all they brought you is a guy who does pathology -- excuse me, a guy who does autopsies who says to him, it looks like it was caused by something else. the experiment that mr. reid talked about, you remove smoking, and what happens? no cancer, no emphysema. before smoking, even if you take his factors, she had one of the lowest reads of that p.f.t.s in 1996. you remember, he put it on the board. that was her lowest read. well, if she had such a low read in 1996, she had been removed from those elements for over five years. his own chart indicts him. his own chart tells you that the only cause, the only cause, in my opinion, but it does not have to be, it can be a substantially contributing cause, is cigarette smoke. common sense, folks. mr. corr: five minutes. mr. pantazis: i'm going to show you -- would you put the smoker/nonsmoker slide up? mr. reid also says that ms. koballa is not addicted. the only evidence that you heard was from mr. thompson -- dr. thompson who says she -- mr. reid: excuse me, your honor, may i approach about this slide? the court: no. mr. reid: i object, it was excluded previously. mr. pantazis: it was not excluded. mr. reid: it was. it was offered yesterday and it was not used. mr. pantazis: may we approach? the court: well, this is a demonstrative aid shown to each other this morning, so overruled. mr. pantazis: dr. thompson, you remember, said that the only reason that ms. koballa is not addicted is because he thought she liked to smoke. well, i think in order to understand, and you heard dr. frazier say not all smokers are addicted, in order to understand why someone is addicted, you have to look at, an addicted smoker, in my opinion and what you have heard from the evidence, is always smokes daily. i would suggest to you that someone who is not addicted does not smoke daily. an addicted smoker has constant blood levels plus peaks. in other words, nicotine is in their blood level. exposures, over hundreds of doses per day. smokes in all settings. often multiple failed attempts to stop. smokes soon after waking up. you remember the nicotine leaves your brain, that cigarette in the morning is the best? somebody who is a nonaddicted smoker gets periodic peaks in nicotine, exposed to limited doses of nicotine, often smoke only in social setting, not difficult to stop, no one needed -- no need for morning cigarette. which of that does ms. koballa fit? next slide, please. mr. reid: same objection, your honor. the court: overruled. mr. pantazis: often smokes when ill. you heard evidence of that. almost always experiences withdrawal. structural function brain change, because those memories are permanently impaired. spends a great deal of time smoking. in denial. compulsive use. as opposed to does not experience withdrawal, does not have brain alterations, very little time spent, and no compulsive use. ladies and gentlemen, there is a word that mr. reid said, red herring, and he went through a story. i would submit to you there is a red herring in this case, but i point back to the document, their internal document, that you will have. could i have that document pulled up? the red herring is this, they knew in '62, just like they know in 2011, that environmental factors, the air pollutant factors, there is no evidence of it on the scan, so they are going to attempt to shift the blame to them. and they know today, just like they knew in '62, that the evidence of cigarette smoke as a health hazard is overwhelming. so what was the defense that you heard over this last week on whether cigarette smoke causes addiction -- excuse me, causes cancer, substantially contributes to ms. koballa's cancer, substantially contributes to her emphysema? oh, it is all these other air pollutants, it is all these other environmental. you think that is coincidental? common sense. when you go back and you look, and i did not put this board up for no reason, i know mr. reid does not like it because it points out, there is absolute -- mr. reid: your honor, i move to strike counsel's comments about what i like and what i -- the court: overruled. mr. pantazis: i know he does not like it because it points out there is absolutely no evidence that any of these substances cause cancer or cause emphysema, but he wants you to believe that there is because he is brought an expert in here from montana that says so. the only thing that substantially contributed to ms. koballa's lung cancer, the only thing that substantially contributed to her emphysema is smoking. and this experiment proves it, if nothing else. she stops -- she stops smoking in '96, cancer disappears after -- no more cancer after surgery. her p.f.t.s improve. the worst p.f.t. she had is in '96. ladies and gentlemen -- i need the verdict form. the court: you have just about a minute. mr. pantazis: thank you, your honor. on behalf of all the parties, again, i would like to thank you for your attention. you have done everything that a jury is supposed to do, you have been on time, and i know that is -- both parties appreciate that. the verdict form in this case is very simple. why is it simple? because this is a simple phase, it is a qualification phase. it is not the ultimate verdict of what happens in the case, it is just to allow ms. koballa to participate in this case into the next phase as a class member. in order to do that, you must answer yes, was ms. koballa addicted to nicotine -- to cigarettes containing nicotine. the answer is obviously yes. the next questions you must answer one or both of the next questions yes in order for ms. koballa to qualify as a class member. "was stella koballa's addiction to nicotine contain" -- "containing nicotine a legal cause of her c.o.p.d. and emphysema?" there is no other evidence that anything but cigarettes, but certainly, it substantially contributed to it. lung cancer, and her particular lung cancer, adenocarcinoma, 80 to 85 percent of them caused by cigarette smoke. absolutely no evidence of any of these substances substantially contributed other than smoking. now, you may go back and you may say, you know, i've heard things this and i believe this. the question is not could these things -- you cannot guess. you have to have specific evidence. and even if you believe one or more of those things played a role, there is no way that you can ignore the overwhelming evidence, the overwhelming common sense that cigarette smoke is the substantially -- is a substantial contributing factor, even if it acted with those others, both to adenocarcinoma and to the emphysema. thank you, ladies and gentlemen.