mr. rosen: yeah. thank you, your honor. good morning. the jurors: good morning. mr. rosen: so it is friday, and we have been in trial for quite some time. and i want to thank you from the very beginning, on behalf of my team, on behalf of alan, and i think we speak on behalf of 3422 the entire -- everyone in the courtroom is that your dedication and commitment to this trial is unparalleled. i mean, we have been through a hurricane passing by, we have had holidays, we have had folks getting sick, and you have come back, and you have served. and so no matter what the outcome is of this case, we thank you for your service. this is our system of justice, and it only works because you are here. all right? i'm going to -- i'm going to mention one thing. this -- now, and you heard this earlier on. this lawsuit was filed by elaine konzelman and alan konzelman. she was alive -- mr. furr: objection. mr. rosen: -- when this lawsuit was filed. mr. furr: there is no such evidence. the court: sustained. ladies and gentlemen, you rely on your own recollection of the evidence. mr. furr: i would ask that the jury be instructed to disregard that. mr. rosen: your honor, this was a jury -- juror instruction. the court: excuse me, i do not want anything 3423 discussed in front of the jury. objection sustained, jurors disregard it. mr. rosen: all right, so the entire time we have been talking about do not discuss the case, do not discuss the case, do not discuss the case. well, in a little while, you are going to go back into the jury room, and you are going to get to discuss the case and you are going to get to discuss the facts of the case. and so i want to get right into it because what you are going to be given is a verdict form, this is what it looks like. all right? and it is going to be a series of questions, and you answer yes, no, and i'm going to go through -- i'm going to go through everything. okay? and that is going to be the guide -- the guide for your discussions. that is what i suggest you do is you look at the verdict form, and there is instructions that correlate with each number. all right? and so the first question on the verdict form deals with class membership, right? and we talked about whether elaine konzelman was a member of the engle class. and you have heard that that is a group of people in florida who suffered from an addiction 3424 from smoking cigarettes that was a legal cause of their disease, of her chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. and it had to manifest prior to 1996. and you have seen evidence and we are going to talk about it, the medical records that are in evidence that you are going to have back in the jury room, she was diagnosed prior to 1996. it was 1995, and we are going to talk about how addiction played a pivotal, pivotal role in her developing that disease. all right? and if she is a member of the engle class, and you talk about those findings that the judge read to you, you apply those findings to this case. all right? we have to prove our case, that is our burden of proof, by the greater weight of the evidence, the more persuasive and convincing force and effect of the entire evidence, the entire evidence. so you have to look at everything, all right, not just little snippets of pieces of testimony, everything, all the evidence. elaine konzelman, she was born in 1930. this was a photograph when she was 15 years old. all right? and i have cross-examined defendant's expert, dr. kreitzer and -- excuse me, it was 3425 dr. giakas, he is the addiction expert. and after his forensic analysis of this case, he determined that elaine was 15 years old when she started smoking cigarettes. 15 years old. this is when she is 15 years old. teenager. mr. furr: objection, your honor. the court: overruled. mr. rosen: we brought you some experts to talk about addiction, all right, to talk about nicotine addiction specifically. and we brought you dr. cummings, who is a world-renowned expert, we brought you dr. toll. these people have dedicated their careers to understanding nicotine addiction. that is what this case is about. right? this case is not about, you know, bipolar disorder or schizophrenia or other psychiatric disorders. this is about nicotine addiction. and the people that we brought you, dr. cummings, dr. toll, they have dedicated their careers to publishing, researching, and understanding this, this, this, this powerful, powerful drug. all right? and you are going to see, and i think we have shown you from their own records, and unfortunately and i'm sorry that -- 3426 mr. furr: objection to counsel's statement of opinion. the court: sustained. mr. rosen: you are going to -- you are going to -- what i believe we have shown you, all right, and i -- and i apologize, i know i showed a number of videos, there are probably too many videos. mr. furr: same objection. the court: sustained. no beliefs, counsel. mr. rosen: you remember and i'm going to go through some of the evidence. i know it was a long time ago when we started with dr. cummings, but i want to go through it, and you are going to see some of the -- some of the facts that we have in this case. some of the facts that we have is that she smoked a pack to two packs a day for over 40 years. all right? their expert agrees with it. you are going to see medical records that are in evidence. smoked first thing in the morning, and i'm going to get to that in a minute. she smoked around her kids, her grandchildren, while cooking, cruise ships. she could not sit through church, through a movie, through a meal 3427 without having a cigarette. all right? and you are going to see there is a reason why. there is a reason why. and it is not because she just loved the process or she loved the taste or the flavor or she loved to blow smoke rings. the first cigarette of the day is the most important factor, and you heard about this from dr. toll, it is a marker of how someone is addicted, when they have that first cigarette why is it important is because when they go to sleep, their body is completely -- all the nicotine is going out of them. and so when they wake up in the morning, they are in withdrawal and they need it. all right? and so you look at time to first cigarette, was it within the first five minutes, was it within the first 20 minutes, was it within the first 30 minutes? that short amount of time is going to tell you so much about the smoker. and you heard from both dr. toll, that is that their bodies are screaming for nicotine in the morning. you heard from dr. cummings. he was asked about this. and one of the things he said regarding whether or not someone is more addicted there are three indicators, are they a persistent 3428 daily smoker. elaine was a persistent daily smoker. when is the first cigarette in the morning. you have to look at that. and then how much do they smoke per day. a pack to two packs per day. that is -- we are going to get to how much it is. but 20 to 40 cigarettes a day. and it is critical in understanding addiction. those factors. and so what was the evidence? you had the son, john gilbert, we read his deposition to you and you heard that it was immediately. she woke up immediately, she had that first cigarette, it was right there, next to the bed, lit it up immediately. alan konzelman, almost immediately. she would sit up on the edge of the nightstand, she would reach over to the nightstand, she would sit on the edge of the bed, she would have her first cigarette. sandy mattson testified, how soon would she have her first cigarette. it was right there, it was on the nightstand. time to first cigarette is critically important. and -- and you heard that from the people who are trying to help folks quit smoking and have dedicated their careers to helping people 3429 stop and they have studied this and tried to figure out what is it that -- what is the most predictive indicator of whether someone is going to relapse or whether someone is going to have a hard time quitting? some people are able to quit. some people it is easy for them. other people, it is extremely, extremely difficult. and there is a reason why, you heard there is 500,000 deaths every year of smoking-related diseases. all right? these people are not all just walking off cliffs. there is a driving force, a mechanism behind it. this is just some of the -- the medical records that you have. you are going to have these in evidence. 80-pack-year history. extensive history of tobacco use. smoking two packs for 35 years. 70-pack-year history. so pack-years. if it is two packs a day, you would divide that by two, 70 divided by two is 35, for 35 years, two packs of -- two packs of cigarettes a day. that is how you could look at it. one and a half to two packs for 35 plus years. 35 years of smoking. it is tremendous. it is a tremendous amount of cigarettes on a daily basis, every day. 3430 we brought you dr. toll, a psychologist, who explained to you what his opinion was, whether she was addicted to nicotine, what the level of her dependence and addiction was, high. alan konzelman talked about how many times she tried to quit, right, over the -- over the time -- over that time period, over 20 times she was trying to quit. you know, maybe it was not good enough for dr. giakas, who says they were just quit gestures, but to her family, she tried. and she tried lots of different things. throw away her cigarettes, her lighters, she chewed gum, sucked on candy, she would eat more, and it would last about a day or two. she could not make it past that day or two, and that is what some of the experts talk about is that -- that peaking, that peaking time, and it continues to go, continues to peak. and that is part of it is this withdrawal syndrome. the withdrawal syndrome. she had almost every symptom of withdrawal that you can find when someone is not smoking, when the nicotine is leaving their body. irritable, grumpy, short-tempered, different person, different personality. 3431 sue sweeney talked about how they would go to church, right? and she knew she was going out, she would tell me, "i had to leave because i wanted to smoke." she could not sit through church. movies, sue sweeney says that a couple times a month, would not go often, no, she never sat through a movie without going out. she would go out and smoke. you know where she kept her cigarettes? in her hand. she had her cigarettes with her all the time. whichever room she was in she had her cigarettes. you have to look at the behavior. you know, you have to look at what a person does with their time, right? she just loved it so much that she is doing 20 of these a day? she loved it, the flavor? you know, the smoke rings? and what happened when she started -- when she would try to quit? when she tried. and she did try. she would be depressed. there is testimony that she would cry from two separate people, they saw her crying when she is trying to quit smoking. when she is trying to not smoke, she is crying. defense expert, they brought you dr. -- dr. giakas, the $2 million expert who came in and 3432 said he was paid $95,000 in this case, right, $95,000 to look at this case and say that elaine konzelman was never addicted, never had -- never even had a tobacco use disorder, right, a woman who smoked herself onto a ventilator, did not have a tobacco use disorder. not even a little one. right? $95,000, who, at the time he was retained, right, for -- for his work in tobacco cases, had never done any original research on nicotine addiction, never published on nicotine addiction, smoking and health, running a smoking-cessation clinic, consulting with government on nicotine addiction. that is -- that is the expert. he is a psychiatrist. and i think you heard he is a jack of all trades, he has lots of different things, he spends thirty percent, forty percent of his time in a courtroom or doing forensic work. what was it he said, i think out of his entire career, he is had thousands and thousands of patients, only about 25 of them had actually come to him specifically for nicotine -- for smoking. 25 people. and that is $95,000 to come in and say that a 3433 woman who smoked a pack to two packs a day, based upon his opinion, from the age of 15, who smoked herself onto a ventilator and got a deadly disease, she smoked enough to get a -- a disease that killed her, but she did not smoke enough to be addicted? addicted? and he took -- i mean, that is extreme. that is extreme. look at -- look at the testimony. when i asked him about the surgeon general of the united states who publishes in the area of tobacco and addiction and smoking and health, is he authoritative? is the surgeon general report, is that an authoritative source? no. not -- not -- it is not one of many sources, it is not authoritative. the person who is charged with the responsibility of looking into this and researching and publishing it for public health, for people. addiction to cigarettes, you are going to -- there is a jury instruction on legal cause. right? legal cause. so we know that smoking, in the stipulation, smoking was the medical cause of her copd and death. that is agreed. it is not an issue. now we have to look at legal cause. and so 3434 there is an instruction on there. the first part of the instruction says but for the addiction, right, would she -- would the disease have occurred. all right, that is one part of it, right? did it directly and in natural sequence produce or contribute substantially. did it contribute -- did addiction contribute substantially to producing the disease. but for addiction, would she have smoked one to two packs day for 40 years and develop her copd. that is one part of it. that is one part of it. and there is another part of legal cause. and so maybe, maybe you look at this case and you say you know what, you know, she tried. i see she tried a whole bunch of times, but some people said maybe she was not motivated, some people she said she maybe wanted to quit later or did not want -- this is another instruction where you can take that all into consideration, you could take it all into consideration. a legal cause can act in combination with other things going on in her life. it can act within combination. and so you will see it need -- addiction need not be the only cause. addiction to 3435 cigarettes containing nicotine may be a legal cause even though it operates in combination with some other cause if the addiction contributes substantially to producing the disease. and that is the question. did it play an important role? did it contribute substantially to her getting copd? now, i broke this down for you. you know, when you talk about the amount of time she spent smoking in her lifetime, in her life, up until 1995, you break it down, and she spent literally 12.5 years with a cigarette in her mouth. 12.5 years of her life. and so who -- i mean, who does that? who does that with anything other than a cigarette? how many people drink 20 cups of coffee a day, 40 cups of coffee a day? there is testimony she tried to quit cold turkey, she switched to the filters. you remember hearing about that, she actually started smoking more when she switched to the light cigarettes. we are going to get to that in a minute. she threw out ashtrays, lighters. she hid stuff. she hid stuff. i mean, what kind of behavior is that? where she would throw some 3436 stuff away sometimes and then she would hide stuff other times. chewed gum, hard candy, she gained weight, talked about crying. and this is important, the very bottom, at the very bottom here where it says "smoked after her mother died in 1987 and smoked after her sister died in 1992." smoking decimated this family. and her mother died from smoking and her sister died from smoking and she kept smoking. that is a problem. that is addiction. knowing that, knowing -- hearing about it. i mean, maybe she was not believing, but hearing, just hearing that, that her family members died and she is still smoking, that is a problem. talked about all the different withdrawal symptoms, you have heard she had all of it and then what would happen when she would pick up a cigarette, she would be back to normal, right? and we learned, and i hope -- i hope i did a good job, i hope we did a good job presenting to you why that is, why it is that when you are going through all these symptoms of withdrawal and what is happening when a person picks up a cigarette, it is because those receptors light back up again and they get filled back up and a person feels happy and normal. 3437 and so every time you hear about someone enjoying the process or they like the flavor or they like the taste, it is all related to they know they are getting nicotine, they know they are getting their drug of choice. dr. giakas says, "nicotine compared to other drugs is really kind of a weak behavioral reinforcer." and we have put into evidence, into evidence internal company documents from r.j. reynolds and from the other companies, nicotine is a potent drug. our industry is based upon the design and manufacture and sale of attractive dosage forms of nicotine. a potent drug, right? he says it is a -- it is a mild, it is a mild reinforcer, it is a mild reinforcer. we provide a product that is an essential commodity and a habitual act. and they talk about -- i do not know if you remember this document, but putting a rat in a cage, right, and they will go and they will keep hitting the lever to get the food pellet. right? and it is like a smoker, they get it and there are going to keep getting it and they are going to keep hitting that lever 20, 30, 40 times a day. 3438 we read this to you. we read this to you that -- this was one of the last witnesses, this was james johnston, he was the ceo of r.j. reynolds in 1994, under oath testifying and asked about cigarettes and cigarette design, and what does he say? he says, "we design our cigarettes to a tar specification, not a nicotine specification." right? what do we know from r.j. reynolds' own documents? in designing any cigarette product, the dominant specification should be nicotine delivery. that is what they sell is nicotine. and they deliberately downplayed the role of nicotine because they knew consumers were not aware of it. they did not understand it. consumers did not appreciate what they were doing. and they talked for decades internally about what they were doing and they hid this information from people like elaine who this information would be important for, this information was concealed. we are in the business of selling nicotine. we just read the next one, we read the next one. it is an essential commodity. r.j. reynolds tobacco company, there is no dispute that the cigarettes caused her disease. 3439 there is no dispute at all, and that it caused her death. and that it was their cigarettes, it was r.j. reynolds' cigarettes. the question is whether addiction played an important role. did addiction play a substantial -- was it a substantial contributing cause. so you have heard the testimony and from every -- everybody on the left -- every -- the testimony from -- elaine was addicted to cigarettes. elaine was addicted to cigarettes. the only person that came here was dr. giakas who says never addicted at all. and r.j. reynolds, all the while, throughout their history, this is the business that they are in and that they chose to do and not reveal to the public is having elaborate research programs studying how low they can go with nicotine to maintain somebody's addiction. precisely controlling levels of nicotine. do they control the nicotine in the cigarettes? they precisely control it. right? we talked about ammoniation, right, putting ammonia and freebasing the nicotine, manipulating the nicotine, flue curing, additives, changing the ph level so that it could be easily inhaled into 3440 the lungs which gets it into that huge surface area. their -- their pulmonologist talked about those huge grapes, right, to get it into the lungs so it gets to the brain extremely fast. and that is why it is different. that is why people do not get addicted to the patch because it is slow. why they do not get addicted to the nicotine gum because it absorbs slowly into the mouth. cigars less -- have less tobacco abuse. when you talk about inhaling into the lungs, freebasing, smoking, a drug, it gets to the brain super fast, super fast, and it has a huge, huge abuse potential. and they controlled it to the dose puff by puff. it was not by accident. it is carefully controlled. they make sure that the nicotine level does not go too low. why? why? because if the nicotine level in their product goes too low, right, people stop smoking. people do not smoke. addiction was a substantial contributing cause of her copd. her addiction was a primary reason she kept smoking. all right? that is the evidence. dr. henningfield, i brought to you a video from dr. henningfield, another world renowned expert in the area of nicotine addiction, smoking 3441 and health, who has consulted, who has been on the front lines of this for decades. "what role does addiction play in continued exposure to cigarette smoke?" "it drives the daily repeated persistent high levels of exposure." that is what addiction is. all right? you know, you go beyond, you go beyond where it talks about -- "going beyond, you know, that cigarette that people may like to have after dinner, or after sex, whatever. you know, those cigarettes that people often report the best," they have gone way beyond that. this is not just a cigarette after dinner or something over the weekend or having some with cocktails. this is daily repeated every day for decade -- over decades. and she was one of those people. what role does addiction play in causing disease? "addiction is the interface. it is the driver. it is the interface between the product, the cigarette, and the disease." that is what happens. that is what happens. and they know, they know what happens if they did not have that in their product, they did not have that chemical, that drug. their business would 3442 collapse. right? they would go out of business. and they talk about it, "we would all lose our jobs and our consulting fees." r.j. reynolds says, "it is to say if the exit gate from our market should suddenly open, we could be out of business overnight." so the question is whether addict -- whether -- was elaine konzelman addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine and was it a legal cause, was it a substantial contributing cause. all right, the answer is yes. all right, so she is a class member. she is a member of the engle class. she fits the criteria. she fits that criteria. and if she is a member of the engle class, you you have heard the engle findings. and i put on a lot of evidence during this case, a lot of evidence, right, about history and about concealment and about conspiracy. and i'm not trying to reprove these findings to you, all right? that is not my job. these findings say what they say, they mean what they mean. but you need to see the big picture, the context, right? there was a jury that determined these things 3443 in the past for the engle class. and they are binding, precedent. right? that jury found that they concealed and omitted material information not otherwise known. right? concerning the health effects or addictive nature of cigarettes. that jury found that against this company and a number of other companies, the tobacco institute, the ctr. the defendants agreed with other companies to conceal regarding the health effects and addictive nature with the intention smokers rely on it. that jury found that. that is binding on you. and what i did was show you what -- you know, a backdrop, right, a picture. and i told you you guys should get college credits for what you have seen because you have been here for a long time and you have learned a lot of information. all right? so now i'm trying -- i'm trying to tie it all together so you see everything in context, everything. the next thing i want to talk about is the statute of limitations defense. and i want to talk about best evidence. the best evidence that we have in this case. all right? so this is r.j. reynolds' burden to prove, all right, the statute of limitations defense. did she 3444 file her lawsuit in the time frame required by law? all right. and they need to prove that she either knew that she had copd before may 5th, 1990, right, that is one thing they have to prove. they did not prove that. right? there was no evidence of it. right? the other aspect, this is the other part where they are going to travel under, is that she should have known, by the use of reasonable care should have known before may 5th, 1990. so their argument is she should have known before may 5th, 1990 that she had this deadly disease, copd, and then she should have filed a lawsuit back then. right? that is what that -- that is what that means. now, you heard testimony from a number of different people, all right, you know, let me go back just for a second. and the issue on this is a reasonable care, you know, whether she used reasonable care. reasonable care is the care that a reasonably careful person would use under like circumstances. and so you have got to look at was she negligent in any way? and i'm going to get into that. did she fall below that? 3445 and it says right here "critical event is not when elaine konzelman's copd was actually diagnosed by a physician, but when elaine konzelman knew or" -- "whether elaine konzelman knew or by the use of reasonable care she had copd and that there was a reasonable possibility her copd was caused by smoking." they have to prove that she had copd, all right? that is one part of it, that she had it before may 5th, 1990 and that there was a reasonable possibility that it was caused by cigarette smoking. so i want to talk about the best evidence. because you heard a lot of testimony from witnesses in court today. you have heard deposition testimony from people that were taken in 2016, 2015, right, talking about things from 30 years ago or 40 years ago or 50 years ago. you have heard from alan, who is 87 years old, all right, and you have to take into consideration everybody. you have heard from sue sweeney. i believe she is in her '80s. you have to take into consideration people's ages, all right? their memories. and all that -- all that is included in the jury instructions about believability of 3446 witnesses. but we have documents that were made at or near the time, all right, at or near the time. we do not have to go by memories from people in 2016 thinking about things from 30 years ago. we have key documents. and this is in pmed1. all right? so on the statute of limitations defense, pmed1 has the documents from dr. choy. we know he is the pulmonologist that treated her first. all right? and the first admission that we have is february 28th, 1995. 1995 is the first time, and their expert agreed, is the first time she is diagnosed -- actually, she was not even diagnosed that day. she was admitted to the hospital on february 28th, 1995. this is the best evidence of the time and what was going on in elaine's mind, all right, whether she knew, whether she exercised reasonable care. "the patient is very pleasant. no respiratory problems in the past." this is her reporting to her doctors. they were asking her, what is going on. she is coming in needing help in an emergency, and they are asking, "what is going on? have you 3447 had problems in the past?" and she says, "no respiratory problems in the past." this is from 1995, from at or near the time. "the patient felt well until sunday night, three nights ago. she has never had any problems with shortness of breath or wheezing in the past." that is her belief. that is what she is reporting to her doctors, right? this is not memories from 20 years forward, this is from the time. "she saw dr. vanek yesterday who put her on medrol antibiotic and inhaler. dr. vanek, you heard was her treating doctor that she was seeing before this admission. she had physicians, all right? talks about her having a penicillin allergy, but she has tolerated cephalosporins in the past by dr. vanek. she was under the care and treatment of a physician, of a physician, who was watching over her, who was responsible for her. and so the question is did she exercise reasonable care. you heard testimony that she would routinely get checkups. she would routinely go to see doctors. the defense wants to say she should have known at some point before 1995 that she had copd when her doctors did not know, when her doctors were 3448 prescribing things like -- diagnosing her with hypertension. right, a doctor had to examine her, meet with her, take a history, prescribe a medication. he did not find copd. mr. furr: objection. there is no such evidence, your honor. the court: sustained. mr. furr: move to strike the last comment. the court: ladies and gentlemen, you are to rely on your own recollection of the evidence. this is counsel's closing argument. so the objection is sustained. disregard the last comment. mr. rosen: "patient complains of shortness of breath for approximately three days prior to arrival. past medical history, history of hypertension." you know what is not listed there? history of bronchitis, breathing problems, chronic bronchitis. and she is taking verapamil. and you heard verapamil is a drug, it is prescription medication prescribed by physicians. you heard in the redirect yesterday of dr. kreitzer, counsel got up there and said, was the standard of care this in the 1980s, and was the 3449 standard of this care in the 1980s, and was the standard of care this in the 1980s. that is what the doctor's job is. right? the doctor's job is standard of care. and so their argument is every single time she went to the doctor, every one of those doctors committed malpractice. they all missed it. mr. furr: objection, your honor. mr. rosen: and she should have known. the court: sustained. mr. furr: move to strike that comment. the court: ladies and gentlemen, you are to rely on your own recollection of the evidence. the comment is stricken. mr. rosen: this is in 1997, she again went to the doctor in 1997. so she is two years after her diagnosis of copd. the doctor meets with her and says, "the past medical history is positive for hypertension for the past approximately five years." all right, so that goes back to 1992, she had hypertension. hypertension. she did not just make a decision -- i mean, you are going to decide what that means. okay? you decide whether she had seen a doctor, she got 3450 treatment, she was prescribed medication by that doctor. trauma to her left ankle in 1991, there is another time where she -- you make a decision whether -- where it talks about a past medical history, whether she saw a doctor, whether that doctor examined her, saw her. all right. it is not -- you cannot hold her responsible if a doctor missed it. you cannot hold her responsible if a doctor missed it. she was exercising reasonable care. she went to doctors routinely. edgewater drive, all right, this is important. because i drew this on the board for alan. okay? edgewater drive, you know, when you talk with certain people, giving them anchor dates is important and it is helpful. all right? an anchor location or an anchor date, a place that someone can say all right, i was living here, i can remember before that point in time x, but before that -- after that point in time y. and so alan was asked about edgewater drive before that time, how was her health, before 1992, when you moved to edgewater drive; right? and there is testimony, i think you heard him get 3451 cross-examined in the 1980s, the 1980s, the 1980s. their own expert would not admit that in his own notes, right, and it is stipulated now, we are going to get into that, but that this is what alan said at his deposition, right? at one point he says the 1980s, but then someone else -- then later, he says, "i was living at edgewater drive." her health was excellent. she never had any problems. no coughing, no shortness of breath, no wheezing, no phlegm. i mean, that is alan. that is one witness that talks about her symptoms, what symptoms they remember observing. alan continued to say the same thing. she was active. she would get checkups routinely. routinely by doctors. and she did that in the '80s and '90s. "where were you living when you first started to observe elaine having shortness of breath? "edgewater drive." that is 1992 going forward. right? and is that -- that is consistent, right? this was in dr. -- this is in dr. giakas' notes. remember i tried to refresh his recollection, he says i do not know, i do not remember. and this was read to you. and it is in his 3452 notes. "is it accurate the first time" -- this is from alan konzelman's deposition in dr. kreitzer's notes -- dr. giakas' notes. "is it accurate that the first time you recall elaine having shortness of breath, wheezing, or coughing was while you were living in edgewater drive?" that was recorded in alan konzelman's deposition, "yes. "and my notes indicate you moved to edgewater drive in 1992?" so we are talking about symptoms. all right? when was her symp- -- when did she first begin to show signs or symptoms, and that is consistent with the 1995 note. the 1995 note from the time. john gilbert, the son, "she was healthy all through the 1980s, late 1980s, early '90s, she was, you know, a healthy, vibrant person." mom in the bahamas, you remember this testimony, right? this is 1989, he talks about his mom going on the cruise in 1989, she was in perfect health. there is a picture there, one on a boat in a conga line, right? you saw that picture in 1989, right? they are arguing that she should have known she had been suffering from a deadly smoking 3453 disease in 1989, but look at her. you have photographs of her. right? you have her life and you can see it and judge for yourself. "you mentioned earlier your mother was" -- and this is karen gilbert, this is another daughter that you read her deposition, "you mentioned earlier that your mother experienced shortness of breath prior to the time that she was hospitalized in 1992 or 1993?" "first time my mother was short of breath and had problems breathing was when she went into the hospital, to my knowledge." that is what her other daughter said. lori frost, this was their witness, they called this witness. right? their own witness, lori frost comes in, and what does she say? in 1985, when she saw her -- she did not see her much in the 1980s, but she said 1985, no chronic cough, no chronic wheezing, no phlegm, no shortness of breath in '87. i mean, i can go down the list. 1993, no shortness of breath. she saw elaine at her mother's funeral, at her mom's funeral, and elaine was in good health. "from 1979," i asked lori frost this, "from 3454 1979, from your observations, it never crossed your mind once that she had any type of smoking-related disease?" this is an observer. "true. "and she was in good health from '66 to '93? "true." when she saw her at the funeral. the wedding, sandy talked about the wedding. you know, we have photographs. she is right there. they had a great time. and she was -- growing up, she was healthy. she was healthy up until i think she talked about when she came out to utah in 1992, end of '92, end of '93 is when she started to see her slow down, having some shortness of breath. that is the first time she made an observation of it. and again, the same questions with sandy mattson, what was her health like? was she coughing up phlegm, was she chronically coughing, was she chronically short of breath? no to -- no to everything. i mean, come on. 1991, we have her scuba diving, we have photos of her scuba diving, having a great time in hawaii, in maui, in 1991 this was taken. same thing, perfect health, no problems. this is -- this was something that dr. giakas said. and i want to -- i want to -- i need to 3455 point it out to you, because he was saying that she did not meet a certain criteria -- one of the certain criteria for his -- for addiction. and he said that, "i cannot say whether she smoked despite being aware of the harmful consequences," i cannot say that, i'm not sure. and this is what he said. "so if there was any evidence in the chart, in the entire record where a witness were identifying and saying mrs. konzelman said, yeah, i know this is causing the shortness of breath or wheezing or cough, if they said that she said, then i would say she satisfied criteria number 9. "in this case, i could not find that verbalization that mrs. konzelman actually had that knowledge and accepted it, you know." no information tying that that she accepted or had knowledge that smoking was causing her harm. there is some testimony from some witnesses that said maybe she had a cough, there was some testimony maybe she had some shortness of breath. those are observations. nothing, nothing that she believed it or that she was aware of. and that is their burden of proof that she knew or she should have known she was suffering from a disease. 3456 she knew or should have known. and what did dr. kreitzer say? dr. kreitzer admitted that copd is one of -- it is -- there is a huge percentage of the population -- it is a major concern in the field of medicine that there is a huge percentage of copd people that are underdiagnosed. and the reason is because it is so slowly progressing. it is so slow. and he said that people even -- they start -- they just naturally adjust their activity to deal with shortness of breath and things like that. all right? and so they are not getting diagnosed. did she fail to use reasonable care, that is the question. twenty percent come to him had no idea they had copd. in the 1990s, right, we talked about different levels of copd, most people in the 1990s, back then, they were not getting diagnosed until stage iii or stage iv. and they are trying to say she should have known back in 1989, when her first diagnosis was in 1995, moderate to severe, which is consistent with all -- with what his testimony is, is that people get diagnosed with copd late in the game. it is what it is, that is what happens, 3457 because people are doing all right, and then they drop off a cliff. she had a major viral infection. you will read it. they did not even know -- on that first admission, they did not even know that it was chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. they did not know that. and you will see, there is differential diagnosis, i do not have a copy of it right now, but the very bottom of the er chart, differential diagnosis does not list copd. the first admission chart does not list copd. all right? it was not until she was discharged, when they first started thinking, okay, this could be copd. and he admitted, out of the 4,000 medical records that he looked at, no report that said she had been told by a physician that she had copd prior to, and we were talking about 1995. right? nothing in 4,000 pages of medical records. you heard testimony, and the defendants just read this to you yesterday. and we are talking about whether or not you can look at her numbers now and tell whether she had copd back in the '80s. we are guessing; right? we cannot be sure. guessing. 3458 "the only way that i can tell you is if you have a previous pulmonary function test, but we do not have it. so we are probably guessing that she had it for several years or not. is it possible? yes, it is possible, but i cannot really be sure." this is dr. choy, the doctor who is responsible for taking care of her. he says, "i cannot tell you if she had it in 1989 or before may 5th, 1990. i cannot tell you that." and you know what else he also said? i mean, that -- the greater weight of the evidence is their burden of proof. [#deleted recess#] mr. rosen: may it please the court. and i apologize, i did not see that someone needed a break. so i'm sorry. i'm up here. i'm 3460 in a different world. so i'm sorry. it is the defendant's burden; right? the defendant has to prove that she knew or should have known. and so you heard testimony from karen gilbert, john gilbert, alan konzelman, sandy mattson, even dr. giakas, lori frost, dr. choy. they all talk about symptoms that she was doing great up until early 1990, and that is their testimony. and you had sue sweeney, and i want -- i'm going to talk to -- talk to you about that in a little bit. okay? edward horrigan, got a video. so their argument is she knew or she should have known that smoking cigarettes caused copd before may 5th, 1990. and so i want to just play this video for a minute. (video clip played as follows:) mr. koppel: cigarette smoking does not cause cancer, yes or no? mr. horrigan: it is not known whether cigarettes cause cancer. mr. koppel: all right, sir. mr. horrigan: it has not been causally established. 3461 mr. koppel: cigarette smoking, no causal relationship between cigarette smoking and emphysema? mr. horrigan: despite all of the research to date, there has been no causal link established. mr. koppel: no causal relationship between cigarette smoking and heart disease? mr. horrigan: no. as a matter of fact, there are studies that while we are accused of being associated with heart disease, there have been studies conducted over ten years that would say, again, that science is still puzzled over these forces. (video clip stopped.) mr. rosen: and that is the ceo of r.j. reynolds in 1984, right, saying his product does not cause disease, does not cause -- does not cause emphysema. they are arguing she should have known back then when our own ceo is saying it did not cause copd. she cannot be held to a higher standard. i mean, again, they talk about the standard of care, standard of care. all right? you know what, they breached the standard of care. r.j. reynolds breached the standard of care. 3462 the ceo from r.j. reynolds, this is 1994, okay, 1994. "does cigarette smoking cause cancer? "not in my opinion." this is the former ceo of r.j. reynolds under oath. "what is that opinion, the fact there continues to be statistics, does cigarette smoking cause any disease? "not in my opinion." this is the ceo of r.j. reynolds in 1994, under oath. during the entire time that elaine konzelman was smoking, r.j. reynolds denied that their product caused disease. it was not until 2000, you have heard the evidence, that they came and they -- and they came forward and they admitted that it caused disease and it is addictive; right? in 1994, "is it your position that it has never been proven that cigarette smoking caused a single person to die? "that is my position." and that is the ceo, the head, head person of this company. did elaine konzelman know or by the use of reasonable care should she have known before may 5th, 1990 that she had copd and that there was 3463 a possibility that it was caused by cigarette smoking? they had not proved that she had it. all right. by all accounts, by the testimony, she was doing well. she was doing great up until 1993, '94. and i want to make clear, if you answer yes to this question, the case is over. the defendant -- r.j. reynolds wins. all right. if you answer yes to this question, defendant wins. the answer is no. the answer is no. she filed her claim timely. she filed her claim timely. she was diagnosed in 1995. and according to the record, at or near the time, all right, the document that was recorded that we have, no history of breathing problems, no prior problems. that is what it says. and she was under the care of other physicians who took care of her. no history of copd or breathing problems. the next questions are going to be concerning reasonable fraud, fraud. once she is an engle class member, i told you, the findings apply. all right. they did this. the defendant concealed it. they omitted material information not otherwise known or available. that is a fact that they did it, right, about the health effects or addictive 3464 nature. so you take that rule of law, right, you take that rule of law, and then you apply it to the case, did it impact elaine? okay? and the next question is very similar. it is the conspiracy question; right? they did it. if she is an engle class member, they did it. it is the fact. it is the rule of law and that you apply it. how did it impact elaine? how -- how was it important to her; right? what would have been important to her; right? you heard she was an intelligent person. she was smart. she was decisive. you heard all of these things. what would have been important for elaine? in 1984, "can we have an open debate?" i mean, this is -- this was their campaign to create doubt and controversy. and you heard that. i just showed you the video of their ceo on ted koppel. and you heard from the son, john gilbert, she would watch ted koppel and nightline. he remembered that. and they talked -- again, the whole idea was to create doubt so that people continued to smoke, right, so that people would have that psychological 3465 crutch. well, maybe it is, maybe it is not, but, you know, it could -- any risk is so far off, it is so remote, it is not going to happen to me. and this was john gilbert. you heard his testimony. "how do you tie that general knowledge to the media specifically? "well, it was a very debatable topic. there was a lot of debate in that period of whether it was harmful or not." all right. he remembered the controversy. "okay. and the debate, as you understood it, was entities, were they expressing views about cigarette smoking? "yeah. the debate -- the debate was whether it was harmful or not, and she thought they were not harmful based on what she heard." it impacted people, their debate, their controversy. and we have proof that it impacted elaine and her decisions. r.j. reynolds is responsible for those other companies. you know, when you see a statement or a video from the tobacco institute or the council for tobacco research or you hear a statement from philip morris, if it is done in the course and scope of that conspiracy, they are responsible for it; 3466 right? they are responsible. they were in it together. and we know they were in it together. and i showed you that meeting at the plaza hotel and how they got together, they were competitors at first, but they got together and they got this public relations campaign. and we have all their internal documents of what they did when they formed the conspiracy and they hired big scientists. they misled the surgeon general. they were studying nicotine; right? they knew about when kids -- how old the kids were going to start smoking. fifty percent of smokers are going to die. i mean, what they concealed, right, r.j. reynolds concealing, the manipulation of nicotine, filtered cigarettes, people believed filtered cigarettes were safer, were helping, were removing nicotine, right, when, in fact, people were actually smoking more, right, because people -- dr. kreitzer -- dr. giakas did not -- does not believe this, but people smoke for nicotine, and they adjust their behavior to get the perfect dose. that is what dr. toll told you is that smokers are very, very good at it because that is what their body needs; right? and they adjust it, and they 3467 get the perfect blood level of nicotine throughout the day. and that is why you have people having different levels of nicotine. it affects different people, and different people need that certain amount. and so then they increase. if you -- if you take someone who is smoking a regular cigarette and give them a light cigarette, they are not getting the same amount of nicotine, so they start puffing harder and they start taking deeper breaths and getting more of the nicotine that they need. so when they formed that conspiracy, this was her. she had been smoking. she is 21, 22 years old, 23. what were they doing? r.j. reynolds was studying; right? what was elaine doing? you think she was studying the clinical data that confirmed the relationship between smoking and cancer? okay. r.j. reynolds was doing that. that is what they were doing. they were tracking it closely because they knew it would affect their business and their profits tremendously. and so that is when they met, and that is when they -- when all that information started to come out, most important thing was "to free millions of americans from the guilty fear that would arise 3468 deep in their biological soul every time they smoked a cigarette." they needed to figure out a way, right, because people naturally have this inclination if they hear that it is bad, they needed to free people of that. and so they started out with their campaign. you saw the frank statement. they promised the public that they would be responsible, they would cooperate with public health. they said their product was not harmful. but internally, what did we know, internally that the individuals we met with, smoking caused lung cancer. carcinogen -- this is internally what they are saying to themselves. it is in every class of compound smoke. "the amount of evidence accumulated to indict cigarettes is overwhelming. cigarettes cause unattractive side effects. they cause lung cancer." and so they formed this, the tobacco institute and the ctr, to create doubt and distraction science; right? millions and millions of dollars on research, and we have not found anything. okay. of course you did not find anything. you have not been studying what you told the public you are 3469 going to be studying. and they knew internally that they would be in a deplorable position. look, i mean, it says right here, the tirc; right? that was what they said was going to be this honest, honest organization for the public that it was a successful defensive operation; right? and they talked about how they have to give a psychological crutch and self-rationale for people to keep smoking. "obviously the key word is confusion. doubt is our product. the most important story casts doubt." we have the evidence that they actually did this knowingly, intentionally, deliberately. show a short clip. (video clip played as follows:) mr. hugh cullman: we want to be the detective just as much as the surgeon general and as the ama. we will cooperate in every way. well, obviously, a filter takes out certain tar and nicotine. i do not think the industry admits there are any bad elements. if there are bad elements, through our laboratories, through the surgeon general, through the ama, through acts of god and luck, we hope we 3470 may find them. and if they are found, they will be removed. mr. joseph cullman: we do talk to the question of whether or not cigarettes are hazardous. we do not believe that cigarettes are hazardous. we do not accept that. because when, as, and if any ingredient in cigarette smoke is identified as being injurious to human health, we are confident that we can eliminate that ingredient. (video clip stopped.) mr. rosen: those are lies; right? those are lies. i'm going to talk about a holding pattern, a holding strategy in a minute. those are lies. those are lies they wanted the public to believe, people like elaine to believe so that they continued to smoke, right, so they continued to make money. (videotaped deposition of james figlar, phd played as follows:) by mr. paige: q. and they wanted people to believe that and rely upon them, did they not? a. i believe in general, yes. q. and as early as '88 or '89 or '90, the tobacco 3471 institute was saying they still did not know whether smoking causes cancer; correct? that is what they were telling the public; correct? a. they did not know. they could not make that determination is what they said in the video. q. and they wanted the people to believe them; correct? a. i would say they would, yes. (videotaped deposition concluded.) mr. rosen: they wanted -- this is the c -- this is a corporate representative from r.j. reynolds, and this was taken i think in 2014, right there, 2014. they wanted the people to believe them that there was no proof that these -- that their product caused disease. it was deliberate. and it was a -- and they boasted about it internally. they boasted internally how it was working. right? you saw that consumption chart where every time there would be a dip, it still just skyrocketed, right? 20 years, a single strategy on major fronts, it was brilliantly conceived and executed. it was a holding strategy. you know what a holding strategy is? whatever we can do just to keep people smoking. all right? 3472 maybe we do not win, maybe, you know -- it is not a vehicle to win, we just need to keep people smoking, we just need to keep the status quo, while millions of people are dying from horrific diseases. and you are going to hear about elaine's horrific disease, and i think you heard from the testimony how it affects people, how it affects families. it was set up as an industry shield, we know that now. we have these internal documents where they talk about how their whole -- everything was fake. it was a front. it was a front. it was the cheapest insurance the tobacco industry could buy. that is what they were doing. that is what r.j. reynolds and the tobacco institute and their fake ctr in the '70s, in the '80s, that is what they were doing. you know what elaine was doing? she was with her family, smoking in her house with her kids. okay? do not you think that would have been important to her? awareness versus belief. i may hear something. do i believe it? and they did a great job shaping public perception, a tremendous job. what was she doing? she was smoking around 3473 her grandkids. do you think for a second, knowing elaine and learning about who she was, do you think for a second she thought she was doing something harmful around her grandkids? these things are important to people. "who ain't for more money?" right? and they talk about they have congress, "through a symptomatic program on the hill, we can count nearly 300 representatives on our grade a contacts." "carcinogens are found in practically every class of compound." present technology. this is 1961, internally they are talking about how they cannot -- there is carcinogens in every class of compound. we cannot remove it. and then what do they say to the surgeon general in 1963? they send a letter to the surgeon general, they say none of the chemicals listed are harmful to humans, and it is possible, of course, to modify it by filters. lies. the fraud. right? we know, you heard from sandy mattson, she remembers her mom smoking camel unfiltered, unfiltered cigarettes and she switched to a pall mall. and she showed her mom the pall mall cigarette, showed the filter. her mom showed 3474 the filter to her, how it was darker and it was -- and she believed it was safe, she believed it was better, she believed it was working. all the people that switched. i mean, the amount of people that switched from unfiltered to filters right around -- right at the exact time, '64. the surgeon general report's coming out, here is your psychological crutch to keep smoking. all right? do not believe them, here is a filter, we will take it all out. the bottom line here, all right, "in the meantime, we say here is our triple or quadruple or quintuple, capable of taking whatever constituent smoke -- out of smoke." and then what do they say up here? "the smoker of a filter cigarette was getting as much or more nicotine and tar that she would have gotten from a regular cigarette." right? "she had abandoned the regular cigarette for reduced risk of health." that was her. this would have been important for her. right? knowing that she is getting as much or more. the illusion of filtration, i mean, that is what they talked about. we need to make an 3475 illusion of filtration. and then another one, down here, it talks about "someone who switches to a hi-if cigarette winds up smoking more units in order to provide himself with the same delivery which he had before." do you know what that is? same delivery, the same delivery of nicotine as they had before. and here is the evidence that you have heard testimony, and there was some other testimony about it, but what did she tell you the reason she was smoking, "she smoked filters, she felt they were safer." right? and she showed you the filter and she talked about the filter, and we just talked about that. and then what happened when she switched to lights? do you remember, she tried to convince her mom here is the step-down method, try the virginia slims. her mom tried it, and what happened, she is smoking more. which is exactly what they knew and they hid and concealed. this is the former ceo, robert heimann, of american tobacco company. (videotaped deposition of robert heimann played as follows:) q. throughout your tenure with american, it was 3476 1 25 not only american's position, but your position that cigarettes were not injurious to health; is that accurate? a. through my tenure? q. yes. a. yes, that is so. q. that is something american tobacco wanted the public to believe; is that correct? a. yes. q. it is a statement that american tobacco placed great reliance on? a. we -- we issued that statement, yes. certainly. q. as far as -- a. certainly we wanted them to believe it. q. as far as you are concerned, a person is justified in relying on that statement? a. yes. q. okay. (videotaped deposition concluded.) mr. rosen: from their own mouth, elaine was justifiably -- she could justifiably rely on their statements, from the ceo of american tobacco company. and she did. konzelman 19 october 21, 2016 and so the answer to these questions are both yes. all right? did their fraud impact her? the answer is overwhelmingly -- overwhelmingly yes. all right, all of those things would have been important for her to know. percentage of fault. so you, under our law, it is not an all or nothing proposition. right? you can make a decision what the respective levels of fault are of parties. you can weigh it, when you look at it, and there is an instruction on it. all right? so when you get to this question, you are going to decide what is the responsibility. and then what i want to suggest is when two people come to a table, all right, you look at who had what information, who had superior knowledge, who knew what about what, and then you make your decision. all right. and you decide the percentage of fault between elaine that you charge to r.j. reynolds or elaine. they were spending -- you know, we talk about, you know, you heard about the public service announcements, right, and you saw a couple, i think there was a yul brynner, i forget which one it was, but there were some public service announcements 3478 saying smoking causes lung cancer, smoking causes disease, you have got to stop, it is really harmful. and you know what else you learned, actually dr. toll came in and talked about this, he is an expert in message framing, it is the psychological message that we give to smokers. and he is saying -- he is on the cutting edge of this right, he is on the cutting edge, saying, you know, it is not good to tell people smoking is going to cause lung -- is going to give you lung cancer. all right? those are loss frame messages. and he is trying to change public policy because he studies this. and the psychology is you do not want to say that to someone, you want to say, listen, quitting now, you are not going to get lung cancer, not if you continue to smoke, you are going to get it. and so it is important to look at that. i mean, these were the messages that public health were giving, but then what was the industry doing? i mean, this is the evidence. the industry was spending more in one day in marketing, in their campaigning, than the government could spend in a day. in a day. it was overwhelmingly drowning out what public health was trying to say, the message. the industry was spending more in one day than the 3479 government would spend in an entire year. one day compared to a year that the government had. from 1953 to 2000, "what was the amount spent by the tobacco institute and ctr to create the controversy?" they spent a billion dollars, a billion dollars to keep that train going. why? so that they could keep selling cigarettes. people keep buying, people keep dying, they keep making money. and this was it, again, you saw this, the holding pattern, okay, it was a holding pattern. 20 million deaths. this is it, the doubt, confusion, the campaign that they went on. listen. (video clip played as follows:) mr. cullman: we do talk to the question of whether or not cigarettes are hazardous. we do not believe that cigarettes are hazardous. we do not accept that. ms. browder: the case is still open. the jury has not come in. mr. stossel: it may not be harmful? you are not convinced? ms. browder: it may be, or it may not be. we 3480 do not know. mr. dwyer: so insofar as the correlation between lung cancer and cigarette smoking are concerned, no one knows. it may, it may not. in fact, no one knows what causes lung cancer. mr. horrigan: it is not known whether cigarettes cause cancer. it has not been causally established. speaker: so do cigarettes cause cancer? mr. merryman: i do not know if they do or not. ms. banks: i am not in a position to give you a does or does not answer. representative waxman: they agree that smoking causes lung cancer. do you agree? mr. james johnston: it may. mr. waxman: do you know whether it does? mr. james johnston: i do not. (video clip stopped.) mr. rosen: i mean, decade after decade this industry denied and concealed it so that people keep smoking. and you have it, i mean, you have the chart that goes right up into the 1980s. i mean, really 1964 is when you have the surgeon general coming out, but they keep -- it keeps going. you know, 3481 '53, you have the mouse painting study, '64. but it keeps going. and they were looking to get people, the pre-smoker, the nonsmoker to become habituated smokers. that is what they said internally. and look at this, they have to -- "he does not start to smoke to satisfy a nonexistent craving for nicotine. rather, he appears to start to smoke for purely psychological reasons. younger adult smokers have been the critical factor in the growth and decline of every major brand and company over the last 50 years. they will continue to be important in the future. renewal of our market stems almost entirely from the 18-year-old market. no one starts smoking after 25 -- 24. 5 percent." they need replacement smokers. a replacement smoker, you know what that is? that is when either someone quits or they die, they need someone to replace that person. and so they have got to get it from that 18-year-old group or by 18 years old. nicotine. they deliberately downplayed the role. this is an r.j. reynolds document, right? not everyone knew that nicotine was addictive. not everyone knew that. and not everyone knew what they were doing to the nicotine, freebasing it and 3482 putting other chemicals in to change the form and the ph. all right? no one knew that. "we have deliberately downplayed the role of nicotine, hence the nonsmoker has little or no knowledge of the satisfaction." and then look what they say, "instead we somehow must convince him with wholly irrational reasons that he should start smoking." right? all those advertisements that you saw making it fun, you know, sexy, glamorous, cool. "we have to convince him of irrational reasons so that he starts smoking our product and gets addicted in the hopes that he will for himself then discover the real satisfaction." quote, satisfaction. you know what that is? that is addiction. that is the pharmacological effect of nicotine that people get. and they studied consumers and they knew, this is in '78, they knew that consumers are -- "very few consumers are aware of the effects of nicotine, the addictive nature, and that it is a poison." right? and then you have testimony from sue sweeney on this issue. you know, "did elaine ever talk about nicotine? 3483 "no. "did elaine ever talk about addiction to nicotine? "no. "did elaine ever talk to you about nicotine being a drug?" and this is her testimony from 2015 or '16. she says sitting her -- i said, question: "sitting here today do you believe that nicotine is a drug? "that i do not know." this was a woman who smoked and had quit in 1995 or '96, right around the time elaine quit. and to this day, she does not know that nicotine's a drug. very few consumers are aware of how powerfully addictive it is. right? and you have got -- you have learned a tremendous amount of information, tremendous, that the average consumer does not know. those things would have been important. you know, their own forensic guy says that she started when she was 15 years old. you know, when two people come to a table, what information do they have? you are going to make a decision. what i would suggest as far as percentage of fault, percentage of fault, r.j. reynolds 90 3484 percent, elaine konzelman ten percent, if you find her to be at fault at all. okay? damages. "please state the total" -- so next question on the verdict form is damages. all right? there is two types of damages, there is the medical expenses and then there is the compensatory damages for alan for his loss of his wife and for what he went through from the time they got -- she got sick up until the time that she passed. all right, that is how -- that is the different types of damages. you have heard the stipulation, $295,000 is the medical expenses for elaine konzelman that goes to her estate. all right? that was stipulated to, that is agreed to by the parties. so i want to talk about the next -- the next point about damages. we have shown you evidence, we have shown you proof, alan's testified, sandy has testified, every witness that came into this courtroom talked about this relationship. alan, all right, he is a mariner, he is a sailor, he was away for a few months at a time and he would come back home. when they were together, they were together all the time. all the time. 3485 you know, some folks, they may have a 9 to 5 job or an 8 to 7:00, whatever it is. i mean, they may see their spouse or loved one at night for a little bit or maybe see them for a little bit in the morning. people have different relationships. you know, soldiers who have to go away across the -- you know, they get deployed, they do not see their family for however long and come back, they still love each other. they still care about each other deeply. all right? and the fact that this was his career and what he did to support his wife should not diminish that at all. does not diminish that at all. because when they were together, they were together and they traveled and they had a wonderful, great, great life. they had a -- an amazing, adventurous life that some people do not get to experience because of the type of work he did when he was able to come home. and they sailed and they enjoyed each other. you heard alan had been married a couple times and it do not did not work, so you know who it worked with? it worked with elaine. she was the right person. and it lasted 29 years. 29 years. and 3486 they sailed and they got married and they traveled together and they had fun together. and they grew old together. and they had a right to grow older together, to have each other. alan lives with cliff now, a roommate. he had a right to be with his wife, elaine. and he was there when she declined, and declined worse, and declined worse. and he continued to work and continued to support her. and there were times where he was away and there was times when he came back. and anyone can make an accusation. anyone. but i want you to look at the proof. and i want you to look at alan and everything that you heard from everybody in this case and this testimony and trial, and at the end of this day, i want you to make a decision what that relationship was and what the loss of this woman, elaine, was to him. he was there for her and he took care of her. and he was there on the last day of her life. and he will never have her back. and he watched her deteriorate. the number that i'm going to suggest is a significant number. it is a substantial number, because it is a substantial loss. if this was a 3487 case about broken bones or a case about surgery, you have to look at the nature and the extent of the damages. and you are going to see that there is no exact standard for measurement. you are going to decide. whatever you decide we accept, okay. this is a suggestion, you can go higher, you can go lower, it is just a suggestion. all right? this is the type of case where i am required to ask you for a substantial verdict, and so i would suggest $5 million for his loss, for alan's loss, the loss of a woman like elaine. and the punitive damages follow. and i mentioned this -- i did not mention this, i was thinking about this, i did not think i was going to say it out loud. you have come this far. and you have fought through illnesses and been here and been committed. and so if you answer yes to this question, if you find by clear and convincing evidence that punishment is warranted for the type of conduct that this company has engaged in. all right. if you find that it is warranted and you answer yes to this question, our case will go on to a second phase. we would come back monday, and it would be very short, i would probably put on about 3488 a 15-minute witness and then rest. the defense may have a witness. it would being very, very short, probably a day, maybe a day and a half extra of your time. and so if you have come this far for us and you answer yes, i'm asking you to come just a little bit farther, just a little bit farther, because i'm going to show you that punishment is warranted. there is instructions, it talks about whether it is clear and convincing, whether they are guilty of intentional misconduct. you can consider harm suffered by others to determine how reprehensible their conduct was. and they knew it. it is not -- it is not that they made a mistake and they accidentally did something. instead they knew what they were doing. and despite knowing that at some point in time they would get caught, they continued to do it. "our basic position in the cigarette controversy is subject to the charge," they knew they could be charged, "and may be subject to the finding that they are making false and misleading statements to sell cigarettes." lies for profit. death for profit. that is punitive. and you can use a punitive damages verdict to 3489 punish the company and to let other companies know that this type of conduct will not be tolerated. it can be used as a deterrence to others. they knew. "happily," they boasted, "happily for the tobacco industry, nicotine is both habituating and unique." "if we move towards eliminating nicotine, we will liquidate our business." right? the nicotine levels are not obtained by accident, they regulate them. and we can fairly precisely, the nicotine levels desired by the levels that management want. and smoke ph, how they talk about using free form, free form, freebasing nicotine so that people keep smoking. people cannot stop, people get sick and they die. they talk about this again. it is like they know that if there is a nicotine antagonist, if there is something that could block that nicotine receptor, give a pill to somebody you are going to block the receptor, right, and then people will not smoke, they will not get the nicotine in there, they are out of business. they avoided having research done. they were terrified of that type of research. and they came and they swore before congress, before the united konzelman 19 october 21, 2016 3490 states people, right, for decades. for decades. (video clip played as follows:) representative wyden: let me begin my questioning on the matter of whether or not nicotine is addictive. let me ask you first, and i'd like to just go down the row, whether each of you believes that nicotine is not addictive. i heard virtually all of you touch on it. and just yes or no. do you believe nicotine is not addictive? mr. campbell: i believe nicotine is not addictive, yes. representative wyden: mr. johnston? mr. james johnston: congressman, cigarettes and nicotine clearly do not meet the classic definitions of addiction. there is no intoxication. representative wyden: we will take that as a no. and again, time is short. if you can just -- i think each of you believe nicotine is not addictive, we just would like to have this for the record. mr. taddeo: i do not believe that nicotine or our products are addictive. mr. horrigan: i believe nicotine is not konzelman 19 october 21, 2016 addictive. mr. tisch: i believe that nicotine is not addictive. mr. sandefur: i believe that nicotine is not addictive. mr. donald johnston: and i too believe that nicotine is not addictive. (video clip stopped.) mr. rosen: those are the heads, the senior, senior, senior people right up to the top before congress. and you have seen every internal document that -- i've shown you the internal documents about what they knew about their product and how they are manipulating it, how they are keeping people smoking. and so it will be up to you to decide whether there is clear and convincing evidence that punishment is warranted. the answer we believe is yes. the answer screams yes. and so we would ask you to -- to give us a little bit more of your time. and so i've had -- again, i truly appreciate. i cannot -- i cannot say it enough that we appreciate everything that you have done. on behalf of my team, everybody, baron phillipson and ms. wald and 3492 elaine -- alan konzelman and elaine, and elaine. on behalf of our whole team and everybody, thank you so much. mr. rosen: may it please the court. 3601 i'm going to try not to hurt myself here. i think i'm going to fail. mr. furr: your honor, may i move someplace where i can see the -- the court: yes, sir. of course. mr. rosen: this is going to be the last opportunity that i get to speak with you, so this is just my final rebuttal. and i want to talk about some of the things that mr. furr brought up with you just now. really, this case is two completely different sides of the spectrum. all right? so you have a choice. they are going to look at the evidence and what each side is saying. and all we have is credibility. all we have is truth. and the jury is the factfinders. you decide what the truth is. all right? you have seen mr. konzelman, you heard him on the stand, you have heard him testify. he spoke to you right there. there is an instruction that talks about credibility of the witnesses. you get to look at him and judge him and decide how he reacted, how he responded, everything. every witness. okay? and so what it comes down to is on our side, 3602 elaine was addicted, she tried to quit. elaine did not know what r.j. reynolds concealed. elaine was diagnosed for the first time with copd in 1995. and i wrote that down improperly, sorry. r.j. reynolds committed fraud engaged in the conspiracy to conceal health effects and addictive nature of their product for profit, and addiction was the legal cause of elaine's copd. that is our case. okay, what is the truth? what is the truth? all right? and we look at their side. she was never addicted, never, not once in her life. no tobacco use disorder. she never tried to quit. those were just little gestures. they were just gestures. never tried to quit. right? r.j. reynolds said some stupid things in the past. those were not stupid things. those were -- those were decades-long, documented evidence from the highest level of their corporation, of their business. they were not just stupid things. they were deliberate. they were deliberate. they were intentional, and they were misleading the public. it was as the most reprehensible of behavior you could ever imagine, putting profit over human life. the most reprehensible. that is what they 3603 said. it was just -- they were just stupid things. alan lied to his wife and doctors while she was dying from copd. make no mistake. make no mistake, what was just presented to you is that alan was lying to his wife. those two years in his continuous discharge book that are not there, right, that do not show that he was working, he was lying to his wife, he was lying to his doctors, and he was off somewhere else doing something else; right? and i think the implication is he is having an affair with someone. mr. furr: objection as to what counsel thinks, your honor. the court: thank you, sustained. mr. furr: move to strike. the court: jurors disregard the last comment. mr. rosen: and so you are the factfinder and you will decide whether that is truth or whether that is not truth. and elaine had diagnosed -- had copd six years before she was actually diagnosed with it, and she should have known that she had copd six years before she was actually diagnosed with it. that is their case. all right, we are on two separate sides of the spectrum, you decide what the truth is. 3604 all right, and i'm going to talk about alan right now and the discharge books. i want to jump into it. because, you know, he said right -- one of the first things you saw the question when he was asked on that stand, right, that first question he was asked was about what about these discharge books. and what was his first response? he said they do not issue them anymore. that is what he said. and there was a -- and i find it interesting that there was another clip, when he was actually confronted direct again about the issue. and let us play the clip that was not played. testimony so if you were working away from home for a lengthy period of time in 2009, where is the documentation in your continuous discharge book? a. i may have gotten certificates of discharge at that time. q. okay. i thought you told me that did not happen until after 2010? a. i do not remember. some of the ships i went on, they did not know what a continuous discharge book 3605 was. (video clip from courtroom view network stopped and the following is in open court.) mr. rosen: you are going to decide what the truth is, whether alan was lying to his doctors and lying to his wife and not actually working and was somewhere else, all right? or the truth, which was that this man was working, that there were times where he got certificates of discharge, that there were boats that did not even use the discharge book anymore. i mean, he is 87 years old. he comes from a different school, the old school. this is a man who -- can i get the overhead? -- this man, who is lying to the doctors and lying to his wife, right? you were shown a document about him -- his wife being upset that he had to take a another job, right? well, what about the other document where he is with his wife, "patient and husband instructed on use of" -- cannot -- "monitoring blood pressure." because he is with his wife just a couple of days before the document that they showed you. and then what about the fact -- you know what, 3606 this is a man who is lying to his wife and he is going off somewhere else, and he is not telling the truth, but he is finding time, and this is in the evidence, he is finding time to write a letter to the facility because he does not feel they are giving his wife proper care, and he is upset that they are not giving her proper care. right? this is a man who is lying and running off somewhere, but yet he is sending -- he is sending letters saying i do not like the way this -- i do not like -- and that is in pmed57. i do not like the way that the doctors are treating his wife. all right? so you -- you are going to make that decision. you are going to make the decision. and the decision keeps going. we are going to come back to this in a minute. in 2008 with his wife, and i want to talk about the trust that they have, that she lists him on the advanced living will directive, she appoints him. this is in 2008. the trust and the love that this couple had, in hospice, she is telling the folks at hospice, this is in the -- in the records as well, she is talking and reporting about their life. in her retirement years, she enjoyed traveling with her 3607 husband and also doing volunteer work at the local hospital. and this is what she is telling them in the last few months of her life. and he is lying. and he is running away. but he is also at home with her when she had two emergency room visits, each time she is at home with her husband, she became short of breath and she or he had to call 9-1-1 because she suffocated. and was he there? was she home with him? what is the truth? what is the truth? why put that in front of you? mr. furr: objection, your honor. he is attacking my argument. the court: anything else? mr. furr: comment on counsel. the court: sustained. mr. furr: move to strike. the court: jurors will disregard the last comment. mr. rosen: you know, the whole story, that is what counsel mentioned, the whole story. i want to jump back just for a second. you know, you heard about john gilbert statements, people telling her to quit, what was her response. this is 143. 3608 you know, john gilbert talks about indifference. you know, what else did he say? and he talks about a later conversation that he had and what would she say in response. she was addicted, she could not quit. and is that something that she specifically would say that she was addicted, yeah. she said, "you know i cannot. it is an addiction." we talked about sue sweeney, right? sue sweeney talked about, you know, she had this cough in the 1960s. right, a cough in the 1960s. 127. "how would you describe elaine's health otherwise during the time you lived at thoman place? "she was in perfect health. she was never ill." 131. "before she moved to washington township, you observed a deep, chesty cough? "i did." that is in the '60s. all right? that is the '60s. it says, "was it productive? was it productive? do you know? "no, not that i know of." all right? she loved to smoke. that is the testimony you heard, right? that is the testimony you heard. let us put it into context. let us take a look at what sue sweeney said. this is 130. "did elaine 3609 ever tell you she loved smoking? "yes. "tell me about that conversation. "i would -- i can remember one time i asked her why she smoked so much, and she said, 'because i love to smoke. i love it.' "when did elaine tell you that? "when she still lived on thoman. other than that, i never asked her anything about it." okay? that is in the '60s. that is in the 1960s. and then why do you think she said that she -- that -- why would sue sweeney say that her friend loved to smoke? you know what her definition was? and this was the testimony. this is the testimony. 128. "why do you say that? "because she loved to smoke. "how do you know that? "anyone who smokes every day all day long loves to smoke." anyone who smokes all day every day, all day long, that is addiction. that is addiction. that sue sweeney could not appreciate, did not understand. why? because she did not understand nicotine 3610 addiction. she did not know what they knew. you know, they brought up the ambulances. i mean, you have the medical record. you have a medical record from 1995. okay? and you are going to decide whether, when alan konzelman gave that testimony, whether he was accurate in his deposition, whether he was accurate, whether there was all these ambulances coming to her house before 1995. you have the medical record from 1995, you take a look at it. okay? and there is testimony, 139. "alan, at your age, does it help you when we give an anchor date in time to talk about things? "yes. "and so before 1995, when she was diagnosed with copd, did ambulances come to your home? "no." and sandy gave that same testimony. there were no ambulances coming to the home. you are going to take a look in this -- in the medical records, you will have it, there were a lot of ambulances, okay? and they were all after 1995. there were a lot. okay? alan at 87 years old. i want to talk a little bit about the statute 3611 of limitations defense. this is 140. "do you know how long it takes a patient on average to move from mild to moderate in terms of, for lung obstruction, as shown in a pulmonary function test? "i do not think nobody can tell you that. i do not think there is a specific time in which one's severity moves to the next one in any specific time. too many factors involved." all right, there is too many variables. but their expert comes in and says, oh, it had to be there for ten years. right? well, her treating doctor, the person who is charged with the responsibility of taking care of her, says nobody can tell you that, there is too many variables. 141. and the same answer for moving from severe to very severe. "that is correct. i have patients who are in the same degree for years and years and years, so there are patients who from one year to the next, all of a sudden, they are so bad, you wonder why." okay, it could be dramatic declines, it could be slow. 142. again, this is dr. choy, this is her treating doctor. "now, you are asking me did she 3612 have any previous copd? i really cannot tell you. could it be possible? it is always possible. in medicine, anything is possible. but did she have it, i really cannot tell you based on this." and at the very end, "nobody can tell you based on this. if it is possible, yes, but can i tell you, really cannot tell you." that is her doctor who is saying, i cannot tell you based on 1995, her having moderate copd, i cannot tell you whether she had it in '89 or '88 or '85. and that is their burden of proof. their burden of proof is to prove that she had it, and not only that she had it, that she should have known she had it. and the number on this one is covered. and verapamil. now, you understand this is talking to dr. choy. you understand past medical history notes, the patient has had a history of hypertension and is taking verapamil. what is it, he explains it. and prescription medications, do they have to be prescribed by a doctor, yes. for a doctor to prescribe verapamil would they have to meet with the patient and perform a physical exam, take a 3613 history and do the normal examination that a doctor does before they prescribe medication. usually that is the way they do it. okay, she had medication prescribed to her before her first admission. we know she had been seen by a doctor, who examined her, who looked at her. and she -- and there is no evidence, we have no evidence she was ever told she had copd or was diagnosed with copd before she actually was. the encyclopedia of facts. this was dr. giakas. i think counsel described him as the encyclopedic knowledge of all the facts. let us go ahead and bring it up. i'm sorry 150. you are not a mind reader. "encyclopedic knowledge of all facts." right? this was when i was asking him, "doctor, is not it true that alan konzelman was living on edgewater drive when he first noticed elaine konzelman having shortness of breath, wheezing, and coughing? "i do not recall where he was living." all right. and you read -- you heard the stipulation we read into evidence. that is in his notes, that was in his notes that she was living at edgewater drive and that is after 1992. but he was choosing which facts he was going to talk about and what he 3614 was going to remember. mr. furr: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. mr. furr: move to strike. the court: jury can disregard the last comment. mr. rosen: let us talk about marcela. 144. with respect -- "were you surprised to hear from mr. konzelman in 2011 when he called? "yes, i was very surprised. "why is that? "i was not interested, you know, i was single for so long, i never wanted to get married." you know, she was surprised when she heard from him. and you know what, alan called her up a year and a half after his wife passed. all right, that is the evidence is that it was autumn of 2011. and then they went on a cruise in march. it did not last very long. they were not compatible. all right? a man watched his wife suffer for a very, very long time. and he was alone. there is nothing wrong with a person reaching out to somebody that he knew from the past to speak with them and spend some time and have some companionship. and it 3615 did not work. and you want to know why? because she was not elaine. mr. furr: objection, your honor. the court: overruled. mr. rosen: 145. "did you speak with mr. konzelman at all between '81 and 2011? "no." she did not remember even talking to him. she did not remember talking to him. i'm going to just briefly touch on one more subject, filters, 153. you know, i think counsel mentioned that public health, it was public health that was encouraging everyone to smoke, public health, right? i mean, it sounds like they are blaming public health. who had superior knowledge about that product and about whether filters were working? this is 153, this was dr. cummings. r.j. reynolds had superior knowledge and they knew it was not working and they concealed it and they were happy to have public health encouraging people to smoke filters. it is more money in their pocket. i want to end with this. 3616 just wait one second. i wanted to make sure that the stipulation about when elaine passed away was correct. march 22nd, 2010. okay, she was in hospice in california. all right? 126. you have these records and you are going to get to see who was there and who was with elaine on the day she died and in the weeks leading up to her death. this is march 22nd. "lunch arrived while nurse in attendance and husband fed patient bites of meat and potato. she refused anything to drink." this is a man, this is a man who is being accused of lying to doctors, lying to his wife, put her in an assisted living facility and not working so that he can be out somewhere? you are going to make that decision. you are going to make that choice. is this the truth? you make the decision. alan and elaine loved each other. alan worked to support his wife. he cared for elaine. he wanted her to get the best treatment. they loved each other, they loved each other's company. and they had each other. and that was taken away. you will see this, this is in evidence. this is 3617 elaine. "my final wishes. i ask that my ashes be returned to alan and scattered out to sea with alan's." all we have is credibility and truth in this courtroom. and you make the decision. what is the truth? whatever verdict you render, we accept. thank you.