mr. furr: just so you-all know the plan, my understanding is the lunch has been ordered. we expect it to be here around noon. and so i will talk to you until your lunch arrives, and then we will take a normal break, and we will finish up after you get done. well, there is only one place i can possibly begin, that is to thank you-all for your heroic service. at least three of you deserve a purple heart in this case. you came back from being sick and came back to be here with us. we really appreciate that. but all of you have been courteous, you have dressed professional, you have come here on time and you have paid attention, and we are all very, very grateful to you for your service, and it has been an honor to serve in front of a jury like this. thank you. konzelman 19 october 21, 2016 i have a favorite saying that i like a lot. the saying is, keep your eye on the ball. now, i love football, so i like to put a football theme when i talk about it. but it really applies to any endeavor in life. what does it mean? it means concentrating on the task before you, concentrate on the things that matter, and do not be distracted by the other things that are competing for your attention but will not really help you achieve the results and complete the task that you have at hand. i think that is an important thing to think about as you sort through all the evidence in here, because this is really a pretty simple case. this is a case about one smoker, elaine konzelman. it is not a case about all smokers, it is not a case about smokers in general. the class action is over. this case is about one smoker. it is a case about one disease, copd. it is a serious disease. and we are not going to diminish the seriousness in any way of copd. but it is not a case about lung cancer, it is not a case about heart disease, it is not a case about smokers becoming ill from other -- with other diseases. it is about 3496 copd. it is a case about one plaintiff, alan konzelman. it is his case. we now know that this is a case in which mr. konzelman is going -- has asked you to award to him $5.3 million. $5.3 million. so that is what this case is about. and you know this case is about that because you have seen the verdict form and you now know that every single question on your verdict form has elaine's name in it, and sometimes it also has mr. konzelman's name. so all this case is about the konzelmans. it is really a pretty simple, narrow case. and there are only a few facts that you really need to know to answer all of these verdict form questions. and these are the facts. you have seen the evidence. you know that elaine konzelman was personally warned over and over about the dangers of smoking throughout her life. you know that she knew that smoking could kill her by the 1960s when her father told her so. you know that she was not confused as to whether smoking really did cause disease or did not cause disease because you know, and this is a sad fact, but it is just -- the fact of the matter is konzelman 19 october 21, 2016 she watched her mother, she watched her mother develop emphysema and die from it, and subsequently, she watched her sister develop lung cancer. she was not confused. i mean, the evidence was right in front of her face, in an undeniable, powerful fashion that nobody could miss, and elaine did not miss it. but despite knowing that smoking is dangerous and could cause a deadly disease, she just loved to smoke. she loved to smoke. and we are going to look at that evidence. i mean, this is not a one-time thing. this was her response. she loved to smoke, and she did not want to quit. she did not want to quit. we are going to look at what all the family members told us about elaine in the 1980s, and they told you that she simply was not interested in quitting, even when she was watching what her mother was going through and what her sister was going through. now, you also know that there is a statute of limitations defense in this case, and we are going to show you that the facts simply are that she should have known, whether she did or not is not 3498 the issue, but she should have known, she should have known that she had copd caused by smoking before may 5th, 1990, and as a result, this lawsuit is legally barred by the statute of limitations, which is not a technicality, it is the law of the florida, it is the law that you are bound by and that you all followed to uphold when you took your oath to serve as jurors. and we also know that just the truth is she could quit smoking. we know that she quit smoking the first time that she made what mr. konzelman, the plaintiff in this case, acknowledged to be a wholehearted quit attempt. not a half hearted quit attempt. not quitting for show. not quitting to placate others. not quitting to get others off her back. but the first time she wanted to quit and made a wholehearted quit attempt, she quit, walked away from it, and never smoked again without any nicotine replacement therapy or any other professional help. the plaintiffs have the burden of proof. that is an important thing to remember. mr. konzelman has to meet his burden of proof to prove his claims about elaine konzelman and her 3499 copd. he has to prove to you his claims. and he did not prove to you his claims. it demonstrates -- the evidence demonstrates that mr. konzelman's case fails in three significant areas. i'm going to give you a brief overview before lunch of what that is. he failed because he failed to prove that she was injured by concealment or an agreement to conceal. he failed to prove that she was injured because she was -- addiction to nicotine caused her disease. and his case also fails because it is barred by the statute of limitations. and i'm going to look at those three issues at least, i hope, before lunch. we will start with the concealment case. the facts demonstrate -- the evidence is demonstrated to you that she knew from the 1960s on that smoking could kill her because her father told her so. but throughout her life, and we will walk through some of this today, she continued to get personalized warnings. not just the general warnings that bombarded all the rest of society, not just the warnings on the packs, not just the efforts by the surgeon general and the american cancer society and the american lung association 3500 and the public health and schools, not just the warnings that we all got, but she got personalized warnings from her family members, from her own body, and from a variety of the sources. she knew. but despite all that, she did not want to quit because she loved to smoke. and i want to be clear. i'm not criticizing elaine in any way for wanting to smoke and not wanting to quit. she had the right to make those choices. it was her right to decide whether to smoke or not. it was also her responsibility for the choices she makes. a fundamental tenet of our society is, in america, we have the right to make our choices, but we also have to be personally responsible for our choices. i'm going to demonstrate to you this morning that her choice to smoke despite knowing the dangers of smoking was the only legal cause of her copd. the only legal cause. yes, under florida laws, florida law recognizes that sometimes there can be more than one cause of the event, concomitant causes or other legal jargon, it does not really matter, but the law recognizes there can be more than one cause of the 3501 event, but under the facts of this case, under the evidence before you, there was only one cause of her copd and death. let us take a quick look at -- i showed you this in opening statement. i'm going to walk through it again now, help short-circuit the rest of the day, but let us just look at the abundance, the constant drumbeat of information and warning that elaine konzelman personally received and that she received just like all the rest of society. you know that her father saw the cigarette -- saw the warning in 1966, quit smoking, offered all the family -- the kids in the family a thousand dollars not to smoke before they -- if they did not smoke before they were age 18. that is what lori frost told you from the stand yesterday. and you know that he told the kids and he told elaine that smoking will kill you. smoking will kill you. again, sadly we know, i mean, probably the most powerful warning a person could get is to watch a loved one go through the process. but she watched her mother develop symptoms of copd in the 1970s. she watched her disease progress. she watched her get sick over time. and then 3502 ultimately, died from her copd in 1987. we know from john gilbert, her son who testified by deposition, that by the 1970s, all four of her children were asking her to quit. all four of them by the 1970s. we know that mr. konzelman repeatedly asked her to stop smoking. we know that he asked her on their very first date to stop smoking. he asked her constantly after that. okay. we are going to look at all the different ways he showed her the warnings in -- on the packages. he showed her the warnings in the ads. he told her about his experience with smoking. and he talked to her constantly about her need to quit smoking. we know that she got warnings from her own body. we are going to look at this in a couple of different ways. both because it demonstrates she knew what smoking could do, but also it is relevant to the statute of limitations. we know that she had coughing and shortness of breath and wheezing and phlegm, and she began developing all that in the '80s, and we are going to look at that evidence. but she got warnings from her own body. 3503 and, of course, ms. lori frost testified yesterday, and although she did not remember what she had told us a few months ago in her deposition, ms. lehman reminded her and refreshed her memory of what she had told us in her deposition. and we know that among the many, many warnings that lori gave her aunt was that cigarettes are going to kill you. you have to quit smoking. you have to quit smoking. and you heard from her best friend, sue sweeney, by deposition, and sue told you that i told her it was not good for her health. i told her it was not good for her health. sue is a real important witness in this case because, you know, with family members sometimes we all have to maintain a certain decorum and, you know, there are expectations in relationships. but who do you talk to in life? your best friend. sometimes your best friend just knows you in a different way than any family member could, because your best friend, you are not judgmental of each other, you were best friends through thick and thin. and it is not that they love you any more than your family members, but they love you differently. 3504 so the testimony from a best friend is really important. and of course, the warning labels. you cannot overstate the importance of the warning labels. this is not a product that caused disease and failed to carry a warning. this is a product, among -- one of the first consumer products the warning was ever put on. this warning has been on cigarettes for 50 years in one form or another. for 50 years. every pack of cigarettes she would have picked up had a warning from 1970 on. every advertisement that she saw for cigarettes had a warning. there were warnings everywhere, and people brought the warning to her attention, including mr. konzelman. he constantly brought the warning to her attention. but of course, as you know, i cross-examined dr. cummings on this, and although we had to impeach him several times and remind him of how he was changing his testimony, you know that dr. cummings in the end admitted that the public health community became active in 1950s and had bombarded the public with information about the dangers of smoking through the newspapers, on 3505 radio, on tv, the message was everywhere. you know, frankly, from the 1950s on, you would have had to be living under a rock. you would have had to be living under a rock not to know that public health was saying that smoking was dangerous. and sue -- and elaine konzelman was not living under a rock. she was an aware, intelligent, ambitious woman. she -- she watched the news. she read newspapers. she was college educated. elaine konzelman knew what was going on. what was her response to all this? well, what was her -- what was not her response? when people would confront her with all this information, she did not say, there is a controversy, there is a controversy, i'm not convinced. she did not say the cigarette companies say it is not proven. she did not say cigarettes are not dangerous. she did not say it is okay, i'm smoking a filtered cigarette, they are not dangerous, they are not dangerous. she did not say i know it is dangerous, but i'm addicted, and i cannot quit. now, a couple of family members said that she said things like that from time to time, but again, 3506 looking at all the evidence across the board, that is not how she responded. she ignored people when they would say something about it being dangerous because she did not want to hear it, because she wanted to continue smoking, or again, sometimes, when she was talking to people like her best friend, who she could be candid with, she would say things like, "i know it is not good for me. i know it is not good for me, but i like to smoke. i like to smoke." you know what, she had every right to feel that way. she is an adult. she gets to make her own decisions. in america, we get to take the risks that we want to take, and we are responsible for the risks we take. well, why is that important? well, let us look at a few examples of this. i mean, when you -- every time that she was provided information about the dangers of smoking, one way to look at this is, it was really a quitting opportunity. it was a quitting opportunity. so whenever people would talk to her about, hey, this is bad for you, it is bad for you, that was a fork in the road. that was a moment when she 3507 had to make a choice. did she act on their advice, or did she ignore that advice and keep doing it even though she was being reminded? here is what mr. konzelman told you. testimony from the time you met her, you began encouraging her to try to quit smoking, did not you? a. yes, i did. q. in fact, you told us that you probably encouraged her to quit smoking on the very first date you had with her; right? a. yes. q. but her response to you was just to keep on smoking, was not it? a. (nods head affirmatively.) q. one of the things you encouraged her to do was to cut down on the number of cigarettes she was smoking each day; right? a. yes. q. in fact, you told us you would say things to her, like, why do not you go an hour or so before you light another cigarette; right? a. sure. 3508 q. but she would never do that, would she? a. no. q. and when you were making these suggestions to mrs. konzelman, your view was that she did what she wanted to do; right? a. yes. again, she did not say to mr. konzelman it is not proven, or i'm smoking filtered cigarettes, they are okay, or yeah, i know, but i'm addicted, and i cannot quit. i mean, frankly, she just did not respond. and she did what she wanted to do. and she did -- and that is okay. but she was a decisive, independent, strong-willed woman, as we know from everything we have heard, and that is okay. that is okay. but she made her choices. she made her choices knowing the dangers she was taking. again, let us look at what -- a couple really important things you heard during this case. sue sweeney told you, she told you, from the best friend perspective, "she knew it was bad for her health." "she knew it was bad for her health. anyone knows that." sue sweeney lived through 3509 those years. she was elaine's age. she knows what was going on in the '60s. she saw all of the same things you are hearing. and mr. konzelman -- actually, this is -- this is -- frankly, this is an admission by him when he admitted this in his cross-examination. it is just completely, just one answer defeats the claim that she developed copd and died because of concealment, in other words, the claim that she developed copd and died because she did not know that smoking was dangerous, that is really what that claim boils down to. look at what mr. konzelman told us. "and during that time in the 1980s, when she was trying to quit, she realized that cigarettes were not good for her, did not she? "i believe so. i believe so." and that is from mr. konzelman asking you for $5.3 million in this case. i want to turn -- so that is why the concealment case fails, why the agreement to conceal fails. i want to talk with you briefly, if i can just steal five more minutes or so from you before our lunch hour, i want to talk to you briefly about why her addiction causation case 3510 fails, addiction causation. that is kind of a weird term, is not it, "addiction causation"? who would have ever thought you would spend three weeks of your life thinking about addiction causation like you have in this case. but what is addiction causation? the simplest way to think about it is, you look at the instruction, you listen to the argument, the real claim is that she died -- developed copd and died because she was unable to quit smoking, because she was unable to quit smoking. that addiction prevented her from quitting smoking. and here is what the evidence is. the evidence is she was not interested in quitting smoking in the 1980s. her daughter, sandy mattson, who came here live, admitted that on the stand. mr. konzelman admitted the same thing. in fact, his language he was -- used was that he conceded that he could not say, despite living with her and watching her, quote, try to quit for 20 times or so, he could not say, he could not say in his sworn testimony that those quit attempts were wholehearted before she got intubated and diagnosed, and then she quit. 3511 and as she demonstrated when she got diagnosed, she always had the ability to quit. it was not that she did not -- that she could not quit. it was not that she required significant daily ongoing counseling with nicotine therapy or support or anything like that. once she got diagnosed and said that is it for me, she stopped smoking, never smoked another cigarette, did not need nicotine replacement, never relapsed, walked away from it. she made a different choice. she made a different choice. so all this put together demonstrates that addiction to nicotine was not the cause of her copd and death. she did not develop copd and die because she could not quit. she developed copd and died because she chose to take the risks that she knew might occur. now, this morning, mr. rosen mentioned to you that r.j. reynolds has stipulated that smoking cigarettes was the medical cause of her copd leading to death, and we did because we did not want to waste your time on non-issues. we agree with that. we are not going to waste any time on that issue. but medical causation does not mean addiction 3512 causation. if it did, you would not be here answering the addiction causation question. those are two separate inquiries. one is medical causation. the addiction causation is really a legal causation question. just like we talked about in jury selection, it is a legal causation question. and here is where, again, you remember what we are doing is taking a quick look at the major gaps in the plaintiff's case. this is the single biggest evidentiary gap in the plaintiff's case. this is a case about addiction causation, a case about addiction causation. and plaintiff brought three witnesses, three witnesses to discuss addiction. dr. henningfield, dr. cummings, and dr. toll. and not a single one of them, not one of them, search your memories, search your notes, talk about it together, you will recall, not one of them, despite being on the stand for hours and hours, not one of them said anything about a central issue in the case. nobody said, in this whole trial, no witness has ever said that addiction caused elaine konzelman's copd. it is incredible, it is a central issue in the case, called three addiction witnesses, and nobody 3513 said it. nobody was even asked the question. nobody said it. a fair question that you might have had at the start of the case is did she know she should quit, did she know she should quit. well, you know the answer now. you know that everybody in her life for a long, long time asked her to quit. her best friend, sue sweeney; her daughter, sandra; her daughter, karen, that you heard from by deposition, she lives in california, did not make it here, you heard from her by deposition. her son, john, you heard from him by deposition. her dad; her niece lori; her son, ron; her husband, mr. konzelman; everybody asked her to quit. everybody asked her to quit. she exercised her right, decided not to, chose to continue smoking anyway, and, you know, that is her right, her responsibility. lori frost was very clear, although we had to remind her of what she told us, we had to remind her of what she told us, from what she admitted that what she said to elaine konzelman was that cigarettes are going to kill you, cigarettes are going to kill you, you have to quit smoking. you have to quit smoking. 3514 again, all this was in the context of watching lori's grandmother, elaine's mother, going through copd and die, and lori would watch this and said, i do not understand. she is watching this, she is watching this, but she is continuing to smoke anyway. and she would tell her very, you know, kind of in her face, hey, it is going to kill you if you do not stop. it is going to kill you. sue sweeney. we asked sue sweeney the question, here is what -- this was the exact quote that was read to you from her deposition. we asked sue sweeney if she wanted to quit smoking. here is what sue sweeney, best friend, said. "she never wanted to quit smoking. she never wanted to quit smoking. she loved to smoke. she told me she loved to smoke. she loved it." "she loved it." it is important, it is really important, because as you heard yesterday, in maybe the most boring two and a half hours of your life when we read dr. choy's testimony to you yesterday, my legs got tired of standing up here. so i know you got tired of listening to it, but you heard dr. choy say when we asked him, maybe even the most important question we asked him was, 3515 would she have been able to avoid her copd if she had quit smoking as late as 1985? and he said it is a possibility. she could have avoided her copd by quitting as late as 1985. there is no question, it is beyond dispute that in 1985 she knew that smoking was dangerous, that she knew it caused copd, but she did not quit. and you know, we know that she had symptoms of copd in the 1980s. i mean, you know, subsequently, some different things were said, but you know, you know you heard from this witness stand under oath, you heard what mr. konzelman told you about whether mrs. konzelman had symptoms of copd in the 1980s. testimony when you observed mrs. konzelman to have a cough in the 1980s, you believed it was caused by her smoking, did not you? a. yes. q. and when you would say something to her about her coughing being caused by her smoking in the 1980s, she did not say anything in response, did she? a. no. q. now, when you would tell her in the 1980s that 3516 you believed that her smoking was causing her wheezing, she did not have anything to say in response, did she? a. no. q. when you said something to mrs. konzelman about her shortness of breath in the 1980s being caused by her smoking, she did not have much to say in response, did she? a. no. q. and it is your understanding that mrs. konzelman's copd was quite severe when she was diagnosed; right? a. i believe so. okay. 1980s, he brought it to her attention, hey, that cough, hey, that shortness of breath, hey, that wheezing that you are having, elaine, those symptoms you are having, that is being caused by your smoking. being caused by your smoking. she did not say you are wrong. she did not say smoking does not cause that. she did not say my cigarettes are okay with filters. she did not say, "i know, alan, but i cannot quit." she did not say anything. she did not say anything. she just kept 3517 on smoking. and you heard lori frost yesterday. i mean, lori went back and forth on things, but you also heard her say that in the 1980s, ms. konzelman coughed like she had phlegm that she was coughing up, and that she experienced shortness of breath when just walking on level ground at the mall or when going up and down steps, or when going up and down steps. so the plaintiff's case about the plaintiff's claims for concealment and agreement to conceal and the claim about addiction causation, they just failed spectacularly in this case. neither one of them were proven by the facts of this case, by the facts of this case. and you cannot backfill and prove those claims with the engle findings or generic evidence. so let us talk for just a minute about the engle findings and generic evidence and the role that does play in this case, because mr. konzelman cannot prove his case about elaine and copd with the engle findings and generic evidence. look, the engle findings say what they say. they are serious findings. we take them seriously. we are not here to dispute them in any way. 3518 and you saw the generic evidence about tobacco company conduct. but over the years, a lot of stupid things were said. a lot of stupid things were written. especially when you look back at the hindsight we all have now, a lot of stupid things were said and written. and i'm not going to defend any of that. because that is not the issue in the case. the issue in the case is whether the plaintiffs have been able to use case-specific evidence, facts about elaine konzelman to connect those findings to her copd and death in a causal way. in other words, had they been able to demonstrate that those engle findings, that those things the tobacco companies said over time, were those the legal cause of elaine's illness? that is the issue before you. and you will see, the jury instruction is very clear, again, i'm not diminishing the engle findings, but the jury instruction tells you, i encourage you to look at this part of jury instruction number 12, "the findings may not be considered in determining whether the plaintiff has proven that elaine konzelman was a member of the 3519 engle class." i know we are asking you to do -- it is hard to tell you something and ask you to ignore it, but it cannot even be thought about when you are deciding class membership. "the findings do not establish that the defendant is liable in this case nor do they establish whether elaine konzelman was injured by defendant's conduct or the degree, if any, to which defendant's conduct was a legal cause of elaine konzelman's injuries or death." they cannot use the findings to prove those things. they have to use case-specific evidence. you know, a lot of evidence they brought to you was generic. you were told this morning that dr. cummings and dr. henningfield's testimony demonstrated that elaine was addicted. they did not know anything about her. both of them, they did not know when she started, they did not know what she smoked, what brands, they did not know how much she smoked, they did not know how long she smoked, or why she smoked and what she knew, whether she tried to quit or whether she was addicted. they did not know anything about elaine konzelman. they did not know anything. they 3520 could not provide any evidence that would help you answer the questions you are here to answer, which as we saw from the verdict form, they are all about elaine konzelman. they are all about elaine konzelman. you cannot answer those questions with evidence that does not have anything to do with mrs. konzelman. there is another aspect i want to address, the last topic before we watch two or three slides about dr. cummings. because one of the things you have in your instruction package is you have a believability of witnesses instruction, instruction number 3, and i've highlighted a couple things i would ask you to consider. one is you can -- you can -- you are the judges of the facts. you are the judges of the credibility of witnesses. you get to decide what weight, if any, to attach to different witness's testimony, and some of the factors you can consider are listed for you right here. one of them is the frankness or lack of frankness of the witness. the second is the reasonableness of the testimony of the witness. and i suggest to you that one of the ways that you can evaluate that is the consistency of the 3521 testimony of the witness. now, another thing you learned during this trial that you may hope to forget about and never think about again was impeachment. and that is when a witness changes their testimony on the stand and they are confronted with their prior sworn testimony from a deposition or from another trial to demonstrate that they are not testifying consistently so that you have that for your consideration in evaluating the believability of witnesses. you actually remember this about dr. cummings. we counted up 26 different times, 26 different times dr. cummings said one thing here in court, and i demonstrated that it was inconsistent, inconsistent with his prior sworn testimony in another transcript. you know, this is their witness who made $1.2 million over the course of his career testifying about tobacco companies, who does not know anything about elaine, and who testified inconsistently 26 different times and you got to watch the spectacularly interesting process of josh handing me transcripts and me confronting dr. cummings 26 different times with how he had changed his 3522 testimony. and this is a great breaking point, your honor, and i hope you all have a great lunch and see you after lunch. [#deleted sidebar#] mr. furr: thank you, please the court. 3534 welcome back anyway. before lunch -- let us take that down for one second. before lunch, i walked through a lot of the facts with you. i'm now going to attempt to tie those to the verdict form questions and the instructions of law that you have which is what you are here do. and i'm going to start by reminding you that really the way you render your verdict, of course, is you have a verdict form and that verdict form has eight questions that you will be asked to answer, and i'm going to walk through each of those questions and review a little bit of the evidence that you have already seen and show you how i view the questions and suggest to you what it means for the purpose of answering those questions. and i'm going to address each of the eight because it is my obligation to talk to you about each question, although i want to be very clear, both of the first two questions have a stop/go direction you will see on the verdict form. so if you answer the first question no, then you do not go any further, the case is over. or if you answer the second question yes, the case is also over there. so although i believe that both 3535 of those questions should be answered different ways, that result in you rendering verdict and completing your service, i'm going to go ahead and talk to you about each of them in case you get to them. i'm going to start with class membership. question number one on your verdict form is, "was elaine konzelman, one, addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, and two, if so, was such addiction a legal cause of her chronic obstructive pulmonary disease?" okay. so the class membership question really has two components to it. one is addiction, the second is addiction causation. mr. konzelman has to prove both of those things to you. if he only proves one and not the other, then your verdict would be for r.j. reynolds on this question, your answer would be no. so you have got to prove both components. first, he has to prove that ms. konzelman was addicted to nicotine, second, he has to prove the addiction causation element we have been talking about. and when you look at your instruction, you will see what he is got to prove is that but for addiction to nicotine, she would not have developed 3536 her copd. i'm going to start with the addiction question. and the evidence demonstrates that he failed to prove that elaine konzelman was addicted to nicotine. now, you do not have a definition of addiction in your instructions. but you get to decide what addiction should mean for the purpose of this lawsuit and what you are being asked to do. i'm going to suggest to you one way to think about it that would be helpful is, especially in a case where you are being asked to render a verdict of $5.3 million, one of the ways to think about addiction is was she an involuntary smoker. was she smoking against her will. was she only smoking because the power of nicotine or was she choosing to smoke. the evidence has been pretty clear that knowing that she is a daily smoker is not enough. dr. cummings, dr. henningfield, dr. giakas, everybody agreed that not every daily smoker is addicted. you have to drill a lot deeper and look a lot closer at their smoking pattern and why they smoke. mrs. konzelman was never diagnosed as addicted 3537 before this lawsuit. that is a diagnosis that has occurred only here. you are going to have all the medical records, and you can look at them all and you will see, none of them describe her as ever having been addicted. there is no medical record that shows that she ever saw a doctor for treatment for addiction. there is no medical record showing that she was ever treated with nicotine-replacement therapy to prevent relapse. and, in fact, here is another gap in plaintiff's case, no medical doctor came to you in this case and told you elaine konzelman was addicted. the witness that testified that she was addicted was dr. toll, who is a phd, not a medical doctor. and we are going to compare his credentials to dr. giakas' credentials so you can evaluate which of them is in a better position to make a diagnosis of addiction. dr. giakas -- excuse me. another thing, there was not any disagreement about is, look, argument being why else would she smoke, why else would she smoke so much? well, all the witnesses, dr. toll, dr. cummings, dr. henningfield, dr. giakas, everybody told you 3538 that some smokers enjoy smoking and they simply want to continue smoking, and mrs. konzelman was one of those. you have heard what the evidence is about her smoking, from mr. konzelman and the experts talked about it, both dr. giakas and dr. toll, you were told the following, mr. konzelman told you she enjoyed the taste, she enjoyed the process of smoking, the physical manipulation of the product, the hand-to-mouth stuff, and inhaling and exhalation of the smoke, she enjoyed it. she enjoyed smoking with a cocktail, a lot of people do. she enjoyed smoking with coffee. and mr. konzelman told you smoking seemed to keep her spirits up. and let us remind ourselves what kind of person mrs. konzelman was. mr. rosen started talking about this. she was not a weak, indecisive, addiction-prone individual who was out of control and unable to make decisions in her life. she was the opposite. she was a strong, independent woman who chose how she wanted to live life. you heard that late in her life, she became a small business owner, started up a couple different companies. everyone who knows her told you she was 3539 a decisive person, that she was strong-willed. and, you know, what you heard was she was so strong-willed that when she made up her mind, that is it, no one could change her mind from doing something that she wanted to, and you were told no one could make her do something she did not want to do. so she had the ability to make her choices and follow through with her own independent thought process about how she wanted to live her life. again, best friend, sue sweeney, was asked, sue sweeney told us that she could remember one time that she asked elaine konzelman why she smoked. and here is the testimony that was read to you. "i can remember one time i asked her why she smoked so much, and she said, 'because i love to smoke. i love it.'" sue told you she just loved smoking. she did not say sue, i'm addicted. she did not say, i want to quit, but i cannot quit. she did not say i'm dependent on nicotine or anything like that. she said, "i love to smoke." so let us talk about an expert you saw, dr. giakas, day before yesterday. md psychiatrist that we brought you. a clinician who devotes his life to helping people with problems, for decades 3540 he is helped people with serious psychological problems, including any addiction problems that they have. he told you about his geriatric psychiatric treatments, his adolescents. he is treated them from a to z, and he always addresses their addiction problems too. he is a clinician in the field, talking to people, working with them, helping them change their behaviors and achieve their goals, that is who he is. his credentials are outstanding. a medical doctor at the yale university, does not get much better than that, chief resident at yale, board certified in four areas of psychiatry, 25 years of treating patients, 150 patient visits, he is treated patients for heroin, cocaine, alcohol, and other addictions. he is treated hundreds for nicotine addiction. this is a doctor, you heard -- you can decide. this is a doctor who knows what he is talking about. he knows human behavior. he understands how people make decisions and how they choose to live their life and how people can change their lives if they want to change their life. and you know what, he did charge $95,000 for 3541 his work in this case. but why did he do that? he read. he read every deposition. he reviewed every medical record. he read the fact witness depositions. he read the expert depositions. he poured over that information. he empathized, he sympathized, he thought about it, he applied the addiction criteria to it. he wanted to be prepared. and you heard him talk about this case. if there was any witness who came in here and had an encyclopedic knowledge of all the facts of this case, it was dr. giakas. he communicated clearly, hopefully effectively, and that is why it took him that much time to prepare, because he did the work necessary to come in and talk to you about all the discovery in this case and all the records. and he told you, i mean, this was, again, a little tedious, i'll be the first to admit it, but he outlined for you the criteria that he as a psychiatrist uses to diagnose whether somebody is addicted, and he walked through them one by one. and you heard his explanation and his criteria. he knows what he is talking about it. he told you what it means. he told you how to apply it in the context of diagnosing if somebody 3542 is addicted. and then he took that criterion and he applied them to the facts of this case so he could evaluate whether or not she was addicted. and he sorted through the facts and he came out and he told you, his expert medical opinion, the only doctor who gave an opinion about addiction, that she did not meet the criteria for addiction. now, dr. toll. let us contrast dr. giakas, the medical doctor clinician, with dr. toll. dr. toll is a researcher, basically. you heard he spends a lot of time doing clinical trials on whether one therapy works or whether one approach works. he is not a medical doctor. he is not board certified in anything, including his field. he is certainly not board certified in anything related to addiction. he cannot even write -- you know, he is not a medical doctor. it is not a criticism, but he just has a different type of expertise, he is a researcher. he cannot write prescriptions. he told you he sees about seven patients per week. and how did he get here? how did he get here? he was recruited to participate in this litigation by his friend, dr. cummings, who we have already talked about, and you have seen what 3543 dr. cummings' intent is, and that is who dr. toll is, and, frankly, he just does not stack up against dr. giakas. his expertise does not match dr. giakas's expertise. take a step back and look at a full review of addiction. because dr. giakas, as he walked through those criteria, he really painted a word picture for you, he told you what an addicted smoker looks like and the types of behaviors he is seen in them and the attributes that they have. and here is what he told you. he said people that are addicted are involuntary smokers, they frequently hate smoking, they smoke against their will, they are not in control of smoking, they do not want to smoke, they make multiple serious quit attempts with help from doctors and others, and they fail, and they just cannot beat it. they get diagnosed with serious illnesses and they keep smoking anyway, even after diagnosis. they hit rock bottom, they seek help from family and friends. they try every available therapy they can. and they continue having multiple relapses despite exhausting their efforts to try to quit. if you have a smoker like that, you have an addicted smoker, there is no question about that. 3544 but that is not what we have here. if you compare that to mrs. konzelman, you know that she did not want to quit. she enjoyed smoking. she liked the taste, she liked drinking -- having a cigarette with alcohol, all the things we just looked at. she was able to control her smoking. she said she wanted to smoke. and then she quit the first time she was really motivated. when she got diagnosed and it came home to her, she is done. she quit. walked away from it and never smoked again. but you have got to realize, she did not seek any help from family or friends or doctors or anybody. she did not use any of the psychotherapy aids or the pharmacotherapy aids or nicotine replacement. she did not try any of this. i mean, in these quit attempts which the family described and which dr. giakas described to you, they were really more quit gestures, they are more quit gestures than they are quit attempts because she did not really want to quit. they were being done because you saw -- remember the chart we looked at everybody telling her to quit, she wanted them off her back. 3545 she was under a lot of pressure. everybody telling her to quit, everybody telling her it is going to kill you. you know, she would respond by going through the motions of trying to quit. we heard she did not do the types of things that somebody really does when they want to quit. we will take a little closer look at that. again, she never smoked after diagnosis. and as you can see, she is a very different experience than somebody who is addicted. dr. giakas was very clear, again, the only medical doctor that you heard from, he told you that she was not an addicted smoker, so i would submit to you when you get to verdict form question 1, the answer should be no. the first part of the class membership, she is not addicted, and if you find that, your obligation as jurors will be to sign and date the verdict form, and that will be the end of this trial. but she -- like i said, i'm going to talk about not only the rest of this question, but all the questions because remember we talked about there are two parts of addiction causation -- to addiction -- excuse me. the question number one of class membership. 3546 the second part is addiction causation because they have to prove but for addiction to nicotine, elaine konzelman would not have developed copd. now, again, plaintiff did not bring you any expert, they called three addiction experts and nobody told you, nobody told you that addiction caused her disease. nobody told you that. what does addiction causation really mean? again, you have got lots of legal instructions. i suggest to you the way to think about it, it would be helpful for your deliberations, is did the plaintiff prove to you that she was unable to quit and avoid her disease? did they prove to you that she was unable to quit and avoid her disease? talked about this, i will not belabor it again. nobody told you that addiction caused her disease. her treater did not tell you that, we read dr. choy yesterday, he never said that. dr. toll did not say that addiction caused her disease. dr. cummings did not, dr. henningfield did not. you heard from dr. giakas, he certainly did not. nobody told you that addiction caused her disease. and, you know, addiction causation is an important element of this case that requires -- you need expert testimony to help you understand. i 3547 mean, this is not a do-it-at-home piece of ikea furniture that you put together by yourself. you need expert guidance on an issue like this, and you did not get it. does addiction prevent quitting? does it prevent quitting? you know it does not. dr. henningfield told you that the smoker must decide whether to continue smoking or decide to quit. dr. toll told you it is important that smokers make the choice to quit smoking. and although i had to impeach him with his prior sworn testimony on this, as on many other issues, dr. cummings admitted that his prior sworn testimony was that anyone who wants to quit can quit. anyone who wants to quit can quit. and he also told you something else that is really important in this case. dr. cummings again, after i impeached him, admitted that he had previously testified that a smoker is fully responsible for making the choice to quit. and that only makes sense, does not it? who else could make the choice to quit for a smoker? nobody holds a gun to their head to make them smoke a cigarette in the first place and nobody holds a 3548 gun to their head to make them quit. it is a voluntary human choice behavior. people make choices about whether to smoke or not. and dr. cummings went further, he told you that after all the years he spent researching nicotine, again, he is a researcher not a medical doctor, but he told you that smokers have a responsibility, they have a responsibility to quit smoking. and elaine chose to smoke -- excuse me, mrs. konzelman, sorry, i do not mean to be informal. she chose to smoke and that is okay, but it was not because she could not quit, because millions and millions of other people were making the choice to quit at the same time that she was making the choice to smoke. as dr. cummings explained to you, millions of heavily-addicted smokers have quit in the past. by 1965, the year after the surgeon general's report that we looked at, 17.8 million people had quit dating back to the mid 1950s, when all of the publicity began coming out about the dangers of smoking. in the four years after the warning label went on cigarette packs, 13 million people quit in four 3549 years. that is over 5,000 people a day. 5,000 people a day in this country made the choice to quit and choose health. she was making the choice to continue smoking and take the risk. in the 15 years, i chose this number -- this year because the earliest evidence we have of mrs. konzelman even making quit gestures are the late '70s. but in the 15 years prior to that, 30 million americans had made the choice of health where she was making the choice to not even try to quit. thousands were quitting every day while she was choosing to smoke and not try to quit. did the actions of the tobacco companies prevent people from quitting? you heard a lot of evidence about things the tobacco companies did, about their advertising, about their reassurance message. and i'm not going to dispute any of that. but did it really prevent people from quitting? did it prevent mrs. konzelman from quitting? oh, well, all this quitting, while these thousands of people were quitting a day, while millions of people were quitting a year, the campaign of what dr. cummings described as the campaign of doubt was going on. that did not 3550 prevent quitting. he talked to you about the modern american cigarette and the control of nicotine delivery. but these people were smoking modern american cigarettes. that did not prevent 30 million people from quitting in 1964 to 1979. and you heard about the advertising campaign from dr. cummings. but people made their choices. people still made their choices. it did not prevent people from quitting. those 30 million people who quit between '64 and '79 were exposed to the same type of advertising campaigns that she was. was she different from the 30 million people that quit? why was she different? why did she keep smoking while they quit? were the cigarettes she smoked more addictive than their cigarettes? no evidence of that. was her brain affected differently than the smokers who quit? no evidence of that. was she exposed to advertising different than they were? no evidence of that. did she smoke for longer or smoke more? did she start at an earlier age? was she genetically prone to addiction? there is no evidence that she was different in any way except for one. and you know what that is 3551 already. they made the choice to choose health, she loved to smoke, she loved to smoke and she made the choice to not try to quit. the only way that she was different than all the people that quit was she made a choice not even to try to quit before 1979. so here is a question for you, was she an involuntary smoker who was unable to quit despite desperately wanting and trying to do so? was that who mrs. konzelman was or was she a smoker who enjoyed smoking and wanted to continue? you know, we have talked about this a couple times, but the fact is that human nature being what it is, when we are doing things that we know that are bad for us and people are asking us to quit, we will say i want to quit, i'm going to quit, but both dr. cummings and dr. giakas told you that some smokers say they want to quit, but when you actually talk to them and talk to them a little bit more about what is going on with them, you find out they have no intention of quitting. dr. toll told you, he said some smokers say they want to quit to placate others. and this is the language he came up with, that is why i've been using this language. he said "some smokers quit 3552 for show. some smokers quit for show." and that is what mrs. konzelman was doing during the years that she was making those quit gestures that dr. giakas explained to you. she had many, many, many quitting opportunities that she just dismissed when her family and friends were warning her. her son told you that he was on her all the time about her smoking and how she should quit, and she just reacted with indifference and discounted his concerns. sue sweeney told you, her best friend, sue sweeney, again, that she would shake her shoulders like who cares when sue would tell her she needed to quit. mr. konzelman, i mean, you know, sometimes little, small descriptions tell you a lot. first date, he is talked to her about the need to quit. she lights up a cigarette in response. he told you that he warned her consistently, but she kept smoking and did what she wanted to do. you know, we asked dr. toll, so when someone does not respond verbally or they respond with indifference or they shrug their shoulders, what is going on, and he told you that that is a passive way 3553 of someone saying, no, i am not going to take your advice and quit. i am not going to take your advice and quit. and you heard, this was a pattern that mrs. konzelman exhibited when loved ones, family and friends, would confront her about her smoking. sue sweeney again, this is language that was read to you from her deposition. sue sweeney told you, she said, "i know i have a nice life, but i want to smoke. alan wants me to stop." but she did not want to stop. "i want to smoke. i want to smoke." is what she told sue sweeney. she did not tell her i am addicted. she did not tell her i want to quit, but i cannot. she told sue "i want to smoke." what did mrs. konzelman do? she made quit gestures. one of the ways to look at it is did she do the things that you now know people do when they are serious about quitting smoking? she never did those things. she never used any sort of nicotine replacement. she never went to the doctor. she never went to a smoking clinic. she never asked mr. konzelman for help. she never asked family members for help. she never asked a friend for help. 3554 think about this. if you were doing something that you know could result in premature disease and death, and you wanted to quit doing that, but you could not quit on your own, what would you do? you would reach out for help. you would turn to people you trust. you would turn to your friends, your family members, your doctors. that is what you would do if, if you wanted to quit. if you just wanted to get people off your back, you would tell them i'm trying, but i cannot. quit for a day or two and go right back to it. that is what you would do if you did not really want to quit. her daughter, karen, told you, you know, you were told -- some people came in and said she tried to quit a lot, some family members. some family members and friends saw things differently. karen told you by deposition, she was asked, "you do not recall your mom ever actually trying to quit other than the time she quit for good; is that right?" karen said, "that is what i said." best friend sue sweeney was asked this question: "prior to her final quit, had you ever known elaine to go without a cigarette for a day? "no." "no." 3555 mr. konzelman told you that based on all his observations and notwithstanding his testimony about 20 quit attempts, or gestures, that he could not say, he could not say under oath that she ever made a wholehearted quit attempt before 1995. well, halfhearted quit attempts, quit gestures do not get it. if you really want to quit, you make wholehearted quit attempts. the class membership instruction on addiction has this language on it, it is number 10, it says that "but for an addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine, the copd would not have occurred." did mrs. konzelman develop copd because of her addiction to nicotine and because she wanted to quit, but could not, or did she develop copd because she continued smoking because she wanted to smoke and did not want to quit? and that is really the issue for you on class membership. and again, sue sweeney, this is what was read to you. it was not a one-time thing. it was over and over and over. because she loved it. elaine said she loved smoking, "i love to smoke. i love it." she said she loved to smoke, she loved to smoke, she just wanted to smoke. she loved it. over and over and over they had discussions where 3556 elaine said she loved to smoke. not i'm addicted. not i want to quit, i cannot, but "i love to smoke." and you also heard that you could not change her mind when she made it up, and no one told her what to do. well, who could have altered the outcome of this case? who could have prevented the smoking-related copd? only mrs. konzelman. only she could have made the choice to quit, as dr. cummings explained to you, the choice is 100 percent in the control of the smoker, but elaine did -- excuse me, mrs. konzelman did what she wanted to do. and then she got intubated, she got diagnosed and she quit. she quit. did she relapse? did she need medical help to stay quit? did she need nicotine replacement? did she need counseling? did she struggle with it? no. she never smoked another cigarette. doctor told you about -- dr. giakas told you she did not need medical assistance, she did not need nicotine-replacement therapy, she never needed any assistance to stay smoke free, she never relapsed. you know, an interesting thing dr. giakas explained to you, while she was intubated, had she been exhibiting withdrawal symptoms from 3557 cigarettes, they could have put a nicotine patch on her. they could have put a nicotine patch on her if she was withdrawing from cigarettes, but we have no record -- no medical record demonstrates that she ever needed the nicotine patch. you know, the facts sort out like this. when you shake it all out, look what comes out the bottom. she smoked because she loved to smoke, and she never smoked again once she chose not to. she was in control. she was able to make decisions and follow through. and the choice and the responsibility for her smoking decision was hers. her choices were the only legal cause of her copd. the only legal cause of her copd was her love of smoking and her choice to continue smoking until she was diagnosed, because she always had the ability to quit, and she just did not want to do so. just did not want to do so. so again, for a second independent reason, for a second independent reason, you only need one, but for a second independent reason, she is not a member of the engle class, because she was not addicted, and addiction did not cause her copd and death. as you will see on your verdict form, if you 3558 answer this question no, then your foreman will sign the verdict form and you will date it and you will return it as your verdict. the next question i want to go to is the question about concealment and agreement to conceal. these -- i'm going to skip over for just a moment question 2, which is your statute of limitation question on the verdict form. question 3 and 4, your concealment and agreement to conceal. and this is -- on this claim, the test is going to be did the -- mr. konzelman prove that but for her reliance on reynolds' concealment or omission of a material fact not otherwise known or available, she would have acted differently and avoided her copd and death. and you have instructions on this. on both of those, concealment and agreement to conceal, they are about a page long. they are about a page long. but you can boil them down to something very simple. the test here is did she continue smoking and develop copd and die because she did not know smoking was dangerous, because she did not know smoking was dangerous. 3559 because think about it. you cannot harm somebody by concealing information from them if they already know it. if they already know it. if somebody already knows something, you cannot harm them by concealing it, because they already know it. and so if you think about, looking at this question that way, did she develop copd and die because she did not know smoking was dangerous, the answer to question 3 and 4 are actually pretty simple for you. i'm not going to belabor this. but you have seen this. i'm not going to do it again. when you get to these questions, all you have to do is think about this wheel that we have drawn of all the sources of awareness. the red lines here are whatever is going to her, direct personalized warnings, personalized -- personal to her. the blue lines are going out to the lines or the warnings she got from everybody else. she got from everybody else. fair question, was she the type of person who was capable of processing that information? could she understand that information? if she would not -- you know, if she was incapable of 3560 understanding that information, that would be a different plaintiff. that would be something different. you know that is not who she was. mr. konzelman, i asked him, "you and mrs. konzelman were both educated, informed people, were not you?" "yes, sir." and there is no question about that. sophisticated, educated, informed, successful people, that is who they were. she was able to process all this information. her best friend told us she was knowledgeable. she was very knowledgeable. she knew it was bad for her. anybody knows that. she knew it was bad for her. anybody knows that. this is an easy question in this case. the evidence is just overwhelming, that notwithstanding whatever the tobacco company did or did not do, that mrs. konzelman, not some other smoker, not smokers in general, mrs. konzelman knew that smoking was bad for her. dr. cummings. again, i had to impeach him to get him to admit that this was his prior sworn testimony, but he admitted virtually everyone knew and heard that smoking caused disease by 1954. i know it is kind of hard to take ourselves back 3561 there. i mean, i'm not quite that old, so it is kind of hard to imagine what things were like back then. but when those first human studies came out and those first animal studies came out, the information was everywhere. there were huge news stories. the information was everywhere. newspapers, tv, the radio, public health messages, it was everywhere, and everybody knew it, and everybody heard, and dr. cummings admitted that that was the case. but the drumbeat of information never stopped. in fact, it just built over time. you have heard about that 1964 surgeon general's report. you know, think about this context. 1964, mrs. konzelman is born in 1930. she is 34 years old in 1964, married, four kids, an adult, successful person, a very knowledgeable, aware person. 1964, the surgeon general's report came out. is she the type of person who would have known about it? well, dr. cummings told you that virtually all of the american public heard about the release of the '64 report and that there was very high public awareness about the release of the '64 report. and of course you know that awareness went 3562 straight to the heart of the konzelman family because her father saw this warning label that was put on in 1966, and he quit and promised and told everybody smoking will kill you, you need to quit. he told the grandkids, if you do not smoke until you are 18, i will give you a thousand dollars. he was very serious about this matter, obviously. that is a lot of money back then. he was very serious, the message to all the grandchildren were unequivocal, and you heard he talked to elaine and told her it would kill her. dr. horn, again, taking ourselves back in time, sometimes a single statement can tell you so much about what is going on. dr. horn was in charge of the clearinghouse on smoking and health. that was the clearing -- that was the federal government organization that was responsible for educating the public about the dangers of smoking. he was interviewed in 1968. 1968. and he said this. "you could stand on a rooftop and shout 'smoking is dangerous' at the top of your lung and you would not be telling anyone anything they did not already know." you would not be telling anybody anything they did not already know. certainly you were not telling elaine konzelman 3563 anything that she did not already know. dr. cummings told you, you know, the warnings are an important part of this case that should not be overlooked. the warnings are really important. you have got a consumer product that says right on the side of the pack that it may be hazardous for your health or it is dangerous for your health and causes certain diseases, and dr. cummings candidly admitted that every time she picked up a pack of cigarettes from 1970 to 1985 that she learned that the health message she got was that smoking was dangerous to her. smoking was dangerous to her. and we know that that warning label and its implications were brought home to her over and over including from her husband, mr. konzelman. here is his testimony. testimony when you had your conversation with mrs. konzelman about that warning label, you told her that the warning label says that cigarettes are dangerous, did not you? a. yes. q. she did not have any response, did she? 3564 a. no. she did not say no, my cigarettes are filtered. she did not say i know, but i am addicted and i cannot quit. she just did not respond. it was back in that passive-aggressive mode of saying i hear you, but i'm not going to follow your advice. and everybody was talking to her then. i mean, john gilbert, her son from california who testified by deposition told you that by the 1970s, because of concerns for her health, everybody was advising her to quit. all of her kids, imagine that, she watched her -- she heard from her father. she watched her mother. she sees her sister get sick. and then her kids behind her are telling her she needs to quit. there is no question she knew it was dangerous and bad for her health and she needed to quit. even their -- their exert, dr. toll, admitted that her children persistently warned her about the dangers of smoking because they were concerned about her health. they were concerned about her health. 3565 and the message was brought home to her in another very powerful way, and that was when mr. konzelman told his wife about the experience he had had with cigarettes and what had happened to him and how he had quit and why. and he told you about that. testimony and, sir, as you told mr. rosen, you are a former smoker; right? a. yes. q. now, you believed that was dangerous to your health back in the 1960s, did not you? a. yes. q. and you quit smoking in july of 1977, did not you? a. yes. q. you decided to quit smoking because you were having chest pains; right? a. yes. q. that you thought were due to your smoking; right? a. right. q. you told your wife about when you quit 3566 smoking, did not you? a. yes, i did. q. and you told her about the chest pains that led you to quit, did not you? a. yes. q. and you told her how you quit smoking, did not you? a. yes. q. and when you told mrs. konzelman the story of why you quit smoking and how you quit, she responded by lighting another cigarette, did not she? a. yes. so now not just mom and dad, the kids, the friends, the niece, the packages; her husband is telling her too, looking across the table at his wife, telling her about his experience and how he perceived it to be affecting his health and how he quit, and she does not respond. she goes back to that pattern of responding with an indifference and passive-aggressiveness and not responding. she does not want to hear it. she does not want to hear it. and, you know, actually, mr. konzelman's 3567 testimony lines up perfectly with the statement we just saw from dr. horn who said in 1968, you could shout from the rooftops that smoking is dangerous from the top of your lungs, you would not be telling anybody anything they did not know. mr. konzelman just told you that he knew it was dangerous by the 1960s. again, the warnings. the warnings. you just cannot overestimate the power of the warnings. i mean, we asked mr. konzelman about the warnings and about what they meant to him, and he told us you could not pick up a pack of cigarettes without seeing the warning. here was his testimony. you could hardly pick up a pack of cigarettes without seeing the warning. remind you, the first warning went on in 1966. the second warning went on in 1970. a set of four rotating warnings, including a warning about emphysema per se, emphysema specifically went on in 1985, at a time when she still could have quit and could have avoided her copd. and as mr. konzelman told you, you could not miss it, you could not miss the warnings. of course, they also were in advertisements by 1971 on also. 3568 but friend sue sweeney, the sworn deposition testimony, "did you ever hear elaine say that she was confused about the dangers of smoking? "no. "did you ever hear elaine say that smoking was not harmful to her health? "no." she was not confused. she was bombarded with information about the dangers. she knew that information, and she understood that information, and she did not rely on anything any tobacco company said when making her decisions about whether to smoke or not. you know, mr. konzelman was married to her 30 years, including 14 years in which she was still smoking. and he told you that he constantly talked to her about her smoking. and here is what else he told you. he told you that she did not rely on tobacco companies when making decisions. here is his testimony that you saw right before you. testimony yes. you do not recall mrs. konzelman ever 3569 talking about anything that the r.j. reynolds tobacco company ever did or said? a. i do not think she knew what i -- what r.j. reynolds did with -- through the tobacco. q. you do not recall her ever talking about what any other tobacco company had ever done or said, do you? a. not that i know of. q. and you do not recall mrs. konzelman talking about anything that the tobacco institute had ever done or said, do you? a. not that i remember. and imagine the discussions in that house, one spouse talking to another, pointing out the warnings to her, telling her how he thought it was harming his health and why he quit, his own words constantly, persistently asking her to quit, and never did she say r.j. reynolds says there is controversy. r.j. reynolds said it is not dangerous. r.j. reynolds said it has not been proven. philip morris, brown & williamson, lorillard, liggett, american, any other tobacco company you want to name, tobacco institute, any other related 3570 tobacco entity, she never defended what she was doing by referencing them. you know, we talked up front about class actions over -- the case about generalized tobacco company conduct is over. but the task here is whether plaintiffs have the evidence to prove that the actions of the tobacco company directly caused mrs. konzelman's disease. and, you know, you saw that stuff from ed horrigan, you saw that stuff from jim johnston. i told you i'm not going to try to defend the statements that they made at the time they made them. i'm not going to try to defend that, but that is not the issue of the case. because what you did not hear, what you did not hear in this case is that elaine konzelman was ever confused or told anybody that i'm going to continue smoking. ed horrigan says it is not proved. the ceo of reynolds says it is not proved. jim johnston says it is not proved. or even generically any tobacco industry executive says it not proved. she never said that to mr. konzelman. now, a couple of kids, they have a different recollection, but he was married to her for 30 years, 14 years when she was a smoker. he was on 3571 her constantly. you can imagine that she felt pressure to quit smoking. her spouse is sitting across the table saying this to her. he told me she never -- she never referenced any of that stuff. all right, this whole issue of filters and whether or not she kept smoking because she was misled into believing that filtered cigarettes were safe and okay to smoke. well, here are the facts. it was the public health community who endorsed filtered cigarettes. it was the public health community who reported that cigarettes were safer. and it was the public health community that encouraged smokers to switch to filtered cigarettes in the '50s, '60s, '70s, '80s, and '90s. but every pack of filtered cigarettes carried the same warnings as unfiltered cigarettes. so whether you were smoking filtered cigarettes or unfiltered cigarettes, people got the same message. they got the same message. and certainly the message was the surgeon general's warnings. you heard mr. konzelman say she tried to quit 20 times in the 1980s. this all occurred after he married her in 1981. she was smoking filtered 3572 cigarettes then. if she believed that filtered cigarettes were okay, if she believed that filtered cigarettes were safe, why was she trying to quit because she believed cigarettes were dangerous? all those quit attempts that he described was when she was smoking filtered cigarettes. ladies and gentlemen, plaintiff just has not produced the evidence to you on questions 3 and 4 of your verdict form. they have not shown you that she was injured by concealment of information about the dangers of smoking. why? because she knew it. you cannot hurt somebody by concealing information that they already know. same for the agreement to conceal. she could not have been harmed by any agreement to conceal because she knew it already. she knew it already. you simply cannot hurt somebody by concealing something from them that they already know. so when you get to questions 3 and 4 on your verdict form, we would suggest that the answer should be no to each of those questions. statute of limitations. the test you will see is the way their claim is time barred because she should have known through the exercise of 3573 reasonable care that she had copd before may 5th, 1990, and that there was a reasonable possibility that it was caused by smoking. the critical -- as the instruction will tell you, it was not when she was diagnosed, it was when the copd manifested. well, let us look at the evidence. the evidence is the copd that she had manifest in the '80s, she had cough, phlegm, shortness of breath, wheezing, and although people went back and forth on it, lori frost, sue sweeney, mr. konzelman, everybody admitted that she had all those symptoms in the '80s. now, you heard this morning that the centerpiece of mr. rosen's argument was that the most important evidence is the 1995 medical record on her admission that said that she did not have these prior symptoms. but here is what else you heard in the case. dr. toll told you that she tended to underreport her symptoms, that she underreported her symptoms, and he also told you that -- we asked him this question, and we talked about the fact that the symptoms she denies having "is inconsistent with the other evidence in this case? "right." 3574 this document is the outlier. all the fact witnesses told you about the symptoms she was having that she did not report to the physician. these are not independent findings of this physician. this physician only knew what she told him, and she told him she was not having those symptoms. so, of course, that is what he wrote down. now, you were also told that she was not having any respiratory symptoms before the day she got intubated in 1995. but you remember mr. konzelman's testimony, let me go back to that. mr. konzelman's testimony, he told you that before, before she was first intubated, the ambulance drivers were called so many times for her breathing problems to come and get her and take her to the hospital that they had the address memorized. they had the address memorized. of course she was having breathing problems from the 1980s on. she -- the ambulance was getting called over and over to come to her house and take her to the hospital. dr. kreitzer yesterday told you that she had moderate to severe copd in 1995, and the important thing to remember there is he told you it takes 3575 about four to five years to go from mild to moderate, another four to five years at least to go from moderate to severe. so if she was having borderline severe testimony [sic] in 1995, using those guidelines, that copd would have started in the 1980s. dr. kreitzer also told you that -- again, this was a little technical, but he took the information he had about her, and he showed you how the flow loop volume showed that she had severe copd in 1995 based on her pft, and that it takes ten or more years to develop that. so, again, that puts her copd back to the mid 1980s. he told you her diffusion capacity showed severe copd, and it takes ten years for somebody to have that attribute of their copd, also. the evidence was overwhelming that she was having symptoms in the 1980s. the medical tests prove it. the witness's personal observations demonstrate it. it manifested before may 5th, 1990. the only real question left is did she have reason to know that it was related to her smoking? did she have reason to know? well, we know what the answer is because everybody told her, everybody 3576 was telling her it was related to her smoking. sue sweeney again, "what did you tell her?" "i told her it was not good for her health. "when did you tell her that? "her lungs, when she would cough. i do not know exactly the date. several times i told her." when she would cough, people would connect the dots for her and say, "elaine, that is your smoking. you need to quit." mr. konzelman, you know, this is what he said, he later tried to tie it to remembering someplace where he lived, but when i cross-examined him, this is what he said in front of you, in the 1980s he remembered saying to her, "your shortness of breath, your wheezing, and your coughing is being caused by your smoking." of course she knew or should have known that the symptoms she was experiencing in the 1980s were caused by her smoking, and she should have known that they were related to copd. because this is the most interesting aspect of why she should have known. dr. cummings told you that one of the most powerful messages you can get -- and we talked about this a little bit -- is when a family member, 3577 someone you love is diagnosed with a disease like emphysema, when you look in the face of the family member and watch what they are going through, it is undeniable what cigarette smoking can cause. and you know that her mother had copd, that the symptoms started in the '70s. beginning with the '80s, she was in and out of the hospital. you know, it is a sad fact, it is just awful, but she died from her copd in 1987. and, you know, mrs. konzelman was having the same symptoms that her mother was having in the '70s, and people were telling her, "it is from your smoking, and you need to stop. look what it is doing to your mother." she had every reason to know that she had early copd and that her copd was related to her smoking. so i suggest to you, again, when you get to verdict form question 2, then you look carefully at whether she should have known before may 5th, 1990 that she had copd and that there was a reasonable possibility, a reasonable possibility that her copd was caused by smoking cigarettes, the evidence is pretty clear the answer should be yes. and, again, this is a second, sort of a hard stop. you will see the directions between the questions in your verdict form. you will see when 3578 you answer this question yes, that is the end of it and you return the verdict and the case is concluded. comparative fault. mr. rosen talked to you about comparative fault. again, there is going to be a question where if you get to this question you have the chance to allocate fault between the parties. it is important to remember the plaintiffs have the burden of proof. they have to prove the defendant's fault. it does not start at one. it does not start at 50/50. the plaintiffs have to prove the defendant's fault. but it is not -- the most important thing to remember about this question, it is not a comparison of who acted worse or whose choices were worse or who had more information. here is what it is. you will see in your instruction, the assignment of fault relates only to actions which were a legal cause of elaine konzelman's copd and death. it is a comparison of each party's contribution to her death from the perspective of fault. it has to be only the conduct that caused her disease. you may see a lot of things that you did not 3579 like about what the tobacco companies did or said. i'm not going to spend any time debating that, getting into that, or talking about it because it does not matter if it was not a cause of her copd and death, because that is what this question is about. i will not go through this again. you know she knew smoking was dangerous and she knew she should quit, but she did not want to because she loved it and -- but she was demonstrating she was able to quit. dr. choy, again, told you that she could have avoided copd and death if she quit smoking in 1985. in 1985, she was 55 years old. she had been warned about the dangers since the 1960s. but she did not make a serious quit attempt in time to avoid it. up until that time, she was not really making a serious quit attempt, doing the things we have talked about that people do when they are serious. remember dr. cummings' testimony, a smoker is fully responsible for making the choice whether to try to quit. the choice to quit smoking is 100 percent in control of the smoker. so i suggest to you when you get to this question about comparative fault, the way to think 3580 about it is who could have changed the outcome? who could have changed the outcome? the only person who had the ability to change the outcome and make a different choice and prevent her copd disease and related death was mrs. konzelman, because she was one hundred percent in control of the decision about whether to choose health, quit smoking, or to choose to continue smoking cigarettes because she enjoyed it. damages. well, i'm going to talk to you about damages. i, candidly, do not like doing this very much, but in this case, i've got to talk to you about what the evidence has been. the damages being requested here are plaintiff's burden to prove to you. again, the damages start at zero, and they have the burden to prove to you each and every dollar of the damages. and we looked at the medical bills. they say what they say. we agreed they say 295,000. we are not going to waste your time on those issues. but it is only -- that is only in order to -- if you find the company to be liable for that, but we are not wasting your time on that because the other claim in here that you are being asked to 3581 award $5 million for, $5 million, is mr. konzelman's loss of companionship, mental pain and suffering. mr. rosen told you that he was asking for $5 million because he told you that mr. konzelman was there for her. mr. konzelman was there for her. so i'm going to review that evidence with you. not the type of thing we usually talk about in public. it is not pleasant to shift through people's personal lives, and nobody is making any judgments about what anybody did. but you have the right, you as jurors, as decision-makers, have the right to have all the facts. you have the right to have the facts you need to evaluate his claim for $5 million because he was there for her. so i'm going to walk through with you what that evidence is. because you are entitled to know the whole story. i'll be honest, you do not -- it does not get sanitized for you. you get to know the good and the bad about the relationship, because you are being asked to place a value on the relationship because he was there for her. so you are entitled to know this whole story. 3582 you have been told that mr. konzelman lived away from elaine fifty percent of their marriage. you know, he spent fifty percent of the time out of the house throughout the whole course of the marriage away from her due to his job. but there is more to it than that, obviously. you get to know the whole story. you know that she lived for months at a time in assisted living facilities, 2006 to 2010, because he was not at home. he was not home to take care of her. you know from the others that elaine, her doctors, and her family believed that he was gone because he was away working on ships. but you also know that the continuous discharge books that mr. konzelman produced to us at his deposition tell another story. they are marked as ag-002635a, b, and c. you are going to have them in evidence. i will talk in just a minute with you about the story that they tell about whether he was there for her. here is mr. konzelman's testimony. i will set the stage for you so you remember what was going in the scenario that was occurring before we look at the implications of those continuous discharge books. he testified to you that she was living for 3583 months at a time, between 2007 and '10, in assisted care facilities because he was not home. testimony and you outlined for us in your direct examination, near the end of her life, mrs. konzelman was spending time in assisted care facilities, was not she? a. yes. q. and certainly that would occur in 2007, 2008, 2009, and 2010; right? a. right. q. and one of the reasons that she would spend time in the assisted care facilities is because you were away working on ships; right? a. yes. q. and you were not there to take care of her? a. right. okay. so she is in facilities for months at a time because he was away working on ships, and he was away for significant periods of time. here is his testimony. 3584 (video clip from courtroom view network of testimony and sometimes she would stay up to six months in assisted care facilities because you were away on a ship; right? a. yes. q. and that was happening in 2007, '8, '9, and '10; right? a. right. so let us look a little closer to what some of the medical records tell us about whether he was there for her. you are going to have all these in evidence. you will be able to look at them all. this one is in the pmed packet. again, pmed is something you will be able to look at. pmed41, april 12th, 2008 medical record. it says, "the patient moved from florida to live with children because her husband is on a six-month," "six-month work tour on a ship." and point out this is 2008 that her -- that she is telling her physicians, and they are 3585 recording that he is away for six months because he is working. another medical record i've got to talk about with you. so again, pmed50. that is in the pmed50 pack. it is a may 5th, 2009 record. we have typed it out to make it easier to read what we are looking at here. "comments: patient is anxious and depressed. upset because husband informed her that he may take a job in the south pacific. patient realizes she has limited lifespan and states she may not see him again." but there is a little more to it than that because she was afraid to raise this with him. "skilled intervention/teaching. instructed on importance of appropriately verbalizing feelings to husband. patient's response to teaching: patient unwilling to discuss issue with husband at this time." let us look at another medical record about what she was doing and what was going on and whether he was there for her. this is an august 17th, 2009 psychological evaluation of mrs. konzelman. i'm just going to highlight some statements you will see in this document. it is pmed54. pmed54 in the packet. 3586 report of psychological evaluation. "at the time she was receiving hospice care in the home as her husband's work required lengthy periods of time away. this is what prompted this assisted living facility admission." he is gone working is what everybody is under the impression of. "my husband works out of town; they decided for me to come here, which i do not like," "which i do not like." "husband's work: marine engineer. he is on -- asked about her husband's work. marine engineer. he is on ships, can be away for weeks; but he is 80 years old, but he is still active." "i came here because my husband works, and he is gone." "because my husband works, and he is gone." now, we are going to look at the continuous discharge books. we will remind you how important they are and how reliable they are for the purpose that we are going to put them to today. and we will do it by reminding you what mr. konzelman told you about these continuous discharge books. testimony of alan konzelman played as follows:) 3587 by mr. furr: q. would you tell the jury what continuous discharge books are? a. well, they do not issue them anymore, but they used to. in fact, i have three of them. and it was a book that if you -- when you sign on, they would put where you joined the ship and what your rating was, and there would be the dates. and then when you signed off the ship, they would make an entry as to where you signed off and when you signed off. q. this is a work history for you, is not it? a. yes. yes. q. and you did -- you provided to us at your deposition your three continuous discharge books; right? a. yes. q. and those are the only three continuous discharge books that you used during your career; right? a. right. q. and these are essentially a documentary of your career; right? a. that is right. q. and you could look at these books and tell what ship you were on, where you went, the date you went on, and the date you got off; right? a. true. 3588 okay. work history, a documentary about his work life, you could tell where he was, the day he got on, the day he got off. had to keep them. if he was working on a vessel, it is recorded in these continuous discharge books. again, these will be in evidence. i showed you this before. during this time period, everybody is under the impression he is not there because he is still working. continuous book -- discharge books tell a different story. but here is the last one, book c, that list of three that i read to you, that shows that he got off the mv earl on december 3rd, 2007, and the next time that he boarded a vessel for work was may 29th, 2010. there are no entries for 2008 and 2009. no entries. so i asked him on the stand to help us explain during this time period when everybody thinks you are on vessels and away working and that is why she is in assisted living facilities, why are not there any entries in your continuous discharge books? i gave him every opportunity to give you an explanation, every opportunity to give you an 3589 explanation. but here is what he said. testimony can you explain to us why there are not any entries in your continuous discharge books in 2008 and 2009? a. i might not have been working. q. well, those were the years that you were working away from home and as a result, mrs. konzelman had to go into assisted care facilities; right? a. true. q. and so where is the record of where you were working during those years when she was going to assisted care facilities? a. i might not have been employed. you cannot reconcile. it does not line up. where was he? was he there for her? one other aspect of this that you are entitled to have the evidence before you and so it is my obligation to comment on this again, even though i do not -- i wish i did not have to do this. mr. rosen: i'm going to object, your honor. 3590 the court: sustained. mr. rosen: move to strike. the court: jurors disregard the last topic. mr. furr: i will talk to you about marcela murveit. marcela murveit. let us see what mr. konzelman told you. testimony now, after you met ms. murveit, you stayed friendly with her; right? a. yes. q. and you continued to talk to her once in a while, did not you? a. yes. q. and you continued to talk to her by phone during the course of your marriage to ms. konzelman, did not you? a. occasionally. very seldom. q. you would call her; right? a. yes. q. mrs. konzelman never knew about the existence of ms. murveit, did she? a. not that i know of. (video clip from courtroom view network 3591 stopped and the following is in open court.) mr. furr: i asked mr. konzelman when he met her. he told us in his deposition, first thing he told us is 1983, two years after he got married to mrs. konzelman. but then he changed his mind and said no, it must have been 1977. but he told us he met her in israel when she was over in israel. that is why when we played you ms. murveit is deposition and we asked her when she went back to israel after she got divorced and when she met mr. konzelman and she told you 1981. she told you 1981. what was the nature of the relationship that they had. (video clip from courtroom view network stopped and the following is in open court.) by mr. furr: q. after mrs. konzelman passed, you took a couple of cruises with ms. murveit; is that right? a. one or two, yes. q. ms. murveit also came to visit you in florida about three times, did not she? a. i think so, yes. q. and when she would come to florida, the two of you would share a room at your house; right? 3592 a. yes. q. she would stay for a week or so? a. yes. q. besides ms. murveit, you have had a few other relationships since ms. konzelman passed away, have not you? a. i have a lot of female friends because there is a lot of widows around. i'm not going to say anything more about that. the question for you is does his claim for $5.3 million because he was there for her, is that right? does it defy common sense? it is up to you. okay. but there is more to this case, because mr. konzelman is asking -- he wants the opportunity to ask you for more money. he wants you to come back next week so he can ask you to award him more money for punitive damages. so i'm going to have to look at that issue with you also. punitive damages are different than the claim for compensatory damages. your instruction will tell you that plaintiff has a higher burden to prove, he actually has the highest burden of proof 3593 you can have in civil law, he has to prove to you by clear and convincing evidence that you can conclude without hesitation, without hesitation, that he is entitled to punitive damages. your instructions tell you a couple of important things about the limits, the way you have to think about punitive damages. instruction number 12 tells you that the findings, again, the engle findings, may not be considered when determining whether punitive damages are warranted. and instruction number 21 also tells you that in determining whether punitive damages are warranted, you may also take into consideration any mitigating evidence. "mitigating evidence is evidence which may demonstrate there is no need to impose punitive damages against the defendant." so again, you do need and get to hear the full context of what was going on, but the important thing to remember is you can only award punitive damages for the conduct that harmed mrs. konzelman. you may not like a lot of things that you saw about historical tobacco company conduct. not defending it. not the issue. the only issue is conduct that the plaintiff has been able 3594 to tie with evidence to mrs. konzelman in a causal connection to demonstrate that it is that conduct that caused her disease and death. let us look at the mitigating evidence because you were talk- -- there is a lot about ctr you were told, but you might remember ctr did a lot of good things too. there is some mitigating evidence. dr. cummings told you they funded $500 million of excellent research with tobacco company money. the research was scholarly, resulted in 6,000 articles being published. they funded nobel prize winners. and, you know, the claim was it did not -- it was not related to smoking and health. but then dr. cummings admitted that over 600 different times, 600 times, work funded by ctr had been cited by the surgeon general's reports, which are dedicated to smoking and health. there is more to it. dr. cummings told you there is no safe cigarette. if you burn tobacco in paper, you generate smoke that contains carcinogens. no dispute there is no safe cigarette, but it is not because reynolds did not try to make safe cigarettes. it is not because they did not try. because dr. cummings told you about the 3595 premier cigarette that reynolds developed throughout the 1980s that they spent a billion dollars trying to develop. and they succeeded. they made a safer cigarette, safer than the conventional tobacco burning cigarette based on mutagenicity and chemistry, but that is only part of what you have to accomplish. it has to be consumer accepted. a safer cigarette that sits on the shelf and nobody buys does not help anybody. plaintiffs told you it was rejected by consumers, it smelled bad and tasted bad. it was offensive. and they had to pull it off and try to rework it, because sitting on a shelf with nobody buying it is not helping anybody. after spending a billion dollars, they took it off. what did they do? they spent several hundred million more dollars revising that product and trying to make it more consumer acceptable, and they succeeded. they developed a safe -- a product called eclipse that dr. cummings told you was safer than conventional tobacco-burning cigarettes, and it is the safest cigarette manufactured in the 1990s. that is not conduct they should be punished 3596 for. so respectfully, on this request by mr. konzelman to come back and have an opportunity next week to convince you to award more money, we submit that the answer today should be no on these questions and this case should be concluded. i'm going to wrap up. let us talk about fundamentally what is really going on in this case. look, this is a case about personal choice and personal responsibility. that is the way cigarette smoking is. cigarettes do not light themselves and jump in your mouth. nobody holds a gun to your head and makes you smoke a cigarette. it is a voluntary choice you make. people get to make their choices and take responsibility for the choices. and that is the way it is always been. there are a couple of videos that were really interesting and were played for you from back in the day, in the 1950s and 1960s, that demonstrate to you that the dangers of smoking had been known, but in our society, the principles always are the adults get to make their choices. adults get to make their choices. this was dr. hammond, one of those famous researchers, one of the first people to do those 3597 groundbreaking studies, that identified the link between smoking and disease, and he was also -- he was kind of a public figure. he was interviewed a lot. he was on the news and everything all the time talking about this stuff. and here is what he told you on that investigative journalism show in 1955 called see it now. (video clip played as follows:) dr. hammond: in my opinion, people should be warned of the dangers, and they are being warned. what they then want to do, whether they wish to smoke or not, is their own business. (video clip stopped.) mr. furr: 1955, people were being warned. in fact, i asked dr. cummings, "did you hear what he said?" dr. cummings said, "i do not take any issue with that. people were being warned in 1955." the same thing throughout the '60s, released the surgeon general's report, we showed you during dr. cummings' cross a news clip from that report that i'm going to be playing for you. (video clip played as follows:) mr. reasoner: in this kind of a country, it comes down to you, whether you like it or not. no 3598 one is going to forbid an adult to smoke and it is now quite clear that no one is going to tell him it is good for him, either. the decision is his, the decision and the health that may depend on it. (video clip stopped.) mr. furr: ladies and gentlemen, we ask only that you use your common sense. this is a choice about -- this is a case about personal choices and personal responsibility. and we all know the role personal responsibility plays in our society. it is what our parents taught us, you are responsible for your choices. it is what we teach our kids. it is what we expect, it is what we hope for out of our neighbors, coworkers. we want people to take responsibility for their own choices in our society. ladies and gentlemen, i ask you to return a complete defense verdict for r.j. reynolds in this case. and i'll end where i began. thank you so much for your time the past few weeks, it is been an honor to work in front of you the past few weeks, and i appreciate it all. thank you.