15 ms. luther: thank you, judge. good afternoon, everyone. may it please the court. this case is not about all smokers. it is not about the general public. it is not about whether you believe people should smoke cigarettes or not. and it is not about whether you believe there are cigarette smokers out there who are influenced by things that you saw or heard in this trial. this case is about one, and only one, cigarette smoker, jayme 4001 westmoreland. when we started this trial almost three weeks ago, i told you that there would be a main story to this case and a side story. the main story, of course, is ms. westmoreland, the decisions and choices she made about smoking, why she started, why she continued to smoke for over 20 years, when did she learn about the health risks of smoking, her ability to quit smoking and ultimately her decision to finally stop. the side story and the story that plaintiff wants you to focus on is the conduct of liggett as a manufacturer of lark cigarettes, liggett's role and the roles of other tobacco companies in the industry, liggett's role in the scientific issues concerning smoking and health, liggett's research efforts, and ultimately, what impact did liggett's statements or actions have on ms. westmoreland and the decisions she made about smoking. i'm going to do my best this afternoon to try and tie the evidence that we have seen to talk about what we learned during the case and how we see the facts and then talk about some of 4002 instructions judge day gave you and the questions that you are going to be asked on the verdict form. now, let me say something about the findings from the earlier engle case you heard about. there is no debate about this. those findings do not establish that liggett is liable, meaning legally responsible to the plaintiff in this case. you now know, because judge day instructed you, that you get to decide by your verdict in this case whether those findings have any applicability to ms. westmoreland, whether those findings have any context in the story that you have now heard about her and how she lived her life. after all, this case is about ms. westmoreland. her daughter filed this lawsuit and now is asking you to award her and her brother up to $20 million for their mother's decisions to smoke cigarettes for more than 20 years. and you are the only people who have heard ms. westmoreland's story. the engle jury did not hear a thing about ms. westmoreland. so what is ms. westmoreland's story? she 4003 smoked for reasons known only to herself. she was aware from the first time she picked up a cigarette at her aunt's house that smoking was dangerous. she demonstrated the ability to quit, if that was what she wanted to do. there is nothing that liggett did that made ms. westmoreland start smoking or kept her from quitting for all those years, and there is nothing that liggett, or anyone else, for that matter, could have done or said that would have made ms. westmoreland choose to stop smoking any sooner than she did. ms. westmoreland did not follow the urgings of her father and her brother not to start smoking or later to quit, and she did not heed the warnings that went on every single pack of cigarettes she smoked starting in 1966, shortly after she first experimented with her first cigarette. notwithstanding the extensive information available to her throughout the entire time that she smoked regarding the health risks of smoking and the benefits of quitting, ms. westmoreland chose on her own terms to smoke, just like she 4004 did everything else in her life. given that backdrop, should liggett be held responsible for ms. westmoreland's death? should liggett be required to pay money to ms. lambert and mr. westmoreland for their mother's lifestyle choices over the decades that she smoked? i told you in jury selection that it is liggett's position that ms. westmoreland was 100 percent responsible for the choices she made and her ultimate illness. that has not changed. we also discussed during jury selection and i mentioned again in my opening, this is a very sad case. it would be impossible not to feel sympathy for mrs. lambert and mr. westmoreland. it is never easy to lose a parent, and it is especially difficult to do so under these circumstances. but that does not mean that liggett is responsible for ms. westmoreland's injuries or that liggett should be required to compensate mrs. lambert and mr. westmoreland for that loss. now i want to highlight a couple of the instructions that judge day gave you. and i'm not very good with the elmo, so let us see how i 4005 can manage this. so, "you may use reason and common sense to reach conclusions." can you all see that? i know i'm kind of blocking. okay. let us see. okay. "you may use reason and common sense to reach conclusions. you may draw reasonable inferences from the evidence. and in evaluating the believability of the witnesses and what weight to give the testimony of any particular witness, you may properly consider the demeanor of the witness while testifying, the frankness or lack of frankness of the witness, the intelligence of the witness, any interest the witness may have in the outcome of the case, the means and opportunity the witness had to know the facts about which the witness testified, the ability of the witness to remember matters about which the witness testified, and the reasonableness of the testimony of the witness considered in light of all the evidence in the case and in light of your own experience and common sense." reason and common sense. you all did not leave that behind you when this trial started. 4006 we ask that you rely on that when you evaluate the testimony of the various witnesses who testified in this case. with that in mind, what did the evidence show? what kind of person was jayme westmoreland? everyone who came into this courtroom, either live or by deposition testimony, who knew ms. westmoreland described her the same way. mrs. lambert said her mother was intelligent, disciplined. she was both smart and had street smarts and she took responsibility for her actions. mr. westmoreland said his mother was a strong person. she was strong-willed. she was intelligent. she had common sense. and if she set her mind to accomplishing something, she did it. roxan, her sister, said that she was smart and also said that she had street smarts. she was intelligent. and, importantly, roxan told us that ms. westmoreland was not gullible. and on two occasions she volunteered that ms. westmoreland essentially did what she wanted. this was a series of questions that was 4007 asked during trial. "identified a problem for herself. "yes. "and set about resolving that problem for herself. "yes, she did. "she did not need any help from anybody to do that, did she? "no, she did what she wanted." ms. luther: am i in your way, ms. bjostad? juror bjostad: no. "did you ever have a conversation with jayme about the warnings on the cigarette packs? "no. she would do what she wanted to do." that is what roxan said about her sister. wayne westmoreland, her brother, corroborated all of this. i thought it was interesting that the plaintiff did not call wayne westmoreland to testify on their side of the case. i mean, in all of this he was the person who was closest to ms. westmoreland when she started smoking. so we brought his testimony so you would get the full picture. and he said his sister was intelligent and 4008 had common sense and if she made her mind up to do something, she did it. and in case you were not already getting this picture, he told us that she was not easily led. like roxan said, she would do what she wanted to do. even dr. pell, one of the treating physicians who came here to testify live, agreed that she was intelligent. and he did not agree with much of anything that we asked him. the bottom line of all of this was that ms. westmoreland was no one's dupe. so what have we learned from the witnesses about when ms. westmoreland started smoking and why? you might remember the timeline that i had put up during my opening. so right about here, in 1965, ms. westmoreland smokes her first cigarette. ms. westmoreland was with her brother, wayne, when she had her first cigarette when she was 14 or 15 years old. and remember, you were told she was born in 1951. what happened when she stole that parliament cigarette from her aunt, lit up, breathed cigarette smoke into her lungs for the first time? she coughed. and her brother laughed at her, and he asked her if she was sure she wanted 4009 to do that. she coughed. she only took three hits off the cigarette and she put it out. and he did not see her smoke again until she was 17 years old, which was consistent with what roxan also said. and she was around roxan all the time because she was her surrogate mother. the first time roxan saw ms. westmoreland smoke was when roxan was about seven or eight years old, which would have made ms. westmoreland about 17 or 18 years old because there was a ten year difference between the two of them. this was around the time ms. westmoreland was a senior in high school, so we are talking about 1968 or 1969. even the medical records, based on information ms. westmoreland personally provided to her treating physicians, corroborate that she started smoking regularly in the 1970s when she was in her 20s. here is a compilation of the medical records that are going to go back to the jury room with you. she stated she had smoked a pack and one -- a pack and a half a day for 21 years. this is what she told dr. pell on november 25th. and she smokes one to two packages daily and has 4010 done so for the past 20 years, november 26, 1993. and we know that her first regular brand was parliament. that was the brand she stole from her aunt, and that is the brand she continued to smoke until sometime shortly before she moved to south carolina when she was about 18 years old. parliament is not a liggett brand. plaintiff makes a big deal about the fact that her brother only actually witnessed her with 40 total parliament cigarettes. they emphasized that in wayne westmoreland's testimony. but wayne was very clear that this was her first regular brand. this is what he said about this. "when she was smoking at age 17, what brand was she smoking? "it was not lark. it was something else. i think she was smoking parliament back then. "and do you recall how many occasions you saw her smoke parliament back then? "when i saw her smoke whatever, it was parliament." and then one more segment, which we may or may not have. we do. great. 4011 "and during the time until she went away to south carolina, what brands of cigarettes? "the one i recall most from that period of time would have been parliament." wayne was also very clear that when she moved to south carolina she was smoking less than he was at the time, and he was smoking about a half a pack a day. so by 1969 or so she is only smoking about a half a pack a day. plaintiff claims that liggett concealed material information from ms. westmoreland, and if she had the information that was supposedly concealed, she would have been able to avoid her lung cancer. that is just not credible. we have a wealth of information available to us that demonstrates the falsity of this claim. the timeline sets out all the relevant dates. we have got the 1964 surgeon general's report before she even smokes her first cigarette. we have a caution label on packs in '66. and at this point in time she is not even a regular smoker. in the early 1950s emerging scientific information linking cigarette use with lung cancer was so well-publicized that it started a 4012 cancer scare. you saw the graph that mr. gustafson put up earlier this morning and the decline. it is not a big decline on the graph, but it was a decline. there was a precipitous decline of people who were smoking in the 1950s because of the mouse skin-painting studies and the other studies that were coming out linking the tar and cigarette smoke to cancer. in the mid 1950s with the publication of the wynder and graham mouse skin-painting study, cigarette use declined in the united states. and throughout the 1950s and '60s, as more scientific evidence emerged showing the relationship between lung cancer and cigarettes, there was more information that was publicized by newspapers, magazines, television news and the like. you know, by 1963 the information regarding lung cancer and cigarettes was so widely known that it was a common association in popular movies and television programs. and you may remember this clip. (video clip was played and taken down to the best of the reporter's ability as follows:) paul newman: you know, i'm going out pretty 4013 soon and my credit is kind of shaky. geraldine page: i would like to smoke, please. no, no. just one of the ordinary cigarettes that only give you cancer. (video clip concluded.) ms. luther: just one of the ordinary cigarettes. they only give you cancer. the story culminated with the publication of the 1964 surgeon general's report, which we have talked a lot about in this case. this is one of the most important news stories of the 20th century. mrs. westmoreland started smoking after that report came out. news that the surgeon general had concluded that smoking caused lung cancer in men was everywhere you turned back then. she watched the television news every night. as wayne testified, their father told them to shut up and learn something when the news was on. and the 1964 surgeon general's report was news everywhere, on television and in the newspapers. you saw examples of that coverage when dr. dibacco was on the stand. and wayne westmoreland confirmed that coverage of the 1964 4014 surgeon general's report was everywhere where they lived, even in red bank, new jersey. if there was any question regarding the impact of the 1964 surgeon general's report, all you had to do was look at what was happening to the rates of cigarette smoking in the four years after it came out. smoking rates started to decline precipitously, even before the surgeon general's report came out in '64. when huge numbers of smokers across the united states were quitting smoking cold turkey, jayme westmoreland made a different choice. she started smoking and became a regular smoker. professor dibacco explained in 1964 information regarding health and cancer risks of cigarettes was flooding the public through newspapers, magazines and news stories. in that year the american medical association stated that the health hazards of excessive smoking have been well-publicized for more than ten years and are common knowledge. and i know mr. gustafson took a shot at the ama because they were receiving money from the tobacco companies for doing research into 4015 issues of smoking and health, but would they have been able to get away with a statement like that? do you think they really would have been able to surmount scrutiny for a statement like that if it were not accurate? by 1964 professor dibacco explained that the not-proven statements by the tobacco institute and other industry representatives were not given much credibility or even prominence in the public press. nobody got their health information from tobacco representatives or paid cigarette advertisements. by the late 1960s the american cancer society and other not-for-profit groups published public service announcements spreading the message about health risks and lung cancer risks of smoking cigarettes. and we showed you some of those. this is just one to remind you of what some of those messages were. (video clip was played and taken down to the best of the reporter's ability as follows:) voice: you lose. (video clip concluded.) ms. luther: the message of this public service announcement is pretty clear. you buy a 4016 pack of cigarettes, you are gambling with your life. this was 1969, when jayme westmoreland was 18 years old, around the time that she became a regular smoker. by the early 1970s the federal trade commission was monitoring and regulating cigarette advertising. and every cigarette ad and every cigarette pack was required to include its tar and nicotine values as measured by the ftc method. by 1972 cigarette companies were no longer permitted to advertise on television or radio. the surgeon general's 1964 was one of the top stories of the 20th century. and she started smoking after that report came out. when huge numbers of smokers continued to quit, jayme westmoreland continued to smoke. and throughout the years that she continued to smoke, the rates of smoking in the united states continued to drop. more than half of ever smokers have quit. more people have quit smoking than not. and around the time that she started smoking, the debate was raging about putting warnings on the packs. and they actually went on the packs years before she was 4017 a regular smoker. and before i go any further, i want to make it clear, liggett is not criticizing jayme westmoreland for her decision to smoke. it is something that we are -- we live in america. we live in the united states. these are decisions that we are all entitled to make. and she made a decision, and she smoked. and now her children are trying to get money for it. but liggett is not criticizing jayme westmoreland for her decision to smoke cigarettes. now, she saw the warnings on the packs starting in 1966. and this is what the first warning said: "caution: cigarette smoking may be hazardous to your health." and this warning was a warning that was required by congress, written by congress. and it ran from january 1, 1966 through october 31st, 1970. then in 1969, around the time that she became a regular smoker, the warnings changed again. and every time she picked up a pack of cigarettes, it said, "warning: the surgeon general has determined that cigarette smoking is dangerous to your health." again, this is language, verbiage that 4018 congress dictated we were required to put on the packs. it was not information that the companies put on voluntarily. there were congressional hearings and they talked about the content of the warnings. and this is what congress decided that the companies were going to put on the packs. the reason it said this as opposed to smoking causes lung cancer, i suspect, is because at the time there was information that smoking impacted other aspects of people's health, so rather than limit it to lung cancer, they wanted to get the broader message out that it caused health hazards. her father told her she should not smoke because it was bad for her health. and with all of this personal information available to her, she clearly knew that smoking carried real health risks. ms. westmoreland knew that smoking came with health risks in the 1960s, and she started smoking and continued smoking and never tried to quit once in the 1960s. and she knew that smoking came with health risks in the 1970s. and she continued smoking and never tried to 4019 quit in the 1970s. and she started -- she continued smoking in the 1980s. and the evidence is that it was not until at least the mid 1980s that she tried to quit for the very first time. she did not have to start smoking and she could have chosen to stop smoking at any point in time before she finally stopped in 1993, months before she was diagnosed with lung cancer. plaintiff would have you believe that she could not stop smoking because of an addiction to nicotine. so what do we know about nicotine? we know that it occurs naturally in tobacco. and we know that nicotine is out of the bloodstream of a smoker within 12 to 48 hours of smoking cessation. we know that its existence was not a secret nor was it a secret that nicotine was the reason why people smoke. it is not information that the tobacco companies were hiding from the world. and it certainly was not information that liggett was hiding from the public health community. liggett actually told the surgeon general in 4020 its 1963 submission to the surgeon general's committee, which i'll discuss in more detail in a bit, that nicotine had physiological effects and that people did not smoke other things because they did not have nicotine in them. in volume four of the submission, and i have some excerpts from the submission which is in evidence as defendant's exhibit 42, this is what liggett told the surgeon general about nicotine's effect on the smoker. "the highly active pharmacologic agent characteristically in tobacco and its smoke, the pleasurable effects of low doses of this alkaloid, as well as tobacco aroma and flavor characteristics presumably are the reasons why people smoke tobacco instead of some other material." and they go on to say, "it is been found to be one of the most potent central nervous system arousal agents known." that sounds like a lot like what dr. hurt and dr. brady were telling you in this courtroom. liggett was not hiding the ball. that is in the 1963 submission to the surgeon general's committee. 4021 even though the surgeon general in 1964 declined to call nicotine addictive, he did say it was habituating, meaning it was habit-forming. this was information that was available to everybody. and he was very careful to point out that just because he was calling it habituating does not mean it is easy to quit. here are a couple of excerpts from the 1964 surgeon general's report that say just that. "the tobacco habit should be characterized as a habituation rather than an addiction. discontinuation of smoking, although possessing the difficulties attendant upon distinction of any conditioned reflex, the behavioral aspects of smoking is accomplished best by reinforcing factors." then is that 351? do you also have -- was it 34, josh? "thus, correctly designating the chronic use of tobacco as habituation rather than addiction carries with it no implication that the habit may be broken easily." they knew this. this was not something that was being hidden by the tobacco companies. professor dibacco -- actually, let me back 4022 up. dr. brady told us that even today, 50 years later, we are learning how nicotine impacts the question of addiction. but regardless of that fact, it had been known for a very long time when jayme westmoreland started smoking in the 1960s that once you start it can be difficult to stop. dr. brady confirmed that, and dr. dibacco showed you that. and you just saw that liggett told the surgeon general in 1963 what it knew about the subject. it was not hiding the ball. professor dibacco testified that the addiction risks of cigarettes were well-known in the united states before 1950 and even before ms. westmoreland was born. by the 1930s and '40s terms such as "nicotine addict" and "nicotine fiend" were understood and accepted in popular culture, so much so that we saw an example of the term "nicotine addict" in the 1942 alfred hitchcock film saboteur. (video clip was played and taken down to the best of the reporter's ability as follows:) voice: hey, buddy, hold the wheel a while, will you, while i elevate this thing. i'm a nicotine addict. 4023 (video clip concluded.) ms. luther: professor dibacco also illustrated the extent to which the addiction risks of cigarettes were understood by showing the elementary textbooks from the 1930s were required to teach children that cigarettes pose significant health risks, including that nicotine is habit-forming and makes people want to smoke all the time. this is an excerpt from one of those textbooks. "tobacco does no one any good. it does some people a great deal of harm." scrolling down to the bottom. "the tobacco habit grows on most people. that is, it gets worse. they smoke more and more until they are smoking nearly all the time. bad habits are hard to stop. do not start them." by the early 1960s there was widespread information in magazines and newspapers referring to the addiction risks of cigarettes and advocating different methods to quit. we saw numerous articles in time, newsweek, life magazine and reader's digest, periodicals that had widespread national circulation in the 1950s, '60s and '70s that recommended and 4024 proposed methods on how to stop cigarette smoking. and this is illustrated in defendant's exhibits 24, 25, and 26, just a sampling of the articles about how to quit smoking. we saw numerous references in the press to nicotine as the addictive agent of cigarettes, and we saw that by the 1960s there were already smoking-cessation clinics that were opening up all around the country. there were no secrets regarding the addictive nature of cigarettes. by the 1950s everyone understood that cigarettes were addictive and could be extremely difficult to quit. the only thing that was not well-settled was the terminology, whether cigarettes should be formally labeled with the term "addiction" or whether they should instead be referred to by the terms "dependence" or "habituation." in 1964 the surgeon general did not believe that "addiction" was the appropriate term for cigarettes and instead used "habituation," because back then it was felt that if you label somebody an addict you are essentially consigning them to a mental health disease. and that 4025 was not considered appropriate at the time. and that is in the 1964 surgeon general's report. so it was not until 1988 that the surgeon general decided to make a change and formally adopt the word "addiction" for cigarettes. the dsm-5, which was revised in 2014 and was shown to you during the testimony of dr. hurt and dr. brady and in mr. gustafson's closing, is used by physicians and clinicians today to diagnose numerous forms of substance abuse and uses the term "tobacco use disorder." it does not use "addiction" either. during the trial plaintiffs showed you the video of the ceos from the different companies testifying before congress in 1994 where they were told, "we have your written statements, so we just want the sound bite for the news. so you can only answer yes or no to this question. is nicotine addictive?" and then they go down the line. "is nicotine addictive?" yes or no? yes or no? yes or no? yes or no? you were showed a clip where mr. johnston of the r.j. reynolds tobacco company tried to expound on his answer and he started to say, 4026 "nicotine is not addictive using the traditional definition of addiction, which requires intoxication," and he was cut off. they said, yes or no. yes or no. so, you know, you heard the sound bite, but you did not hear the written statements of the companies which explained what their full positions were. regardless, 1994, this happened after ms. westmoreland quit smoking. we should not get caught up in these terms of art. the plain fact is that it was well-known and widely accepted by the 1950s that cigarettes were habit forming, addictive and difficult to quit, irrespective of what words were used to describe it. mr. gustafson talked about the testimony of dr. lebow and dr. dietz, who engaged in an intellectual exercise about the word "addiction." and both said something along the lines of if a smoker is addicted then they do not have free choice. neither of them is an addiction expert, like dr. brady and dr. hurt. they answered that question as lay people. they were led down a garden path by attorneys in litigation and they 4027 fell into the trap that plaintiff wants you to fall into here. one more thing on addiction. plaintiff talked about the research liggett was doing using calcium hydroxide to increase the free nicotine available in the cigarette smoke. at this point in time when this research was being conducted, all of the companies and some of the public health officials were all doing research, working hard to find a cigarette that would be less hazardous. and this is one of the ideas that liggett researchers were working on in this regard. you also heard that at one point liggett added lactic acid and diammonium phosphate -- i'm just going to call that dap -- to lark cigarettes. dr. cummings confirmed that these substances are used in products other than cigarettes, things like baked goods and corn tortillas. and this is another example of what you did not hear anyone say, and that is that adding either of these things made cigarettes more addictive. no one said that. but you did hear them say that adding both of these things impacted the taste of 4028 cigarette. we know dap made more sugar available. now, dr. dietz confirmed in his deposition that was read to you that liggett never used additives to affect the ph, which in turn affects the free nicotine in any commercially available cigarette, including lark. he confirmed liggett used these substances to smooth the taste of the smoke. the design of these -- excuse me. the design of these cigarettes is no different than the design of all the cigarettes smoked by the 60 million people who quit smoking. but you have had the benefit of hearing expert testimony before you have to answer this question. and you know that every one of plaintiff's expert witnesses who talked about addiction came in here and confirmed that even people who are addicted can and do quit every day. while dr. brady said it is a constrained choice, it is still a choice. and only the smoker can make the decision to stop. 60 million people have quit smoking since the 1964 surgeon general's report. 1.3 million people quit every year. and according to 4029 dr. brady, the vast majority of these people were nicotine dependent when they stopped. everybody can quit smoking. and jayme westmoreland did quit smoking. even surgeon general koop, the surgeon general who changed the definition of addiction to eliminate the requirement of intoxication, has stated that the individual smoker has to make the decision whether to stop engaging in the behavior. so was ms. westmoreland addicted to nicotine? it is true that the more advanced therapies that are available today to help people quit smoking were not available before ms. westmoreland passed away. but there were things that were available that she could have tried if she had been inclined. smoking-cessation clinics were available going back to the 1960s. dr. hurt, who was smoking three to four packs a day, stopped smoking by going to one of those clinics in the 1970s. there is absolutely no evidence that ms. westmoreland even tried to stop smoking before the mid 1980s. her brother told her to quit after 1980 when he quit smoking, and she 4030 essentially ignored him. now, nicotine gum was available starting in the early 1980s. i think 1982 was the date that we were told. but she did not even try it until sometime when cydne was in elementary school in the mid to late 1980s. and no one knew whether she used it the way she was supposed to use it. she used the nicotine patch at some point, too, but neither mrs. westmoreland or mrs. lambert could say she used it regularly. mrs. lambert remembered only three different instances of seeing the patch on her mother's arm, and she did not know if it was from one prescription or multiple prescriptions. what we do know is while she was using those products she was getting nicotine in her system, so there was clearly something she was getting from the cigarettes other than nicotine that kept her smoking. we know she -- that she stopped smoking for days at a time and quit for about two weeks in 1990. but for reasons known only to ms. westmoreland, she returned to smoking after the nicotine was out of her system. there is the rub. all of the plaintiff's experts concede 4031 this. in order to quit you have to decide you want to quit. when she finally decided she was going to stop smoking, she did stop. she did it cold turkey. she did it before she felt sick. you heard from the people closest to ms. westmoreland about this, her children. their memories on this were consistent. mrs. lambert told you she quit sometime before her diagnosis. mr. westmoreland told you that she quit four to six months before her diagnosis. both agreed she quit before she started to feel sick. remember, these are the people who were closest to her. they were living with her day in and day out. mrs. lambert was even working with her during this period of time at the lobster pot. so she did not see her smoking at home and she did not see her smoking at work. and the medical records indicate that she made significant lifestyle changes about three months before she was diagnosed. right here. "she is a person who in the past three months has changed the quality of her life greatly. she stated that she had smoked a pack and a half a day for 21 years." 4032 if she had still been smoking, her children would have known. you can tell these things. you can smell the smoke on her clothes or in her car or in her hair. the plaintiff wants you to believe that she was still smoking when she was diagnosed. she bases that theory on the testimony of dr. pell and dr. paonessa, recalled 20 years after they last saw and treated her. this is one of the things that you get to evaluate, the instruction that i put up when i first started, regarding the credibility of a witness. continued smoking is something that a doctor treating a patient for suspected lung cancer is going to document in his records. it is just common sense. and dr. paonessa told you that accurately documenting her smoking history was important to her treatment. if she really was still smoking and it was important to her treatment and important that she stop, why did not either of them offer to help her stop smoking, offer to prescribe her smoking-cessation aids, which neither of them did? instead, dr. pell did just the opposite. 4033 he recorded that she quit smoking in his records. "and has quit for the past several weeks." neither dr. pell, who saw her only twice before she was admitted to the hospital where she was not allowed to and did not smoke, nor dr. paonessa ever saw her smoke. but plaintiff would have you accept the doctors' testimony on this matter over her own recollections and the recollection of her brother. now, with this as the framework for the evaluation of the claim for addiction, let us talk about the dsm-5, which dr. brady agreed is the bible that psychiatrists use when diagnosing mental disorders. mr. sales: objection. no such word was used by the evidence. ms. luther: actually, i can pull the transcript, judge, if you would like to see it. the court: i -- overruled. ms. luther: to qualify for a diagnosis of tobacco use disorder -- remember i told you they do not use the word "addiction" in the dsm -- ms. westmoreland had to exhibit a problematic pattern of tobacco use leading to clinically 4034 significant impairment or distress. so you have to have a problematic pattern of using tobacco within a 12-month period of time, so you are looking at symptoms in a 12-month period of time. you heard the pattern of symptoms. mr. gustafson had them up on the board when he went through his closing. they involve impaired control, social impairment, risky use and pharmacologic dependence. and these symptoms have to rise to the level of clinically significant distress or impairment. here there is no evidence that ms. westmoreland had a problematic pattern of using tobacco that rose to the level of clinically significant impairment other than the fact that she smoked a pack to a pack and a half a day. and dr. brady herself confirmed that the amount that a person smokes alone is not enough to diagnose addiction. and there is no evidence that her use of cigarettes resulted in social impairment. she went to work. she took care of her kids. she took care of her house. she took care of her 4035 dogs. and there is no evidence of risky use. i think they tried to say something along the lines that there was evidence she had smoked in bed. but that evidence really is not clear. there is evidence she kept her cigarettes near the bed and when she got out of bed as she was walking to the bathroom, she had a cigarette. so smoking in bed would be a risky behavior. fires start. smoking when you are pumping gas would be a risky behavior. smoking when you are in the bathroom of an airplane would be a risky behavior. there is no evidence of that in this case. when she returned to smoking after successfully stopping for periods of days or even weeks, no one knows why she started smoking again. dr. brady confirmed that the physiologic withdrawal symptoms one experiences from nicotine withdrawal typically peak within 12 to 72 hours and most are gone after only a couple of weeks. so her return to smoking after she had stopped for a few days or a couple of weeks likely had nothing to do with relieving 4036 withdrawal symptoms. so looking at the evidence from this perspective, it is clear plaintiff cannot meet her burden to the greater weight of evidence that ms. westmoreland was addicted, meaning that she had severe tobacco use disorder. giving her the benefit of the doubt, at most she had mild tobacco use disorder. even though she was addicted to nicotine, did that addiction cause her lung cancer? definitely not. like mr. gustafson, i want to go over a couple of the more important jury instructions and the verdict form that you will take back into the jury room with you. now, you heard it in jury selection and i've already said it once, but i'm going to say it again. plaintiff has the burden of proof in this case. you already know this. it is up to her to prove that ms. westmoreland was addicted to smoking and that her addiction to smoking was the legal cause of her death, not the medical cause, the legal cause. and plaintiff has to prove this by the greater weight of the evidence. so what does it mean for something to be a 4037 legal cause? here's the instruction. "addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine was a legal cause of ms. westmoreland's lung cancer if it directly and in natural and continuous sequence produced or contributed substantially to producing such lung cancer so that it can be said that but for -- but for the addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine the lung cancer would not have occurred." we submit that plaintiff cannot satisfy that burden. now, it is a little hard to follow with all the legalese in it, but you will see the words provided -- or sorry, "produced or contributed substantially to producing." so the addiction has to produce or contribute to producing -- substantially to producing the lung cancer. rather than parse the words, let me give you an example. if someone walks across the street and gets hit by a bus, clearly the bus is the medical cause of whatever injuries they sustain. but in order to understand the legal cause, you have to know more about what is going on. was the person texting while they crossed the intersection? was the light red or green when they crossed the intersection? you need to know 4038 more information. and were they talking on their cell phone? were they paying attention? the simple point being, you need to know more about the circumstances of the individual before you can determine that the addiction is the legal cause. you need to know all of these things before you can determine whether addiction was the legal cause in this case. here you get to consider whether ms. westmoreland's decision to continue smoking despite warnings all around her was the legal cause of her lung cancer. you get to consider whether she could have tried harder to quit. and as mrs. westmoreland (sic) has admitted, told you herself when she was on the stand, she certainly could have. so here is the verdict form, and these are the first two questions you are going to have to answer. "was ms. westmoreland addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine?" we submit that your answer to that question is no. if your answer was yes, you would go on to answer question 2. and that question is: "was an addiction to 4039 cigarettes containing nicotine a legal cause of ms. westmoreland's lung cancer and death?" i would submit to you your answer to that question should also be no. if you answer no to either one of these questions, you are done. you sign the verdict form and we thank you for your service. if you agree that plaintiff has not satisfied her burden of proof and answer question -- either of -- if you answer either of those questions yes -- well, actually, no. if you answer question 2 yes -- if you answer either of those questions yes, then you will go on to consider the next group of questions, which deal with what the plaintiff wants you to focus on in this case, the side story. so let us discuss the side story so i can put everything you heard from mr. gustafson in his closing in perspective. company statements. i told you in my opening that the plaintiff would spend a great deal of time talking about the statements made by companies like philip morris, r.j. reynolds, american tobacco company, brown & williamson 4040 tobacco company, lorillard tobacco company and even a couple made by liggett. and just as i told you they would, they pulled out the worst sound bites from those documents that they could find. out of approximately 60 million pages of documents, that is what dr. cummings told you, 60 million pages of documents, you will have, i do not know, a stack about this high (indicating) back in the jury room with you, maybe a couple hundred thousand pages. regardless, i'm not going to try and defend the statements. frankly, i'm not in a position to defend the statements of the other companies' internal documents. liggett was not privy to their internal documents and had no control over what they were saying amongst themselves or how they were running their companies and the things that they said and expressed in those documents. i mean, frankly, a lot of what they said and expressed are things that we would not say or even think today. but it was a different time. interestingly, there really are not such inflammatory statements made by liggett itself. in order to find sound bites from liggett, they 4041 were compelled to go to liggett's annual reports that were issued to shareholders regarding the annual status of the company. really? i mean, jayme westmoreland was not looking at liggett's annual reports. she certainly was not getting her health information from them. now, you may remember that judge day already instructed you on this. he told you, "ladies and gentlemen, you will be shown documents and statements that were created by tobacco companies and entities other than defendant liggett. it is for you to decide whether these documents or these statements were made as a part of the agreement between liggett and other tobacco companies to conceal information regarding the health risks of smoking and the addiction -- addictiveness of tobacco. to the extent you find they were not made as part of such an agreement, you should not consider these documents or statements against liggett." annual reports and other internal documents did not have anything to do with jayme westmoreland. in an attempt to make a connection, plaintiff hired dr. hurt, a medical doctor, to 4042 come here and talk about advertising. he tried to convince you that those ads meant something to jayme westmoreland. he clearly has his own agenda, again, going back to the instruction i showed you in the beginning. that is one of things you get to do; you get to evaluate when weighing the weight to give the testimony of a witness. i mean, it was abundantly clear that he does not like tobacco companies, and i get that. i mean, really, he treats patients who get sick on a daily basis, and it is got to be frustrating for him to see people engaging in a behavior that has a real chance of making you sick. but this is an example of one of the things you get to determine or you get to consider in determining the weight to give his testimony. does he have an agenda? absolutely. he would love to see my client out of business. dr. hurt showed us a large number of advertisements from the past 70 years, and i'm not going to spend much time talking about other companies' ads because dr. cummings agreed that liggett did not participate in the marketing of its competitors' brands. liggett is not 4043 responsible for the content of other companies' brands. now, obviously, liggett brands did not experience an increase in their market share because the marlboro man was a hugely successful ad campaign. in fact, we know liggett's ad campaigns did not work as the years went by because its market share continued to decline. dr. cummings confirmed that by the 1990s liggett's market share was about 2 percent. the ads you saw attempted to portray specific company brands as positively as possible so that the different companies who were in pitched competition with each other could gain market share and sell their brands. there is nothing illegal or improper about that. it is not illegal to have attractive people or glamorous people attempting to market your products. all the companies do it. each one of those ads you saw complied with ftc regulations, and every one of them was legal. what do those other company brands have to do with liggett? for that matter, what do they have to do with ms. westmoreland? and the answer to both questions is, absolutely nothing. 4044 none of the ads that were shown to you during plaintiff's case had anything to do with ms. westmoreland or the facts of this case. you may recall that in my opening i acknowledged that in the past there was a lot of cigarette advertising. i told you that you might have to decide if cigarette advertising had anything to do with why ms. westmoreland continued to smoke. more to the point, was there anything false in liggett's advertising that mrs. westmoreland saw and relied on in making her decisions to smoke? did liggett fail to warn ms. westmoreland of anything that it had a legal obligation to do? ms. westmoreland evidently did have conversations with her children regarding her smoking over the years. but she never told them or anyone else she was close to over the course of her life that she started smoking because of an advertisement or because of anything any tobacco company said or did. not a single witness ever said she told them she saw a tobacco company statement, let alone that she relied on it. but she did tell them that she started smoking to fit in with the boys in 4045 neighborhood, her friends, who nicknamed her moose, to be cool and to fit in. both mrs. lambert and roxan confirmed that mrs. westmoreland -- ms. westmoreland told them this. that is why ms. westmoreland -- that is ms. westmoreland's own explanation for why she started smoking. now, speaking of advertising that had nothing to do with ms. westmoreland, you saw a series of l&m ads in mr. gustafson's closing and you saw a lot of lark ads. and plaintiff emphasized ads for lark's gas-trap filter. plaintiff claims ms. westmoreland somehow relied on lark advertising and because of that advertising somehow believes she was smoking a safer -- not a safe, but a safer cigarette. let us talk about the lark filter and what liggett knew at the time. the lark cigarettes that ms. westmoreland used were one of many types of filtered cigarettes that were available on the market beginning in the 1960s. we heard testimony that in the 1960s legitimate scientists outside of the tobacco industry were advocating the use of filters to reduce tar and nicotine in cigarettes and to 4046 attempt to selectively filter out carcinogens and toxins in cigarette smoke. dr. cummings testified about the national cancer institute's tobacco working group in the 1960s. that was a coordinated joint effort by public health scientists and industry scientists to use filters and other cigarette design modifications to try to come up with ways to make cigarettes safer. that was all part of an effort to reduce the risks of cigarettes and create a less hazardous or potentially safer cigarette. despite these efforts by scientists for the last 50 years, we know today that no one has developed a way to make a safer cigarette, one that removes the carcinogens and toxins in cigarette smoke that cause lung cancer and other diseases. but in the 1960s liggett and arthur d. little were trying in earnest to identify what was potentially dangerous in cigarette smoke and trying to figure out a way to remove it. one of those efforts was the lark charcoal filter. we saw evidence that the 1964 surgeon 4047 general's advisory committee was very interested in liggett's research concerning filters. we saw dr. hamill, who worked for the advisory committee, record in a 1962 memorandum that he specifically asked dr. kensler, who was then working with liggett, for the information they had on the possibility of creating improved filters. this is liggett's exhibit 44. "the l&m chemists have done a great deal of work on the effect of filtration. absolutely sure they will make available all of their information to us." and then on page 2, "their two primary areas of expertise," referring to liggett and arthur d. little, are number one, "subjecting animals and other biologic systems to exposures to various kinds of smoke, and ciliary motility studies in which kensler thinks they have developed some unique methodology." so as of 1962 surgeon general's committee was aware that liggett was doing its own mouse skin-painting studies and was saying that that is one of liggett's areas of expertise. liggett and dr. kensler responded to the request from dr. hamill, and a fair amount of 4048 liggett's 1963 nine-volume submission discussed the possibility of reducing the health risks of cigarettes by the use of a special filter using activated charcoal. the charcoal was designed to remove certain toxins that are found in the gas phase of the cigarette smoke. dr. kensler and liggett found an innovative charcoal filter that was designed to reduce cilia toxicity, which is damage to the little pulsating hairs in the throat and lungs that were caused by the cigarette smoke, and we did this in opening to demonstrate the movement of the cilia hairs to get the bad stuff out of the lungs. dr. kensler reported his research on the charcoal filter to potentially reduce risks in his landmark 1963 new england journal of medicine paper that you heard about. and one entire volume of liggett's submission to the surgeon general was devoted to the possible benefits of using an activated charcoal filter. this is just the cover of one of the nine volumes. "effects of gases and cigarette smoke on mammalian ciliary activity." 4049 the surgeon general discussed in the 1964 report and cited dr. kensler's new england journal of medicine article. and i think we have a cull out on that. "kensler and battista describe development of a method of bioassay for inhibition of ciliary transport activity involving exposure of the trachea of a rabbit to the test material." so this is just evidence that the research that he was doing on the lark cigarette on the charcoal filter was information they were sharing with the surgeon general's committee. the surgeon general actually went further and specifically found that the activated charcoal filter that was identified by dr. kensler was promising and could potentially reduce the harm arising from cigarettes. "activated carbons differ markedly in their absorption characteristics. carbon filters previously employed in cigarettes do not have the specific power to scrub the gas phase. it has been reported that a filter containing special carbon granules removes gaseous constituents which depress ciliary activity." that is liggett's research that we are talking 4050 about there. dr. cummings and dr. hurt did not want to tell you about dr. kensler's research and the discussion of it in the 1964 report when they criticized lark's charcoal filter and, significantly, neither one of them could point to any evidence by the surgeon general or any scientist in any peer-reviewed journal over the past 50 years that challenged dr. kensler's research, his methodology or his conclusions that were set forth in that important 1963 new england journal of medicine article. dr. cummings and dr. hurt knew about dr. kensler and liggett's work on charcoal filtration, but they ignored it and did not want to talk about it. mr. sales: your honor, may we approach, please? the court: you may. [#deleted sidebar#] [#deleted recess#] ms. luther: thank you. if i had known you needed a break, i would have drawn an objection earlier. the point of what i was talking about before is not that the charcoal filter was successful, but that it was a good-faith effort on liggett's part to try and find something that was going to reduce the risks of cigarette smoking. now, going back to dr. cummings and dr. hurt. dr. cummings and dr. hurt, on cross-examination you may remember mr. feiwus talked with them about a 2005 article that was performed by scientists working for the united states public health service. they were still investigating in 2005 the potential use of charcoal filters as a way to reduce lung cancer risks. this 2005 paper looked at the prevalent use of charcoal filters in japan. you may recall this. and they found that in japan where they smoke a lot more charcoal-filtered cigarettes than we smoke here, they have a much lower incidence of lung cancer. so in 2005 they are 4069 still exploring the vitality of the possibilities presented by the charcoal filter. the bottom line with regard to the charcoal filter is this: the lark charcoal filter, no one can tell for sure whether it is any safer than any other conventional cigarette, but what we can say is that it was a good-faith effort by liggett and dr. kensler in the early 1960s to try to make the cigarette safer and to reduce risk. and, again, the bottom line is no one knows where ms. westmoreland got her information that lark cigarettes were safer than any other cigarette on the market. to put the lark story in context, let us go back in time to when the debate began. what does the evidence show about what liggett did and what does the evidence show about what the other major tobacco companies did? did the -- the evidence showed that liggett took a path independent from the rest of the industry during critical parts of the story. we saw evidence that beginning in the late 1940s and culminating with the 1964 surgeon general's report there was emerging scientific evidence 4070 concerning the lung cancer risks of smoke, cigarette smoke. the first widely publicized story was the 1950 statistical study of wynder and graham, which was followed by a study by doll and hill in 1952. and i've said all of this ad nauseam probably, but the bottom line is that the scientists that were performing those studies back then agree that just because of their isolated results that was not the end of the story, that you had to do the studies again to try and reproduce the results that they were getting. mr. gustafson even mentioned this. you have to do correlation studies, you know, it is a building upon a consensus. so what did liggett do in response to this information coming out? we hired arthur d. little. well, let me back up. liggett responded by investing enormous amounts of money in research, biological testing program with its preeminent consultant, arthur d. little. it was -- arthur d. little was a reputable scientific firm doing work for major corporations in america at the time and 4071 united states government. the man in charge of liggett's testing program, dr. kensler, was a preeminent scientist from sloan-kettering in new york with impeccable credentials. and together liggett and arthur d. little set out to do two things. first, to coordinate with dr. wynder himself and to see if the wynder mouse -- wynder-graham mouse skin-painting -- try to say that five times fast -- could be reproduced. the second, to see if they could identify what, if anything, in the cigarette smoke could be identified as the problem. we have talked about this. you want to -- you have to identify what the problem is in order to try and remove it. essentially if the wynder-graham tests were reproduced, what in cigarette smoke was responsible for those test results? now, the wynder graham mouse skin-painting test was a landmark experiment. and when those results were released, labs around the country, not just liggett and arthur d. little, but people at yale, people at sloan-kettering, the cancer research institute and roswell park where 4072 dr. cummings started his career, they all began to try to reproduce dr. wynder's studies. wynder himself said reproducing his studies was an important scientific endeavor. and he himself participated with liggett and arthur d. little and weighed in on the research that liggett and arthur d. little were doing. you saw the report by arthur d. little and liggett concerning the results of their testing. they were, in fact, able to replicate dr. wynder's results, but in significantly lower numbers than what wynder got. and they used lower concentrations of tar or no tar at all. you heard dr. kensler was reluctant to publish those results because he did not want to undermine the information that was already in the public record about dr. wynder's test results. we know liggett continued in earnest with its biologic testing throughout the 1950s. and we know the researchers were able to identify important carcinogens in cigarette smoke that they believed were contributing to the biological activity in wynder's tests and the other tests. 4073 and at the appropriate time liggett made that science publicly available by publishing its results at the new york academy of science in 1960, and even more significantly, providing, voluntarily, all of its research, all of its data to the surgeon general's advisory committee. plaintiff's experts tried to turn liggett's positive efforts, its extensive research and consultation with dr. wynder and its cooperation with the surgeon general's committee on its head. instead of congratulating liggett on doing what no other tobacco company did, plaintiff's experts criticized us because we tried to do the right thing. we did independent science on the important issues at hand and made this research available to the public health authorities. even though dr. cummings has clearly not read liggett's submission to the surgeon general committee in its entirety, he was still willing to come into this courtroom and testify under oath that we did not tell them that smoking causes cancer and we did not tell them that we produced results similar to dr. wynder in our 4074 mouse skin-painting test and we did not tell them that nicotine is important in why people smoke. that is just flat-out wrong. you, again, are going to have liggett's submission with you back in the jury room. i just want to highlight a few things that demonstrate just how wrong dr. cummings is on this. the members of the advisory committee repeatedly praised liggett and arthur d. little for both the quality of the work and the amount of ground that was covered by their research. in defendant's exhibit 46, this is -- these are minutes from a 1963 meeting of the surgeon general's committee. and you will see that this -- the minutes reported, "these minutes can not possibly record the massive amount of data in these reports." then it goes on to say, "the chairman thanked drs. kensler and hainer on behalf of the committee for their comprehensive and well-organized presentation, as well as for the documents which had been prepared, and those still to come." then in defendant's exhibit 40, the assistant surgeon general at the time wrote to dr. kensler at arthur d. little. "we feel that 4075 simple acknowledgment of the receipt of the nine volumes which you submitted to us is not sufficient. please accept on behalf of liggett & myers tobacco company and arthur d. little our special gratitude for the tremendous time, effort and expense in the production of this material for our use." then in defendant's exhibit 47, this is a memo from the united states department of agriculture, the chief of the tobacco laboratory for the government said this about liggett's submission. "the report contains a wealth of information, especially with regard to the biological responses of animal systems to cigarette smoke." those are liggett's mouse skin-painting studies. he goes on to report, "in view of the voluminous amount of material contained in the report, it would be impossible to record here the many findings obtained in the ten-year period of productive collaboration." now, dr. cummings showed you a 1961 arthur d. little document called "l&m: a prospective review." and mr. gustafson talked about that in his closing. that is plaintiff's exhibit 112. and this is what the front of that document 4076 looks like. dr. cummings told you that liggett did not share the information contained in this introductory paragraph, that "there are biologically active materials present in cigarette tobacco. these are cancer causing, cancer promoting, poisonous, stimulating pleasurable and flavorful." again, i urge you to look at liggett's submission, because after you have done so i submit you will conclude dr. cummings was not sufficiently familiar with what liggett submitted to the surgeon general to offer the opinion that we did not tell them this in that document. there is a tremendous amount of information, 700 plus pages. just to give you a flavor of what is in the submission itself, we looked at the nicotine excerpts. let us see what else liggett talked to them -- or told them about. in defendant's exhibit 42, if you look at volume i on page 3, you will see that liggett researchers concluded that there is never less -- "nevertheless, we find enough of the results relating cigarette smoking to death rates to have been obtained in studies 4077 adequately meeting our standards for sound inquiry and analysis to satisfy us with respect to the overall conclusion that a gross statistical association exists between cigarette smoking and overall death rates." and they go on to tell the committee that that effect "increases with the degree of smoking, and very probably with the number of years smoked, the amount of each cigarette smoked, the degree of inhalation and (inversely) with the amount of filtration." now, filters. liggett also told the surgeon general's committee what it found with regard to filters. this is defendant's exhibit 46. liggett never said filters were safe. this is what liggett told public health officials about filters. "condensate from filtered smoke" -- condensate is the tar -- "from filtered smoke is just as or almost as carcinogenic as that from unfiltered smoke. filters can, however, reduce the amount of condensate for cigarettes, meaning lower the amount of tar that you are getting per cigarette. additives have been found which appear to reduce carcinogenicity of smoke, but 4078 none are yet practical." so we are acknowledging that smoke was carcinogenic. this is what liggett told the surgeon general's committee about filters. "but it was still thought that there could be health benefits to removing as much of the bad stuff as could be identified in cigarette smoke as possible." now, here is the table of contents of volume iii of the submission. it lists materials which have been suggested as possible carcinogens for the human lung and it lists these seven items: arsenicals, pesticides other than arsenicals, beryllium, nickel, chromium, free radicals, radioactivity. and then contrary to what dr. cummings told you, liggett did present the results of their own mouse skin-painting studies showing that they had produced carcinomas. that column all the way on the left there shows cigarette -- control cigarette produced nine carcinomas, fifteen papillomas. you just go down the list there. so we told them that we were getting results from our mouse skin-painting studies. i touched on nicotine earlier. i showed you 4079 what we told them about nicotine when i first started and was talking about nicotine. but clearly this information was not concealed by liggett from the public health officials whose job it is to protect health of the country. even with this information, the public health community did not find that nicotine was addictive until they decided to eliminate the requirement of intoxication so that they could call cigarettes addictive. so let us look at the l&m perspective again. just based on this quick review of a few pages out of a 700-volume submission, i have demonstrated to you that liggett told the surgeon general's committee that there are biologically active materials present in cigarette tobacco that are cancer causing, cancer promoting, poisonous, stimulating, pleasurable and flavorful and habit forming. it is very easy for dr. cummings and hurt to come in here 50 years later and apply present-day scientific standards about what we know about disease causation to liggett in the 1950s and '60s, but that is not a fair judgment and it is not accurate. 4080 the scientists working for liggett did exactly what legitimate scientists do. they replicated an important experiment and then built upon that research with new experiments, testing new hypotheses, and then they shared their data, the information they had regarding their testing program, and they identify for the public health authorities specific carcinogens. polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, they mention that in the submission. benzo(a)pyrenes, they mentioned that in the submission and a host of others that they found in cigarette smoke. it is all in the submission. now, let us contrast liggett's responsible conduct with its competitors, the other tobacco companies in the 1950s. what did they do? dr. hurt and dr. cummings testified to exactly what these other companies did. they got together at the plaza hotel in 1953. they hired the pr firm hill & knowlton. they created an organization called the tobacco industry research committee, otherwise known as the tobacco industry research committee, and they did not conduct serious science. they engaged in a campaign of disinformation. 4081 dr. hurt or dr. cummings, i confess i do not remember which now, agreed that liggett did not participate in any of those activities. and dr. hurt said it was because liggett wanted to avoid the controversy. and we also know this because of the 1958 document that was authored by tobacco company scientists from england that mr. gustafson showed you. let us see what they write about liggett. this is plaintiff's exhibit 110. "liggetts (sic) felt that the problem was sufficiently serious to justify large-scale investment by the company directly in experimental research on smoke and cancer, accepting privately that a strong case against tobacco had been made out and avoiding any public comment until their own research had provided something concrete to offer." "we were told that liggetts (sic) have already invested considerably more in this work than the combined donations of the rest of the industry to tirc." that is at page 5 of that document. unlike these other companies, liggett engaged in serious science, and it did not speak on 4082 issues until it had solid, concrete science to offer. and when it did have those scientific results, we know what it did. it published those results to scientists, health officials and the surgeon general. so what would mr. gustafson have you believe? he wants you to believe that all these companies are the same. he wants you to buy into guilt by association. just because liggett was a tobacco company, it should be lumped in with all these other tobacco companies; that somehow, despite these facts, that its conduct is indistinguishable from all these other tobacco companies. but you should not accept that. there is no evidence of it. plaintiff's whole conspiracy theory rests on liggett joining the tobacco institute in 1958 and its extremely limited membership in the council for tobacco research from march of 1964 until january of 1968. their claim is that because liggett was a member of the industry lobbying group called the tobacco institute it is now responsible for what every other tobacco company did or said for a 50- to 60-year period of time. 4083 mr. sales: objection, your honor. contrary to the engle findings and the court's instructions. the court: let us approach. [#deleted sidebar#] ms. luther: so i was talking about the tobacco institute. and you heard what dr. cummings said about the tobacco institute. he conceded that it had many members, not just members of the tobacco manufacturing variety. it included tobacco farmers, wholesalers, other people involved in the industry. and he conceded that those people were not part of the conspiracy even though they were members of the tobacco institute. the evidence showed that liggett was a minor player, at best, in terms of financial 4093 contributions to the tobacco institute and in terms of governance and control. according to dr. cummings, over a 40-year period of time liggett only contributed $1.8 million, about 45,000 a year. that is .3 percent of the total contributions by the rest of the industry. plaintiff wants you to believe that every letter, every comment, every statement made by the tobacco institute or by philip morris, r.j. reynolds, american tobacco company or the other tobacco companies on smoking and tobacco and health-related issues is somehow attributable to liggett and somehow part of a grand conspiracy. mr. sales: objection, your honor. same grounds just argued. the court: hold that thought. sustained. ms. luther: ask yourself what documents or letters did you see from liggett personnel authorizing or directing tobacco institute conduct or tobacco institute pr statements or comments. none. all of the directions came from the major companies, reynolds, brown & williamson, philip morris. and, in fact, other 4094 than documents from the tobacco institute with all these other competitor companies, what public statements, if any, did you see from liggett itself? mr. sales: objection. page 5 of the instructions. the court: you are going to have to approach on that one. [#deleted sidebar#] ms. luther: anyways, now we were just talking about the direction of the tobacco institute and whether there was any documents or anything along those lines showing that liggett was controlling its actions. this issue really bears on the issue of punitive damages that i'm going to talk about at the end. but it is relevant to the reprehensibility conduct -- reprehensibility of the conduct that mr. gustafson talked about. and i will tie it all together when i get to that section. okay? so you saw a bunch of ads for l&m and you 4103 saw a bunch of ads for lark. and with regard to the public statements you saw and with regard to the advertisements, it is liggett's position that they had no bearing whatsoever on ms. westmoreland. so when you go back to the jury room and you are instructed on the law and you have to -- actually, let us see. i lost my place in all that time up in the sidebar, so let me see where i am. okay. so with respect to all of the statements by the ti and the ctr and the other companies that you have seen, liggett or anyone else, did any of those statements play a role in regard to ms. westmoreland's decisions to start smoking, to continue smoking or to not quit smoking? and there is not a stitch of evidence that any of this made any difference to her at all. we know at every turn, every time she was warned of the risks of smoking, she turned a blind eye to it. when her brother told her she should quit, she told him to talk about something else or she ignored him. and we know that from '66 on, there was 4104 congressionally-mandated warning on the cigarette packs and from '72 the warnings were on the ads. they made no difference to ms. westmoreland. she smoked because she wanted to smoke. smoking calmed her. so the shortcut is no matter what you determine about the conduct of philip morris or reynolds or the ti or even liggett, did any statement or advertisement or conduct whatsoever by these companies have anything to do with her smoking decisions? the overwhelming evidence is that it did not. even ms. lambert said that she did not know what the companies could have done or said that would have changed her mother's smoking behavior. she was asked, "and what specifically do you think the companies should have said that you have any reason to believe would have made a difference in your mother's decisions as it relates to her smoking cigarettes?" and her response was, "i'm not sure." this is their burden of proof, and they have not met it. they have not proven with the greater weight of the evidence, and this is 4105 reliance instruction, and this is what they have to prove. so the issue -- i think i got it. slide it over just a bit. "the issue for your determination on plaintiff's claim for concealment is whether the concealment or omission of material information regarding the health effects of cigarettes or their addictive nature by liggett group was a legal cause of ms. westmoreland's lung cancer because ms. westmoreland reasonably relied to her detriment that liggett group would not conceal or omit disclosure of such material information. material information is that information which would have made a difference to ms. westmoreland's actions had it been disclosed." and you are going to get a comparable instruction with regard to the conspiracy question. now i'm going to talk briefly about the information that was publicly available concerning the health risks of smoking while ms. westmoreland was alive. the evidence shows that by the 1920s and '30s, the health risks of cigarettes were widely known in the united 4106 states. people referred to cigarettes as "coffin nails" because they associated cigarettes with disease and death. and when i say "coffin nails," i'm talking about the stuff that you nail your coffin shut with as opposed to a cough. because of the widely perceived health risks of cigarettes, many states, including florida, banned the sale of cigarettes in the 1920s. when that proved unworkable, the bans were repealed, but cigarettes were still associated with disease and death. plaintiffs say that ms. westmoreland could not have known the risks. with all of this information out there, there is no way that it was lost on her by the marketing advertising campaigns of the major tobacco companies. ask yourselves, is this really a credible argument? does this make any sense? so let us go back to the verdict form questions. we have already talked about questions one and two that i submit would be appropriately -- appropriately answered with nos. the third question that you are going to be 4107 asked to answer is, "please state the percentage of any responsibility which was a legal cause of jayme westmoreland's lung cancer and death that you charge to: liggett group and jayme westmoreland." and i previewed for you in jury selection that if you get this far, i'm asking that you write "one hundred percent" on the line for jayme westmoreland. and then it goes on to question 4. if you do not agree with me, you will answer questions 4 and 5, "was the concealment or omission by liggett group of material information concerning the health effects or addictive nature of cigarettes, or both, a legal cause of jayme westmoreland's lung cancer and death?" no. "did the agreement of liggett group with the other companies and entities to conceal or omit material information concerning the health effects or addictive nature of cigarettes, or both, a legal cause of jayme westmoreland's lung cancer and death?" and, again, we submit you should respond "no" to that question. 4108 now, one of the last things i want to talk to you about are punitive damages. and what you are being asked to decide today is whether or not punitive damages should be awarded in this case. you are not deciding the amount at this point in time. if you say, yes, that punitive damages should be awarded, there will be another phase of the trial. there will be additional witnesses and evidence presented to you, and you will have a second round of deliberations in which you determine what an appropriate amount of punitive damages should be. but what you need to understand is any punitive damages that would be awarded would go to ms. lambert and mr. westmoreland, and only mrs. lambert and mr. westmoreland. and the purpose of punitive damages is to punish and deter. if you decide they are entitled to money to compensate them for their mother's death, you compensate them fully for their mother's death through the award of compensatory damages. punitive damages are additional money awarded to them above and beyond any compensatory damages 4109 you might award. the judge has instructed you on the standard for awarding punitive damages. as i just mentioned, they are intended to punish liggett for its allegedly wrongful conduct, and they must be based on liggett's conduct by itself, not the conduct of any other tobacco company or entity. the burden is on plaintiff to prove by clear and convincing evidence, not by the greater weight, but clear and convincing evidence that she is entitled to an award of punitive damages. i submit that there is no basis for punitive damages here. and we do not believe you should reach this issue. but if you do, you should know that the clear and convincing standard is a much higher standard than the one used for you to find in plaintiff's favor on the rest of her claims. clear and convincing evidence is evidence that is precise, explicit, lacking in confusion and of such weight that it produces a firm belief or conviction without hesitation as to the matter in issue. here, whether there is any such evidence that 4110 liggett's wrongful conduct caused damage to ms. westmoreland and whether it is necessary to send a message to liggett to punish liggett for the way it is currently doing business. cigarettes are a legal product in this country. and you have seen from the documents in evidence that back in the day, liggett acted the way a responsible cigarette manufacturer should have acted. it conducted independent research to corroborate the results of dr. wynder's mouse skin-painting studies. it turned over almost a decade's worth of research to the surgeon general's committee, and the information provided to the surgeon general's committee was instrumental in allowing the surgeon general to conclude in 1964 that smoking was a cause of lung cancer in men. and even after the warnings went on the packs, liggett continued to do research and development and try to make its products safer for smokers. liggett today is the smallest of the major tobacco companies. it has approximately two percent of the market. dr. cummings told you that. back in 1996, it was the first tobacco company to publicly admit that smoking 4111 causes certain diseases and is addictive. and you heard that congress mandates what the warnings should be on cigarette packs. well, liggett puts a voluntary warning on its pack that is not required by congress, and you heard testimony about that. liggett today puts a warning on its packs of cigarettes that smoking is addictive. liggett is doing business as a responsible tobacco manufacturer. more importantly, and not to beat a dead horse, but liggett's conduct over the years had no bearing on ms. westmoreland. liggett does not deserve to be punished. in a case in which mrs. lambert admits her mother could have tried harder to quit, and her own decisions and actions were a legal cause of her lung cancer, there should be no question that punitive damages are inappropriate. and you should answer no to question 8 if you get there. question 8 says: "please state whether you find by clear and convincing evidence that punitive damages are warranted against liggett group, llc under the circumstances of this case." like i said, if you get there, we would 4112 request that you answer no. so i sit down now, and mr. sales is going to get up. and he has rebuttal because, again, they have the burden of proof in the case. i want you to remember some key points that tell you everything you really need to know to decide the issues in this case. you all know that we enjoy a tremendous amount of freedom in this country. we have the right to make decisions and lifestyle choices that are not always in our best interests. but with that freedom comes the obligation to accept personal responsibility for the consequences, and in the end, that is what this case is really about. are we going to hold liggett liable, legally responsible for the informed decisions of a strong and independent woman who lived her life the way she wanted to live it based on the evidence that you have heard? i think the answer is clear. mr. sales is going to have an opportunity to get up and have the last word. i do not know what he is going to say. but when you listen to him, ask yourself the following: what does 4113 this have to do with ms. westmoreland? what does this have to do with the story of ms. westmoreland? what does this have to do with the story you have heard over the course of the last two and a half weeks about ms. westmoreland? the evidence supports one and only one verdict, and that is a verdict for liggett. i want to thank you again for your attention. it took a little longer than i thought it was going to. we really appreciate the patience that you have shown throughout the course of this trial. and on behalf of liggett and the rest of my team, thank you very much. the court: counsel.