9 mr. sales: thank you, your honor. members of the jury, good afternoon. i'm probably short on time, and so my thanks are going to be short as well because the clock is ticking. it is almost the end of the day. it is almost time for you all to do what is the most important responsibility that the jurors or anyone in this courtroom have in the end. but on behalf of my clients and our clients and our group, and i know i speak for defense counsel as well, the court, the bailiff, our wonderful clerk and court reporter, everybody is very grateful for all the reasons that have been pointed out. i want to begin by starting and saying that i'd like to just focus for a moment on things that counsel for liggett began within and ended with in her closing argument and state 4119 areas of agreement about the case and areas about which we disagree and disagree very much. because counsel told you in closing argument that this is not about the public. it is about one smoker and only one smoker. and it is not about the other companies. and we disagree with that, and we disagree with that for reasons that you have already heard because i want to begin where counsel ended. and at the end of your deliberations and as you reach the questions on the verdict form, we ask and we hope that you will be answering the question of punitive damages. and i want to talk a little bit about what those standards are, because counsel has suggested to you that this case and your work, your important work from this point forward has nothing to do with everybody else. and it very much does so, because punitive damages are warranted if you find by clear and convincing evidence that standard that was just addressed by defense counsel, among other things, if there was a reckless disregard for human life for the safety of a person exposed to the effects of the conduct of the party sitting in liggett's 4120 position. and also -- also this is the court's instruction, you are going to have this in the jury room -- if they wantonly and recklessly disregarded the safety and welfare of public. we have got plenty of evidence of that in this case, some of which i'm going to review with you. and if they show the reckless indifference to the rights of others. and what you have just heard is that liggett expects when you get to this point in your deliberations that they should be exonerated because they were a two-percent player, at least that is what they tell us currently, current times, in a conspiracy that you have heard has resulted in the loss of life as a result of persons exposed to the conduct of this defendant and its co-conspirators, 20 million people. the other instruction you have from the court, while you cannot consider similar harms suffered by those 20 million in awarding amounts of punitive damages, you can accept in assessing the reprehensibility or wrongness of liggett group's conduct in this case. so we disagree, because that is exactly what the instructions tell us that on those 4121 questions, those end-of-the-case questions, end-of-the-deliberations questions that this case is very much about that. and we also disagree that it is not about the other companies, because the parties have referred to and the court has referred in its instructions to the issue of the conspiracy. this is part of the law that is to guide you in your deliberations. and what do we learn from it? "each party," that would include this party, "to a conspiracy is responsible for the acts or omissions of any other party to the conspiracy so long as the acts or omissions were in furtherance of the conspiracy. accordingly, liggett group is responsible for its own acts and for the acts of the other companies, organizations taken in furtherance of the conspiracy." and it lists them. american tobacco, that is who got it going. that is the guy who was quoted in the canasta pajamas article, denying what is in there. brown & williamson, those are the folks that did not tell anybody that filters do not do any good. lorillard tobacco company, they are the company, among other things, that 4122 were trying to juice the cigarettes up with ammoniation, among others. philip morris, they are the ones that were telling themselves that they just had to get the rat to push the lever again. and then we have the more frequent appears, reynolds, tobacco institute, you have heard a lot about them, and the ctr. and liggett wants a pass and wants to suggest to you that they should be exonerated for all of the things that those parties concealed as part of this conspiracy. and there is not any question about what the conspiracy was about, because, again, we have the engle findings, which are the law that guides you in the case and tells you what it is that you are to be thinking about, at least with respect to the law. and i've drawn these kind of goofy arrows on there because i want to acknowledge that we understand all of this, and you have heard this repeatedly that the findings do not apply unless, and that is where the "if" comes in, that you find that ms. westmoreland was an engle class member. but if that is the case, then the evidence is 4123 overwhelming in that regard. they have not really touched that. more on that in a moment, perhaps, if we have time. the cigarettes that she smoked, and that is every one of these, if you find that she was an engle class member, they were -- these are the court's words, "defective and unreasonably dangerous." that is important for a whole host of reasons, not the least of which is when you go to assess the reasonableness of ms. westmoreland's conduct, we are assessing the reasonableness or unreasonableness of her conduct consuming products that as a matter of law in this case, if you find that she was an engle class member, were unreasonably dangerous and defective. or is it defective and unreasonably dangerous? and then there is the other law. and the other law, again, tells us that these other defendants, they matter if the things that were being done during the period of time of this lady's life were things, i would submit to you, that mattered to her or would have mattered to her. and did not she have the right to know? did not she have the right to know some of these 4124 things you have heard about in this court? because, yes, while they were competing -- and i'll get to that in a few moments -- stories about does it cause cancer, does it not cause cancer and much, much later, the fight about the addictiveness of nicotine contained in cigarettes, there was no -- there was no expression publicly of the things that you have learned that you know that the defendants kept secret, the defendant here, i should say, and its co-conspirators. some of these apply to liggett. some of them do apply to other -- ms. luther: objection, your honor. the court: approach. sidebar conference: 17 court outside the presence of the jury:) the court: your objection is to the -- ms. luther: demonstrative. the very first one says "targeting you," which is talking to the jury, so he is implying we are targeting the jury. the court: might be a clerical mistake. end of sidebar conference www.phippsreporting.com (888)811-3408 court and jury:) mr. sales: yes. my bad. i'm sorry. i changed it to -- the court: clerical mistake corrected. ms. luther: okay. "youth." mr. sales: my brain works faster than my scribble. can you put that back up there? there is no evidence in this case that, as you know from documents from liggett and from r.j. reynolds -- ms. luther: objection, your honor. mr. sales: oh, sorry. ms. luther: your honor, i object to this demonstrative in its entirety, the use of the word -- the court: come on up. sidebar conference: 19 court outside the presence of the jury:) the court: i'm inclined to agree. mr. sales: i'll take it off and just argue. the court: argue your points. you want a chalkboard? mr. sales: no. i'll just write it. end of sidebar conference 4126 2 court and jury:) the court: we are going to go ahead without that demonstrative. mr. sales: i'm sorry. -- that youth was targeted. we know that from r.j. reynolds documents. we know that from liggett's documents. there is never been any evidence in this case that that was disclosed to the public. would that make a difference to smokers in this country? that there was an express interest and desire to addict young people and an understanding that you needed to get them while they are young and get them to commit is exactly what happened in this case to a particular brand, because that is the key to success in this industry. the industry knew these things would happen; that is to say that people would become addicted. there is never been any indication that in her entire period, the entire period of ms. westmoreland's life that she had an understanding of these matters, that they knew that she was at risk for cancer and death, that 4127 they knew that filters do not work, that they knew that lights were no safer, that they knew that they were trying to increase the effects of nicotine. and they come in and they tell you that that would make no difference to someone who has spent decades smoking and a portion of that period of time, the end of her life, trying to quit smoking. and that they knew that these products were unreasonably dangerous, and they knew also, as you see very clearly the document from the tobacco institute in 1968, that they were lying to the public about these other matters because they were trying to sell cigarettes. and, yes, you know, it is true that there are separate claims for liggett and the conspiracy. and counsel has addressed some of these issues with respect to the history of liggett. and at the end of some of this discussion, it was indicated that liggett, according to counsel, should be congratulated for its work. let us just take a little trip down history lane, the history of liggett, some of which you have seen in this case. and these were not 4128 documents that were cherry-picked among the millions. they are the ones that matter that we are aware of in this case. and we know in 1956 that the mouse-painting studies that they did were finished. did they tell the public that they had replicated that work? no, they did not. and that is what dr. cummings said. in 1963 when they were communicating with the surgeon general about those matters, they did identify that they had replicated work that was already in the public to some extent. but what dr. cummings was telling you and what the undisputed evidence is, is that they never acknowledged that cigarettes caused cancer in people, real people. not that they depress ciliary activity, which they demonstrated through one of their contractors or scientists with dead animals. there is no chance that if you are experimenting by design on dead animals that you are ever going to be able to show that cigarettes cause cancer. and did they persuade people that they should be congratulated for those things? well, i suppose they did. and you ask yourself whether or not there was an honest communication 4129 of these things. because counsel showed the part of the trip report that is favorable to them. but the part that is favorable to the plaintiff -- and there are two sides to that trip report -- is that when the tobacco brothers, as mr. bass called them with dr. hurt, came and reviewed these matters here in the united states, with everybody in the country who had a stake in it except one outlier scientist at yale university, liggett and everybody else said the same thing: cigarettes cause cancer in people. we know from their witness yesterday that they did not tell anybody that until 1997. now, let us just turn the clock back for a moment. we are going to turn the clock back to 1964, that giant story that mr. gustafson was talking about. and imagine, if you will, because he talked about addiction, if in addition to luther terry standing there buttoned up reading his report in front of all those reporters who were locked in a room so that they could read it before he spoke, imagine if as part of that presentation this defendant or any of the other manufacturers, because you have seen 4130 that they all knew it, had come out and said, yes, we cry uncle; we have been lying to you for ten years; we are sorry; cigarettes cause cancer. would that have made any difference? would that have been front page news? we submit to you that it would have been and that it would have mattered to people, especially people who were just taking up what they used to call the "habit of smoking." let us take a little bit more of a trip down memory lane here. in 1960, one of the documents we are accused of cherry-picking, they acknowledge -- mr. gustafson showed it to you -- that cigarettes cause cancer. and counsel has suggested to you -- you have it in evidence -- that that 1961 l&m perspective is just saying the same thing as they put in their submission to the surgeon general in 1963. well, you can judge for yourself. but what it is is an acknowledgment, the same acknowledgment in 1958, at least from the perspective of the plaintiff, that cigarettes cause cancer in people. that is what we are talking about. and were they straight? were they square, really truly square with the surgeon general on 4131 that? you have seen a few documents in this case that you know they talk about things that they were deciding whether to reveal to the surgeon general or not, and they decided -- we are going to talk about one of those in a moment -- to hide them. you may remember this. this is put in evidence by liggett. it is exhibit 246 in evidence. it has this heading on it. it comes from the department of agriculture. and it talks in the beginning of it about a visit that those folks in washington had when they met with the a.d. little people, kind of curiously, in 1963. and they are reporting three years later, upper left-hand corner, about the visit that they had with liggett's contractor. and this is part of the mix that was going on at the time in 1963, the things that were being told to the government. and when mr. feiwus cross-examined dr. cummings on this document, he showed him -- and you might remember it was one of those bullets that are in these slides, these powerpoint things that we use. and he showed 4132 him number four. he showed him number four about they acknowledge that there is cyanide, some of these other things. but what you did not see, and this is now in evidence, was what liggett, through its contractor, the same contractor that they are asking you that they should be congratulated for, the work of a.d. little, what do they say? "no direct chemical or biological data have been developed to support the epidemiological evidence indicating an association between cigarette smoking and lung cancer." that was a lie. they lied to the government straight out. and you look through that nine-volume thing that they are bragging about in this case. if you ask yourself if you see anywhere, just like dr. cummings said, that they say that cigarettes cause lung cancer, that would have been big news. they did not do that. we all can agree this has sort of a mind of its own. and so that is what happened, and that is in the middle there in 1963. and counsel also told you, you know, in an effort to persuade you that we just browsed through these 60 million pages and try to make them look bad, that those are 4133 their own words, words of government officials. we did not write those. we certainly did not write this either, because ms. luther told you that there ain't a bad document about liggett in the bunch. and what do you know? you know that in 1963 in a document which they say they are going to withhold from the surgeon general, liggett's contractor, again, a.d. little, undertook to estimate how many people were going to die, how many people were going to die from these products who were age 20 and above at that time. that is their work. and they withheld that from the surgeon general. and you ask yourself, is this the kind of cold, calculated, really bad stuff that the plaintiff's just cherry-picking out of thin air, other companies, to make this defendant look bad? well, no, because they estimated, without any help 50 years ago from anybody in this courtroom, and compared the consequences of these products, these unreasonably dangerous and defective products to car wrecks. and they were talking about men because the data for men was more available then. and it was by a factor of 4134 almost ten that they knew at the time, while withholding what they knew about cigarettes causing cancer is that they were going to contribute, does not matter if it is two percent of the industry or ten percent or a hundred percent, that is how many people were going to die. and that information just never managed to escape from liggett's files until 1997. not this document, just that cigarettes cause cancer. that would have been big news, really big. that would have opened the eyes of a lot of people in this country. and one thing that is incredibly interesting, two things about this document, is that while they want to say that -- lost my place -- while they want to say that they were forthright about these matters, remember one of those scientists, hammond, they were relying on the same epidemiological data. and by this time, they joined the tobacco institute. drumbeat after drumbeat, statistics do not matter, it is nothing, they do not prove. they are using epidemiologic data, the same kind of data that estimates how many people are going to be ill that they and 4135 their co-conspirators challenged for 40 years after this, 30 years after this and then some, to calculate it. and how cold and calculating is it? just shows, i guess, the lack of math awareness. you can look at the back of this document, it is in evidence, and there is a formula. that is what they did. that is what they did. and that is one of the documents that the plaintiff, according to counsel and liggett, cherry-picked from all the other available evidence. and this is a quote. they provided all of this, their research. they did not provide this. that would have been big news. and they tell you when they come in here that they should be congratulated, congratulated for comparing this product and its lethal and deadly consequences to car wrecks, unexpected loss of life in the middle of the night, crash, boom, dead, that is their comparison. and somebody needs to say something about that. let us talk a little bit about public awareness and what people know and do not know, because, you know, there is an old saying about trees falling in a forest, and if nobody is 4136 there to hear it, they do not really fall. and the reason that saying has staying power is because we all know that is not true. it is a reflection, in part, on the way people think about things and what they know and they do not know. and what you know, because you have seen it -- by the way, this is dr. dibacco. there was not any scientific controversy about any of these matters. his review of history is just wrong. one of the reasons his view of history is just wrong is his view is just, poof, any time these people, the tobacco institute or their co-conspirators did anything, this is what the public was doing. and the $250 billion that these very sophisticated companies spent -- ms. luther: objection, your honor. mr. sales: in evidence. the court: approach. sidebar conference: 22 court outside the presence of the jury:) ms. luther: i think that was just a knee-jerk reaction to hearing a large number. i think mr. sales is going to say that was spent 4137 on marketing. and i agree it is in evidence. the court: you withdraw your objection? ms. luther: i do. the court: do you want me to cover you somehow? ms. luther: no, i'm fine. the court: tell him you are sorry. actually, you owed him that and more. mr. sales: no, we are all good. end of sidebar conference 12 court and jury:) mr. sales: very sorry about that. the $250 billion that they spent on advertising, they were doing it because it does not -- they were rubes and nitwits who just throw that kind of money around. because what? because, according to the last witness that you heard, when they are clearly, clearly trying to tell people that they are doing something to help them, to save them, to make it better for them, safer, just, you know, make us feel with that filter we are doing okay, that that -- no, this is really about taste, do not you see? and that is what happens when you put 4138 blinders on in a case like this, you only look at one side of the picture, and you do not look at the company documents where the company spent, one assumes, because we know from ms. luther just recently that they spent a lot of money on research, well, they spent a lot of money on advertising, too, and we know that they tested these things to find out how people would react. and you saw from the documents reviewed by mr. gustafson that people look at that and look at their ads and say, hey, that looks like there may be one of those cancerless cigarettes or safer cigarettes out there. they paid money to find out if people would react that way. and you saw the review of it from a related document from their lawyers. there was not any mystery about that. and nobody ever came out and said, hey, you know, we are trying to tell you that it is safer. we know it is not. we know it is really addictive. and the picture that we have on here on the nicotine filter, filter, it is like being in space where we get pure air to breathe, one of 4139 those ads. it is like being in a submarine, all these super-clean, clear places that you will be protected. why do we show you the ads of the other companies? we do not show them to suggest to you that x bought cigarette brand a because they saw the ads of cigarette brand b. that is not the point. the point is that we lived in a time where people responded to these kinds of products that way. and there is not any doubt about it. there is not any doubt that that was the purpose of these ads, to suggest to people in the face of lots of information on both sides a controversy, they call it, right. there is not any question that that had to do with trying to help people believe that they did not have to worry so much. that is what filters were all about. and we know from the documents of the conspirators, many of them, that that is exactly what the purpose of all these messages were. and would not it have been useful for jayme westmoreland to know that when you are dissecting a filter and responding to ads and telling your son that you are proud because 4140 you are switching to light cigarettes that it was all, poof, nothing but lies? so it is just, you know, the very unusual situation. and one has to appreciate the difficult position that some of us are in in this case to be saying, yes, it is true we said these things for 40 or 50 years, but you knew all about it. when i say "you," i mean ms. westmoreland knew all about it. but even if you did not, we were justified in saying the things that we said. is that really the evidence in this case? and, you know, one of the reasons that we go through these things or we talked about these things, these are in evidence, showing that, you know, philip morris and other defendants are speaking publicly. they are arguing in the new york times. that we showed these things not just to show that dr. dibacco is way biased, and not much more needs to be said about that, but that the controversy that they invested so much money in spending, by estimates, 365 times on their messages what the government had available to spend on the same thing, that that was not trivial. 4141 i mean, they have newsweek articles in there. you saw this. there is a newsweek article, the head of the tirc, he got equal time. we showed these things. time magazine in the '70s over and over and over again. and what do we know? for reasons that may seem mysterious, the lawyers and the witnesses are talking about things that happened in new york city. well, you heard that these things actually made their way elsewhere. and what do we have? these are in evidence. i'm not going to go over them, but you will have them available. we have the asbury park evening press. that is in evidence. that is near where she lived. they are picking up those stories. they got the messages from bowman gray. we are in the '60s now. they have got the messages in there. bowman gray was the president of r.j. reynolds. they got equal time. they got equal time where she lived. there is a few of them. and you can take a look at those if that is a matter of interest to you, all right. it was just a theory cigarettes cause cancer. and then, you know, we have one from greenville, south carolina where she lived in 4142 the '70s. it was not buried in there, right. right here. horace kornegay. you have heard his name. he got equal time in the '70s. and the suggestion is, you know, that that tree just was not falling in the forest where this unfortunate lady lived. and you know that is not so. you know that is not so. you know, sometimes things they just do not happen by accident. here's an article. she is living in st. petersburg by this time in the early '90s. in 1991. and there is a blast from the past and a blast from the present. lo and behold, michael cummings, a witness in this case, is correlinked with walter merriman, one of those tobacco institute people, in the st. petersburg times in the '90s here, '91, about the controversy. and merriman says researchers do not know whether smoking causes disease. and it does not make a particle of difference. nice choice of words. what the views of our council for tobacco research grantees may be -- they are talking about whether the industry is paying for good or bad science -- we are interested in the quality of their research, not what their personal views 4143 are. but the point is the same. well into the '90s -- and it is hard for us to think about those things. and i want to agree with dr. dibacco about one think. think about what was happening then and not what is happening now. no internet, right. so how did they do it? well, you have seen enough, we submit, to see that this is just a portion of it. the press releases from the tobacco institute, the '50s, the '60s, the '70s, you have seen how these things got picked up. and the drumbeat and the message that cigarettes do not cause cancer, they do not cause heart disease, attacking the surgeon general. and there is some from some other companies in there. it is in fair -- baron, is that pt5504? i think it is probably about 200 pages. just take a look. it is another trip through history. and the industry wants to tell you that nobody heard those things. you know because you have seen the way that they were picked up over time. you know that, in fact, they got their equal time. and the suggestion that their power waned in the midst of spending in the second half of 4144 20th century, $250 billion on advertising, and these massive grants and bribing the ama and all those kind, did that just, it just did not work on anybody. and you know those things made a difference. let us talk a little bit about doctors, because -- how did they do it? it is diabolical. it is one of the reasons punitive damages are warranted in this case even for the two-percent contributor, because there is not any question that in 1968, 1958 forward that liggett was part of the conspiracy. there is not any question about it. and they are in for a pound because that is the way the law of conspiracy operates. it recognizes that there is a particular danger associated with wrongdoing when people get together and act as one. and it may be true that when marlboro started to take a little bit of everybody's market share, they said we should use calcium hydroxide, we are going to use ammonium and we are going to use diammonium phosphate, and we are just going to add free nicotine. you can plug the names in. liggett, lorillard -- it is true they have their own ideas about that. but 4145 point is for us and for the deceased, jayme westmoreland, is they never told anybody those things. and it made a difference. how did they do it? we talked a little bit about the doctors. i mean, this is in evidence. i'm just going to review a little bit with you. this is their tobacco and health research notes. they are talking in here about that this is their communications with the medical profession. they sent these to every doctor in the country. and they would collect often their own bogus science in reported form about what was going on. remember that constitutional hypothesis and the multifactorial hypothesis? anytime anybody anywhere in the world said it is air pollution, it is virus, it is this, it is that, it sure ain't cigarettes, they put that prominently in these things and sent it to people all over the world. and, you know, when you look through it, they say it is pollution. they say it is medical technology. they say -- there is something in here -- not making this up -- about being a nun. there is stuff in here about being divorced. there is stuff in here about genes, family 4146 factors. and it is hard not to -- it seems impossible that anybody could be taken seriously to say this now. but this is what they were telling the medical profession as a result of work that they were doing. this is from the early '50s, '60s. and you will notice, if you look through these, it is always in britain or sweden, because we did not have the internet, cha, cha, cha, cha. that is ridiculous. well, that did not exist in 1962, and they were telling the medical profession, hey, you know what, carcinogens do not cause cancer. and it may seem, in the context of a very serious matter like this, ridiculous. but when you look through this, they will tell you that it was baldness -- and i cannot remember if when you are bald, it is more likely that you get it or not, or being left- or right-handed or born in march and all kinds of things that just seem ridiculous, but that is what they did. and, by the way, just part of the trip down memory lane, one of the things that they reported to people, doctors -- and this is from 1958, was that japanese people do not get as much 4147 cancer as americans, even though they smoke more. that was not news. that was not news. it is not news today. but, you know, to the extent there is been any suggestion in this case that filtered cigarettes pioneered by these people have caused the japanese to have less cancer, there is no evidence of that. and even the thing that mr. feiwus showed dr. cummings on that does not say so. you know, did it work? well, mr. gustafson showed you the documents from where he said that they congratulated themselves. but there is more than that to understand why these things mattered to an addicted smoker. you have got a report, and ignore, if you would, just for a moment, this is in evidence, it is pt3870. it is a federal trade commission -- do you have that up? let us just look through a couple of those. trade commission report in 1967 when there was concern about filtered cigarettes. and, actually, i just will read some of those while baron -- mr. philipson is picking them up. "the failure of the warning statement on packages to have any discernible effect on 4148 cigarette consumption is easily explainable. the warning statement on the package alone has proved to be ineffective, mainly because people do not seem to pay --" "-- few people --" excuse me. "-- seem to pay attention to it." and then it talks about the motivations for smoking. and it talks about the extensive advertising in this country. right? and it talks about how the ads blot out the things that people had a right to know. they never showed people with laryngectomies, their larynx cut out. they never showed people not being able to make it -- ms. luther: objection, your honor. [#deleted sidebar#] mr. sales: you will have this in evidence, while mr. philipson is pulling it out, and it is a comprehensive review by the government of not only what it is that people were seeing -- and mind you, we are talking about a time when the -- ms. westmoreland was about 16 years old, at the bottom of page 12, middle of the bottom of page 12 of the report. i'm sorry if i miscommunicated to you. just focus on the bottom. you do not have to highlight it. it is all right. it reviews how many times people are seeing things in a day when we only had three networks for television, including 151.1 million viewers in an individual week in january. that means 141 viewers age 13 to 17. that means, on average, next page, "each of the 18 million inhabitants of the united states" -- that would include jayme -- "13 to 17 4152 viewed 7.8 of the programs during the week in question. this represents a substantial increase over the 5.9 programs viewed on average by persons without distinction of age. intentional or fortuitous, teenagers appear to be a prime target for televised cigarette advertising." and there is not any dispute about that. this document also contains some information about what they were doing with respect to cigarette advertising and the theme of filters and how those were applied in cigarette advertising. and then it has a discussion, which is what i was talking about before, page 23 of the document, the things that they do not say, the things that were not revealed because the industry, including this defendant, individually and collectively was not going to tell anybody about it. and, yes, it is true you would display in advertising, you would not want to show someone unattractive in your advertising. i do not think anybody argues about that. but the point simply is, is that they were selling a dangerous and 4153 addictive product that could kill people after addicting them, and none of those matters were disclosed. you also have in evidence an extensive evaluation of the impact of these things into the 1980s -- into the 1970s, and beginning the 1980s in another report. if you show the cover, from 1981, it is the ftc report, and i urge to you look at the introduction. i urge you -- that is chapter one. i urge you to look at the discussion about advertising. because in 1981 when the ftc revisited these matters, they reached the same conclusions and said that the same effect of cigarette advertising -- and by that time, as you know, it had already left television -- the impact of advertising from cigarettes was the same. it was the most heavily advertised product in america. and by the way, page 2-3 of that is where those estimates that they were spending more on that in a year -- excuse me, in a day than the government had to spend on smoking and health messages. and then in chapter 3 of this report, and i urge you to look at it, again, it is pt3165, it 4154 has an extensive evaluation of the things that americans did not know or knew insufficiently at the time. how many people did not really appreciate the risks of smoking and how many people did not think that cigarettes were addictive. take a look at that, if you would, please, and see how many people did not know the things that liggett says everybody knew. let us talk in that regard about this. because what i heard was that between 1964 when the first surgeon general's report came out that we have been talking about and 1988, there was not any difference in the knowledge about consumers or the public health community about addiction. it was just a name change, just a name change. you know from dr. hurt and dr. cummings and from the industry's own intransigent fighting to have this happen that that is just not true. and you do not have to go very far in this document to find out why that is not so, because the surgeon general, at the introductory sections of the book -- and it is in evidence, i forget the number. mr. philipson: 3828. mr. sales: 3828, it is in evidence, this 4155 whole thing. all this stuff is in there. if you just take a look at the introductory section, the surgeon general explains why it is so important. just like mr. gustafson was talking about to re-educate people and tell them that this is an addictive drug that acts on the human brain like other drugs. he talks about how this is going to lead to the development of other therapies, and that is exactly, as you know from the evidence, what happened. let us talk a little more about addiction because, you know, we only have to go back -- and again, if you just -- sometimes when they say everybody knew, because they called it a habituation in a textbook from 1931, they picked that even though the witness says -- their witness says those things change every six to seven years. so you have not had an opportunity to see how, if at all, the controversy might have affected the content of public school books afterwards. but, you know what, we can look. again, take a trip right back to st. petersburg, florida and see if back then, 1994 may, that is a year of importance in this case, and you know 4156 why, you know why for a variety of reasons, because you know that the defendant and its co-conspirators were still saying it was not true, that the surgeon general was wrong. but right here in st. petersburg, there was a story in the paper that says from the times publishing, so not sure if there was a wire service involved or not. and what do we know? that is when those hearings were going on we have been hearing about. and remember that fellow, bill dwyer, got up in front of all those microphones, the microphones that nobody was paying attention to, according to the defense, in 1979, and says "it was suspect from" -- that guy, okay. what was going on, what was going on back then, joe califano, he was a secretary of hew they called it then, he was attacking, saying watch out, because he is going to come into your bedroom, going to take your cigarettes and come in your bedroom. remember that guy? all right. so part of this hearing part of this hearing, they were talking about -- mr. califano came in and said, you know, there was just starting to be a lot of talk about that in 4157 1970s about that, we were all victims of the concealment. this is the secretary of health, education and welfare. and compare what he probably knew, i would submit to you, as lawyers say, with what jayme westmoreland probably knew in the 30 years before this. "'we were all victims of the concealment and disinformation campaigns of the tobacco company,' said joe a. califano, who once smoked as many as four packs a day, but since has become an anti-tobacco crusader who calls tobacco history's number one serial killer." this is in evidence. he describes that debate that led up to 1979. he said that, "dr. william polin, then director of the national institute on drug abuse, urged carter surgeon general julius richmond to pronounce cigarettes addictive, but richmond resisted, citing a lack of sufficient scientific evidence." there was not any lack of scientific evidence inside the files of these folks. but that was the public status of these things into the 1970s and unknown until secret information was leaked 4158 out in the 1990s. and then in another trip down history lane, there is a quote from walter merriman. he was one of those tobacco institute people you have seen in some of the videos. i believe, if not, there were certainly others. and what he said was -- what he said was "vice president of tobacco institute, noting that anti-smoking fervor was far more subdued during the 1960s and '70s when califano served in government than it is today." that even if califano and public health officials had tried to get nicotine declared addictive, it would have been almost impossible for him to do anything more than they did. and you know what? right here in 1994, the same year that means a lot to a lot of people in this case and in this courtroom, we learn from right here in st. petersburg that "in recent weeks, there was a growing debate over smoking, has focused on whether nicotine is indeed addictive, as numerous medical experts have maintained, and whether the tobacco industry has been manipulating levels of nicotine in cigarettes to keep smokers hooked on its 4159 products." and then at the end, they talk about one of the documents that you have seen in this case, going back, addison yeaman, back in 1963. i think that might be a typo. but certainly is similar to what is described here. they knew it back then. so you are asked to measure the conduct of jayme westmoreland and decide for yourself, if you would, please, whether when the secretary of hew comes and says, i did not know that, i would have done differently, whether it is fair, whether it is fair to say to these folks, my clients, it is all your mother's fault. it is not right. that would not be a just verdict. and that is why mr. gustafson suggested the figures to you that he suggested. and consider the testimony of the expert witnesses in this case on this question. because the defense position is even when it comes to filters, not only, poof, you never listened to what we said, you never listened to the gas -- those are all in evidence. you can look at them. not only you never listened to that, but that you should have known better that 4160 filters were doing nothing. the thing that we spent so much money investigating about it, right. and you know not only, not only because this is undisputed from dr. cummings, and defense does not dispute this, that there are no safer, you know from the documents, things concealed by co-conspirators in this case that they knew it and they knew it back in the 1950s, they knew it. and you know from dr. cummings and dr. hurt that the public health community itself did not recognize these things -- what was it? dr. cummings -- 2001, i believe, was the testimony of dr. cummings, and they want to tell you that jayme westmoreland, who selected filtered cigarettes -- and there has been testimony about that -- it is all her fault, when sophisticated scientific people who dedicated their lives to these matters during those same decades were telling people to switch to the same products that she switched to, where this defendant was bragging about those things. and that is why that number, that amount of responsibility of 4161 fault you put on her should be small. finally, i did not talk about the compensatory damages, the entitlement to punitive damages. i started with that. it is very clear. and we just ask you, you know, think about the way the case was tried a little bit and, you know, there are two sides. mr. gustafson said there is only one side to the story. well, you know, there are -- there are some parts of this story that have two sides. and that was what the controversy was all about. but at the end of the day, it does not matter. if you find that ms. westmoreland was a member of the engle class, because the resolution, the decisions that you have to make, we would submit to you, on these other matters are transparent and clear in this record. yes, she deserves some responsibility, and mr. gustafson hit that nail on the head. but on those other questions, on those liability questions, we ask you for these folks, my clients, to return a verdict in their favor on all of those questions, and award an appropriate amount of compensatory damages for their loss. thank you very, very much. it is been a 4162 pleasure to get the opportunity to do this and do this in a place like this for these folks. and i appreciate everything that everybody in this courtroom contributes to that. thank you so much. thank you, judge.