in the circuit court of the first judicial circuit in and for escambia county, florida case no. 2010-ca-003072 robert lamotte, as personal representative of the estate of vivian barthelemy kemp, plaintiff, vs. rmr. lewis: may it please the court. good afternoon. we have come a long, long way. you all have been patient and waiting. and one of the things in our country, the jury system speaks. it speaks loud. you have seen this process now firsthand. and on behalf of all of our team and everybody, we take this opportunity before i say one word, to say thank you. thank you for your service. and now, in a little while, you will go back into that room -- not today, but it will be sometime tomorrow -- and you will have three jobs. three jobs. one is to answer the questions on this verdict form. this is your verdict. this is your speak. number two, you will make sure that every one of you follows the law that the judge gives you. you will be able to take back the jury instructions that the court gave you in reaching your verdict. it has to be based upon the law. and then number three, you will get to explain to each other why you feel the way you feel about the evidence in the case and how you believe the facts apply to the law. so i am going to try at this late hour, while you have been waiting and waiting and waiting, patiently, to try to go through the evidence that we believe -- what the evidence shows and apply what the evidence, the facts, your verdict, are to the law. so please, again, bear with me. now, members of the jury, companies should never engage in a conspiracy to lie. it is against the law. this claim is brought on behalf of the estate of ms. kemp for that very reason. i want to start with you and bring you up and then i'm going to bring you back and discuss what the evidence has shown on this particular issue. let us start with pt 3862a, please. (thereupon, the videotaped clip was played to the jury as follows:) speaker: i'd like you to rise, and those who will be testifying as well with you, to rise. if you would raise your right hand. do you swear that the testimony you are about to give is the truth the whole truth and nothing but the truth? please consider yourself to be under oath. speaker: do you or do you not agree with the surgeon general's estimate of over 400,000 smokers died? speaker: i do not agree. speaker: okay. do you know how many die each year? speaker: i do not know. speaker: okay. they agree that smoking causes lung cancer. do you agree? speaker: it may. speaker: do you know whether it does? speaker: i do not. speaker: the medical experts agree that smoking causes emphysema. do you agree? speaker: it may. speaker: they agree that smoking causes bladder cancer, stroke and low birth weight. do you agree? speaker: it may. speaker: mr. tish, i want to move to you for a moment. in a deposition last year, you were asked whether cigarette smoking causes cancer. your answer was, quote, i do not believe so. do you stand by that answer today? speaker: i do, sir. speaker: do you understand how isolated you are in that belief from the entire scientific community? speaker: i do, sir. speaker: you are the head of a manufacturer of a product that is been accused by the overwhelming scientific community to cause cancer. you do not know? do you have an interest in finding out? speaker: i do, sir, yes. speaker: what have you done to pursue that interest? speaker: we have looked at the data. the data that we have been able to see has all been statistical data that has not convinced me that smoking causes death. speaker: mr. campbell, you were also deposed and you said, quote, to my knowledge, it has not been proven that cigarette smoking causes cancer. this is a rather passive and puzzling approach, especially in light of the consensus not by some, but all of the scientific community. will you ever be convinced and what evidence are you waiting for? and let us have the microphone passed over. speaker: yes, i may be convinced. we do not know what causes cancer in general right now. so i think that we may find out what causes cancer and we may find out some relationship, which has yet to be proven. speaker: let me begin my questioning on the matter of whether or not nicotine is addictive. let me ask you first -- i'd like to go down the row -whether each of you believe that nicotine is not addictive. i heard virtually all of you touch on it. yes or no, do you believe nicotine is not addictive? speaker: i believe nicotine is not addictive, yes. speaker: mr. johnston? speaker: congressman, cigarettes and nicotine clearly do not meet the classic definitions of addiction. there is no intoxication -speaker: we will take that as a no. again, time is short. if you could -- i think each of you believe nicotine is not addictive. we just would like to have this for the world. speaker: i do not believe that nicotine from our products are addictive. speaker: i believe that nicotine is not addictive. speaker: i believe that nicotine is not addictive. speaker: i believe that nicotine is not addictive. speaker: i too believe that nicotine is not addictive. (thereupon, the videotaped clip was concluded.) by mr. lewis: q now, members of the jury, this was in 1994. the court just read to you one of the instructions that you will get on the law, which will be instruction 22, which does give people the right to appear before congress and various regulatory agencies, under the law, these defendants have the right to petition, provide information, express their views to the governments on the issues of policy and legislation concerning smoking and health. these and similar communications with the government, advocacy efforts, and government submissions are protected under the first amendment of the united states constitution, as well as florida law. however, false, misleading, deceitful statements and representations are not protected under the first amendment. there is an old saying, it goes, oh, what a tangled web we weave, when we try to deceive. that is what was going on. if i take you back, and you come back with me, to 1953. in 1953, these companies decided to get together, get together and began to conspire to conceal and/or omit information that they knew existed and not let the american people know. so what i would like to do is, if we could go back with -- and i know you have been here now for five weeks. at the beginning of this trial it took us a while to select a jury. and then the first witness went on -and i do not have a picture of the first witness -- but he went on, dr. cummings, and we went through all of these documents and it is hard because you are just sitting here and just learning this stuff just at this point in time. so if we go back and look at what went on -let us go to pt 01044. what these cigarette companies did was decided to create doubt, create confusion and conspire. so what they did was -- as you can see, i suggest for your consideration a meeting of the heads of all these cigarette companies, those cigarette companies that have manifested active interest in scientific research and are, therefore, informed as to the true facts. the objective would be an industry response to these charges exposing their lack of scientific foundation. because if you can recall, there had been recent information that had come out where a famous scientist had done some experiments with mice that showed that the smoke, the tar was carcinogenic and was causing tumors and the suggestion was that cigarette smoking caused injury. so they say, let us get together so we can discuss this. so then what happens? what happens is -- go to pt 02061, please. so what they did was, all the members got together. they did this forwarding memorandum and they had this planning committee and they prepared this forwarding memorandum, and what they said was -- the attitude of the men we must directly deal with in the industry is at once interesting and important for us to understand. one of the men said it is fortunate for us that cigarettes are a habit they cannot break. said another, boy, would not it be wonderful if our company was the first to produce a cancer-free cigarette. what we could do to competition. now, this is in 1953. so what they do is, they say, there is only one problem. confidence and how to establish it. public assurance and how to create it. and most important, how to free millions of americans from the guilty fear that is going to arise deep in their biological depth regardless of any pooh-poohing logic every time they light a cigarette. so what they are doing is acknowledging that people now are hearing that there may be health concerns regarding their product. and, they are saying we have got to free them of this fear that is going to arise deep in their biological depth regardless of any pooh-poohing logic any time they light a cigarette. so what do they do? they meet and they come up with this frank statement to cigarette smokers. it is pt 0037. well, they first do a draft of the frank statement and say we believe the products we make are not injurious to health. they go on to say that -go to the next one. you can see they cross out: we will never produce and market a product shown to be a cause of any serious human ailment. so that was suggested to be in the frank statement, but they decided, no, we cannot put that in there, because that was never their intention. then let us go to the next one. the committee will undertake to keep the public informed of such facts as may be developed relating to cigarette smoking and health and other pertinent matters. this is the beginning of the conspiracy to hide and lie and not tell the public the truth with respect to cigarettes and their ability to cause people harm. so what they did was, they came up with the frank statement and took that information out and said the following: that medical research of recent years indicates many possible causes of lung cancer; that there is no agreement among the authorities regarding what the cause is; that there is no proof that cigarette smoking is one of the causes; that statistics purporting to link cigarette smoking with the disease could apply with equal force to any one of many other aspects of modern life. indeed the validity of the statistics themselves are questioned by numerous scientists. we accept an interest in people's health as a basic responsibility paramount to every other consideration in our business. we are going to see if they kept that. we believe the products we make are not injurious to health. same thing it said in 1994. they do not know. we always have and always will cooperate closely with those whose task it is to safeguard the public health. we are going to go through some of the documents where they say be vague. do not give them everything. if you find something, send it to my house. do not put it in the file. send it to colone. do not put it here. we are going to discuss that. all of them, with the exception of liggett, was a part of this frank statement at the time in 1953. so members of the jury, what happens? they begin putting out information. and let us go to pt 04212. smoke without fear. it says if you are a man or a woman who smokes, relax and enjoy. if you tried to give up smoking a dozen times and failed, quit trying. if you have guilty feelings that you are weak-willed, immoral and suicidal, begin anew to smoke with peace of mind. so this is the message that they are going to send and that they are sending to the american public. so what happens? let us go to july of -- take it three years later, pt 01608. they begin this process. and then in july of -- about four years -- three-and-a-half to four years later, they are congratulating each other. you took a bold and courageous action in december of 1953 when you called for a meeting of manufacturers and other industry groups to discuss ways and means of presenting a united front against the claims that were being made that cigarette smoking causes lung cancer. the formation of the tobacco industry research committee was the result. there is absolutely no question in my mind that if this committee had not been formed, the cigarette industry by now would have been in a deplorable position. instead, a very fine job has been done in counteracting unverified, unjustified and unsubstantiated claims of the anticigarette fanatics. in other words, the tirc has been a successful defensive operation. now, they admit that had they not gotten together and agreed that they were going to lie, they were going to conspire to conceal information that was material to people with respect to the health issues of cigarettes, they admit that their business by now would have been in a deplorable position. and the truth of the matter is, you have seen the evidence in the case. when people get the facts and they got the facts, if the facts had come out much, much, much sooner about the truth -- they did this all the way up -- you saw in 1994. that is where i started. to continue to create doubt in our product. i'm going to continue to show you -- they know that their position would have been deplorable, and they would have not been able to continue making the profits that they did. now, this is not just me talking. what they say specifically is -- and i'm going to show you this document. pt 4719. you do not have to put it up. in fact, what you can do is put up slide 5, please. one of the things that they were going to do is -- we are going to talk about this -- get them while they are young. i'm going to show you the documents with respect to that. set the hook deep. enhance the addictive properties of the cigarettes. i'm going to show you the documents. this is not mr. lewis speaking. none of it is what mr. lewis is saying. this is what their documents say. not what just dr. cummings and dr. burns say. you are going to have all of the documents back there when you have an opportunity to look at everything. deny the truth. giving psychological crutches to addicts, those are not my words. they used give them a psychological crutch and then blame the smoker. say we cannot defend in these cases free choice if the person is addicted. so blame ms. kemp. you will not hear the defendants when they stand up here try to defend what they did because they cannot. what they will do this entire case is talk about ms. kemp. free choice, free choice. and they knew that they could not defend any of these cases in what they did and conspiracy to lie, lie and continue to lie, if the individual was addicted to their product. so in 1994 they say is your product addictive? they say it is still not. they say no, it is not addictive. no. no. no. when every major scientist, everybody knew, they knew after 1953 -- and we are going to go through the documents -- that their product was addictive. they said many people who smoke would like to stop. some might stop, but most cannot. they knew it and we are going to show it. their motive, members of the jury, was money. i want to go to the documents that discusses that very issue. let us start with pt 4791. you remember all of these documents -- i asked dr. cummings, and we asked dr. burns, they say confidential. and they went to dr. burns and dr. cummings, and called dr. cummings, you are a general in the war against tobacco, and they went at him hard for a couple of days. all he is doing is talking about their documents. but what they do is they do not want to take responsibility for the conspiracy that they engaged in. just attack. attack. attack. attack the ms. kemps of the world. attack the other hundreds of thousands of people a year who die from smoking cigarettes and are addicted to their product. just attack them and continue to attack them. the nature of the tobacco business and the crucial role of nicotine -- and what they say specifically is -- let us go to the -- in a sense, the tobacco industry may be thought of as being a specialized, highly ritualized and stylized segment of the pharmaceutical industry. tobacco products uniquely contain and deliver nicotine, a potent drug with a variety of physiological effects. well, what are they talking about? sir, will you raise your hand to god and tell these people that nicotine in tobacco is addictive? no, no. and these are their documents. they call it a habituating effect when you go back there. what i've done for everybody, at some point in time -- because we do not have time to go through everything, but i'm going to leave this right here and if at some point in time, i would respectfully request, at the appropriate time for you, to look at the numbers of these documents when you go back there. so that you can look at the documents that -- we are not going to get to go through everything, so you can make a determination after looking at the documents if it is not what mr. lewis is saying or not what anybody else is saying, it is what they are saying. so at some point in time, i would respectfully request and invite you to do that. so what they say is, a tobacco product is, in essence, a vehicle for delivery of nicotine. so they know that what they sell is nicotine. it says it is designed to deliver the nicotine in a generally acceptable and attractive form. our industry is then based upon design, manufacture, and sale of attractive dosage forms of nicotine. happily, for the tobacco industry, nicotine is both habituating and unique in its variety of physiological actions. sir, will you put your hand up to god and tell us whether nicotine is addictive? the documents say we know it is both habituating, unique in its variety of physiological actions. hence, no other active material or combination of materials provide equivalent satisfaction. if nicotine is the sine qua non of tobacco products, and tobacco products are recognized as being attractive dosage forms of nicotine. go to the next part, please. he does not start smoking to obtain unidentified physiological gratification or releases and certainly does not start to smoke to satisfy nonexistent craving for nicotine. only after experiencing smoking for some period of time do the physiological satisfactions and habituations become apparent and needed. indeed, the first smoking experiences are often unpleasant until a tolerance for nicotine has been developed. this leaves us then in a position of attempting to design and promote the same product to two different types of market with two different sets of motivations, needs, and expectations. we should really make and sell -- what we should really make and sell would be the proper dosage form of nicotine, with as many other built-in attraction, gratifications as possible, that is an efficient nicotine delivery system with satisfactory flavor, mildness, convenience, cost and et cetera. on the other hand, if we are to attract the non-smoker or pre-smoker, there is nothing in this type of product that he would currently understand or desire. we have deliberately played down the role of nicotine. deliberately played it down. hence, the non-smoker has little or no knowledge of what satisfactions it may offer him and no desire to try it. instead, we somehow must convince him with wholly irrational reasons that he should try smoking in the hope that he will for himself then discover the real satisfactions obtainable. now, what are they talking about? this is their documents. it is not ours. so that people will start smoking their cigarettes, and then, hopefully, after they continue smoking them, it will become an addiction and you continue to sell them and sell them and sell them, and then you have got a customer for life. if as proposed above nicotine is the sine qua non of smoking, and if we meekly accept the allegations of our critics and move forward with reduction or elimination of nicotine from our products, then we shall eventually liquidate our business. meaning, they will not make any more money. so what are they doing it for? to get paid. there is nothing wrong with doing business in america. this is america. we live in a democracy. there is nothing wrong with good business. however, when we talked at the beginning of this case, you cannot lie, you cannot conspire and not tell people the truth about what it is that you are giving them. now, people in the generation that we are talking about, like ms. kemp, they came up at a time when smoking was the norm. if ms. kemp, in fact, was not smoking, she probably would have been in the minority. they smoked everywhere. there would be ashtrays in the courtrooms on this wall right here. you would go to the hospitals, there would be ashtrays. we showed you on the sidelines, vince lombardi had a cigarette in his hand. we showed you in an operation room, a surgeon had a cigarette. so this is a different time and a different era. i'm not -- we are not asking you at any time -at the hospitals. in schools. after 1953, after december of 1953, cigarettes were contingent -- and there is nothing wrong with marketing their product. what is wrong with it is not telling the truth about what it is that you are doing. so she came at a time when this was the normal. so members of the jury, the cigarette companies, what they did and what they said they would do is, we are going to sell to anyone that wants to buy our product. that sounds like, okay, that is fine. but what they did, members of the jury, one of the easiest groups of all of the times to sell is to kids. it is to teenagers. the judge, when he read you the instructions in the case, he told you one of the first, very first instructions in the case, you may use reason and common sense to reach conclusions and you may draw reasonable inferences from the evidence and apply the law as the court has explained. now, why do i say that? because we are in a courtroom and everything is so ritualized and formalized and there are times when you have got to, when you are walking out, look this way and look that way. we have got a judge who is judging everything that we do, sends you out, come back in, makes sure everything is there. but the important thing in that instruction, so you just talk like you are in your living room talking and discussing information. i know it is a formal setting, but the law says you do not have to check your common sense when you walk into these doors in the courthouse. you can use your common sense. now, we all know that the easiest target and that people prey on people that are teenagers, that are young. that is why you saw, and we showed you, and i beg that you remember -- they did the first deposition of the lorillard corporate reps. they first did the individual, dr. robinson, and then did mr. wayne. the lawyer kept asking her: well, look, do you-all market to youth, teenagers? she continued to say no. no, it is our official policy that we do not market to teenagers. we do not do youth marketing. and then he kept showing her the ads, if you can recall, and discussing with each other where there was a christmas advertisement about the cigarettes, and there was santa claus on one of them. and the lawyer asked: now, you are saying this is not marketing to youth? she could not say nothing else, but: yeah, that would be, and we would not do that today. then he asks, well, why? she said: that would be irresponsible. so at the time, after 1953 is what we are talking about, and during the time period that ms. kemp was an early smoker, they were marketing these products to children. and even before that, not for any responsibility on their part for anything before 1953, but you have got to assess -one of the things, if you get to this point and we are going to discuss that -- what the comparative responsibility was on negligence claims or strict liability claims, and we are going talk about that too in a second. there is just so much information we have to talk about in a limited amount of time. we have been here for almost five weeks. so just bear with me. so you have got a situation and a circumstance where they are marketing to kids. so he continued and continued and they did the annual reports and then started talking about 14-year-olds, 15-year-olds, 16-year-olds. put a guy in a letter, varsity letter sweater and a pretty girl, looked like a cheerleader, said, you do not think this is marketing to children and to kids, teenagers? then you saw the documents. i do not have time to go through every one of the documents. that is why i pray that you look at them and look at the ones that are for the youth documents. that what we are talking about is 14 -mr. henk: your honor, i'm sorry. i need to object about praying to the jury. the court: sustained. rephrase. mr. lewis: yes, sir. that we request that you look at those documents. what they were talking about is getting 14-year-olds, 15-year-olds. you will see the percentage -- can you put that document up? -- of the number -- i think it went to 12 years old, 13 and 14 and 15, to determine how many people were smoking their products. and so we know -- what we know is -- he can get it and we will find it -the court: we will take about a five minute break. (thereupon, the jurors exited the courtroom.) the court: we will be in recess for five minutes. (whereupon, a recess was taken at 4:25 p.m.) mr. henk: have we figured out when we are stopping today? the court: probably 6:00. i'm going to suggest that they prepare to be here later tomorrow night. chances are we will complete plaintiff's opening portion of their final argument. we have all of our key players back. we are ready to continue. mr. maguire, are you ready? mr. maguire: yes, your honor. the court: call the jury if they are ready, please. we will probably take a rest room break in about 45 minutes. mr. henk: i'm sorry, your honor, when is the rest room break? the court: forty-five minutes. (thereupon, the jurors entered the courtroom.) the bailiff: jury is in the box, your honor. the court: thank you. counsel, please continue. mr. lewis: may it please the court. where we left off, we were talking about, they called it younger adults. reported as replacement smokers, to replace those people that were passing away. so you have got to have someone to replace them. so what they are looking at is -- they do not look at the age group of teenagers. they are looking at age groups beginning at 12 years old, 12, 9.9 percent of the males smoking in that population, by the time they was 12. thirteen, 13.4. 14, 20.8. 15, 30.3. 16, 42.9. 17, more than half before they are 18. so they do and they were, and the evidence will be overwhelming with respect to this, that they were marketing to children. these are children. now, as i indicated, most teenagers, especially 12- to 18-year-olds -- everybody knows -- our common sense and our good judgment and our experiences know it is the nature of teen-age children to try things, to try them for thrills. it is just their nature. there are all kinds of people who take advantage of that. no one should be allowed to take advantage of a population that is our most vulnerable. we want to protect our children. we want to protect them from starting what they know -- they call it a habit. they know if they can get them when they are young and hook them, then for a long time we can make profits off of them and continue to replace the older people who pass away with children. that is not me talking. this is them talking. i'm just delivering the message. so with respect to what they did was -- and it goes further, what they knew -- let us go to pt 1040, please. so they acknowledge that -- let us go to 002. realistically, for our companies to survive and prosper over the long term, we must get our share of the youth market. in my opinion, this will require new brands tailored to the youth market. so you remember the documents that we showed you where they say, well, let us go to where the young people are. let us go to the beach. let us go to the parks. let us see if they like coca-colas. let us see those things. they were actively -- even though they were denying it -- remember, we showed you that video, and i may take some time to show it to you again, where the lady, they were asking her the question: do you-all market to youth, the african-american lady, and she said: no, we do not market to no youth, knowing that they were not telling the truth. they do market to youth. that is what they called their replacement smoker. and go to the next one, please. let us go to 03. and so they describe what i'm attempting, maybe not as artfully as they do, they are describing it in their own documents. for the pre-smoker and learner, the physical effects of smoking are largely unknown, unneeded, or actually quite unpleasant. the expected or derived physiological effects are largely responsible for influencing the pre-smoker to try smoking, provide sufficient motivation during the learning period to keep the learner going, despite the physical unpleasantness and awkwardness of the period. in contrast, once the learning period is over, the physical effects become of overriding importance. they hook them. that is not me talking. it is them talking. i challenge them to stand up to you when they get an opportunity to talk to you to explain this to you. when the physical effects become of overriding importance, when they get addicted. and the desirability to the confirmed smoker and the psychological effects, except the tension-relieving effect largely wanes in importance and disappears -because they know that once they hook you, they have got you. they got a lot of people. they got them for years. ms. kemp. go to the next one. and many, many americans. they go on to talk about it. they do not just stop there. having identified these as highly desirable to the confirmed smoker, but largely unknown, or pleasant, awkward and/or undesirable to the pre-smoker -- this is the little person who just started. this 12-, 13-, 14-, 15-, 16-year-old child. or the learner, this teen-aged child -- the effort here should be to effect a compromise to minimize the undesirable effects while retaining these, which later become desirable. meaning, do not make it so bad. like when they said i tried it and then vomited, or it is such a bad experience. make it mild. make it mild so we can hook them. so we can hook them because we know we have got that nicotine in it. once we got them, then we got them. but the problem with it is not telling the people the truth about it, to conspire to keep this information from people. so what they do is they go on and say -- not mr. lewis again -- nicotine effects, nicotine should be delivered at about 1.0 to 1.3 milligrams per cigarette, the minimum for confirmed smokers. the rate of absorption of nicotine should be kept low by holding the ph down, probably below 6. and for what purpose? you remember i showed you those documents about adding the linvulinic acid, making the ph just right. so if you lower that ph just right to 6.0, you can freebase that nicotine and get that nicotine right there, and it is going to have -- what did they say early on -- a soothing effect. so they know this. 1994, you swear to tell the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth. is your product addictive? no. they know it. go to the next page, please. group identification. we all know peer pressure is real. it is not made up. children want to be a part of something. they want to get out from under the control of their parents and they want to be a part of something. so pre-smokers learned to smoke to do what? identify with and participate in shared experiences with a group of associates. all my buddies are doing it. i do not want to be the outcast. so we are going through puberty. your brain is not developed very well yet. so these are the people that are the most vulnerable, that they decided to go for. that is not acceptable in america. that is just not acceptable. now, so what they do is, they say if the majority of one's closest associates smoke cigarettes, then there is a strong psychological pressure, particularly on a young person, to identify with the group, follow the crowd, and avoid being out of phase with the group's value system. even though, paradoxically, the group value system may esteem individuality. so what they are saying is we know that peer pressure is real. so if we can get them and get them with the peer pressure, then we are going to have a whole group of people smoking. ms. kemp's generation, like i said, it would have been unusual for her not to smoke. the evidence was that almost eighty percent during that generation began to smoke. stress and boredom relief. then they talk about the teens and the early 20s are periods of intense psychological stress, restlessness and boredom. they figured all of this stuff out. many socially awkward situations are encountered. the minute or two required to stop and light a cigarette, ask for a light, finding an ashtray provides something to do during periods of awkwardness or boredom and afford a little timeout period when confronting a stressful situation. the fragile developing self-image of a young person needs all of the support and enhancement it can get. smoking may appear to enhance that self-image in a variety of ways. so the reason why that is important is as we showed in advertisements after 1953, and some before, when ms. kemp started smoking, for which we are not making a claim for, as i've indicated. so they would get the greatest athletes in the world -- that is like getting michael jordan -- to take a cigarette and smoke it. and think, every child in america would want to be like michael jordan. they get bob cousey, one of the greatest basketball players in the world, and all of these other athletes and actors, and it is on television and they are telling you that, look, this fragile developing self-image of a young person needs all the support and enhancement and smoking may appear to enhance the self-image in a variety of ways. if one values, for example, an adventurous, sophisticated, adult image, smoking may enhance one's self-image. if one values certain characteristics in specific individuals or types of persons or types of smoke, then if one also smokes, he is psychologically a little more like the valued image. so, yes, that was the culture. so now, in this particular case, on the negligence claims, if you find that ms. kemp is a member of the engle class -- and we will go through it a little more once we have got these instructions. there is a negligence part 2, those engle findings that talk about negligence. negligence, members of the jury, is a law. one cannot be negligent and be in conformity with the law. if one is negligent, you are breaking the law. one has to use reason and a reasonable care in whatever it is that they are doing. one of the findings you will have is that these cigarette companies violated the law because they were negligent. okay. one of the other things that those findings will say -- and i'm paraphrasing and i'm going to read it straight to you -- is that it is against the law in america for any company, for any company, to sell a product that is defective, that is unreasonably dangerous. you cannot sell a car that is defective and unreasonably dangerous. you cannot sell any product in america that is defective and unreasonably dangerous. that is a finding that you are bound by. the court will tell all of us we are bound by it. that is against the law. we know and you know that cigarettes are defective because they are defective as a matter of law because they are unreasonably dangerous. so in that sense and with respect to those two claims, ms. kemp, you can also look at her comparative fault, her comparative negligence. everybody with me, i hope? so when you look at those two claims, you can assess, well, what is her negligence, if you find that she is a member of the engle class, which is what we are going to discuss here shortly. so when you look at it, ms. kemp -- and we have said on those claims -- bears some responsibility. yes, she does. but you got to be the finder of fact. i told you before, when we was selecting the jury, the part of the jury that i had an opportunity to talk to, do you know what presentism means? it is difficult to look at a circumstance today that we know, but go back, all the way back to the time when she was living. because we know a lot. they got tobacco-free florida. call hotline. they got everything that tells people about smoking, smoking, smoking. there ain't no mixed messages now. that is why we are talking about a specific group of class, people that dr. engle was representing in that class action in miami years ago. so we are not talking about those people. we are talking about a specific class of people who were situated differently. so i'm respectfully asking that you put yourself in that circumstance to determine what you think is reasonable and appropriate, if ms. kemp is a member of the engle class, to determine what you think her responsibility is vis-a-vis somebody's responsibility who just flat out -- they are going to tell you in the findings, they lied. nothing negligent about it. you should not -- maybe peer pressure is real and all of that, but that is negligent. meaning, if i take my car and run it into the back of somebody, i did not try, i mean, i was negligent. that is against the law. i was negligent. but that is totally different than if i take my car and say i'm going to run straight into the back of you and i'm going to intentionally do it. that is different. totally different thing. i respectfully request that when you are discussing that, you are talking about ms. kemp, if someone said that is ms. kemp, no, you look at it and say, well, why cannot we look at it this way. let us look at this information with the information that ms. kemp had available to her at the time. then they are going to show you all kinds of stuff. they put textbooks in. you know, they read all of these numbers. they wanted to find everything in the world that they could to figure out and say everybody knew. we really did not trick ms. kemp. we really did not trick all of these people. everybody knew this. but you have got to put everything in context. what we did was -- and you will have an opportunity to look at all of this. every time something came out, they put out a press conference. these people put out more press conferences than you have ever seen in your life. you will look at every one of them. i do not have time to go through them all. i wish i did. i wish we did have more time so i could read to you what -- they still are sending these messages out to people. and they know when you send a mixed message to people -- you know, when i had dr. dosovitz on the stand, and it is -cross-examination, it is difficult. and everybody who goes through cross-examination with experienced lawyers, it is tough. they got great lawyers on the other side. people got experience in this courtroom. so you get an opportunity to put them under the fire. and it is a mechanism by which the court conducts those examinations because you ask the questions. it is not asking someone a question, and waiting for a response. you get to lead them, so that is why it is effective. and then you are like, well, how can i lead them, and then they have got to answer whatever it is you say. so what you are doing is telling them, making a statement and getting them to agree with it. and then they cannot -- you know, they are just sitting in a situation where you cannot explain this, you have just got to agree with my statement. so it is really -- you can see the dynamic of it, when you have got a witness that is under the fire on cross-examination, when everybody turns from the witness, as far as looking at the lawyer, because the lawyer is really the one that is making the statement. so people do it unconsciously -- they do not know it -- but then they start looking at the lawyer because he is making a statement, which is what they did with dr. cummings. we did not even have to call dr. cummings or dr. burns for real. because dr. cummings and dr. burns, they was just a repository of information. when you look -and you will look at the circumstances by which every one of these people came in here, and you -the court -- it is in the instructions. you look at their qualifications. you determine whether they are qualified, competent, capable and excellent. that is up to you. now, you look at dr. cummings, you look at dr. burns's qualifications vis-a-vis the people they brought. dr. cummings, they chose him from new york to be the repository once they unveiled the conspiracy that they created. they have figured it out. they figured it out and said dr. cummings, the most world renowned person in america in this issue, will you take these 16 million documents and be the custodian of these documents? are they going to ask dr. dosovitz? dr. dosovitz was in someplace talking about some type of harassment claims or something he said he was doing as far as representing plaintiffs, i cannot remember, because he would say one thing one day, and then come back the next and say something different. but, anyway, that is what we are talking about. you can make it look like, with a skilled lawyer, that dr. cummings do not want to give the information. he got all the information. he knows the truth. so it is just, like i said, call him. just here is the documents, but then it is tough for you all to put it in context because this is so new for you. you have not seen it. you cannot say that you have not learned something new in this case. you did not know some of this stuff. and then, to ask ms. kemp, with a skillful lawyer -- remember when the lawyer for philip morris got up, one of the things they asked, ms. lamotte there on the stand -oh, it might have been susan, i'm sorry. hey, we had people from the tobacco company call you up on the phone, did not we? she said: yeah, they called me up. did you talk to them? she said: yeah, i talked to them. the only question -- were they polite? yeah, they were polite. were they polite? you saw them questioning ms. kemp. it is like me. it is like taking a heavyweight champion fighter and putting them with a 16-year-old kid. and the lawyer knows every little inkling of every little thing that you-all now see. go out, come in. go out. man, how is it so complicated? it is real simple. it ain't tricky. it is simple. because he knows he can be polite to ms. kemp and try to get her to say things that he knows. ms. kemp do not have no idea. so tell me, ms. kemp, in 1948, what you was doing when you first woke up? well, you tell me two weeks ago what you did when you first woke up. and then they are going to say, oh, ms. kemp got the -- oh, she did not have no memory. she could not remember this. well, i wish could have asked him what he did in 1958. or what he did when he was 16 years old. you got to look at, you get to judge the credibility of everybody who took the stand in this case. but what did dr. dosovitz do and what did he say? he said: i gave ms. kemp this big ole' test and i asked her who the last six or seven presidents were. i said: did you bring in a tape recorder so the folks could hear what you really asked? no. why not? did you bring your key to score her so that we could really share with you all what her score was? no. why not? so we looked at it, they asked ms. kemp to count backwards from 7 from 100. she got the first one, 93. then if my memory serves me correctly, she said 84. he said ms. kemp asked for a pencil. i said: does this, does this piece of paper refresh your recollection as to what happened? yes, it does. then ms. kemp got from 84, she said, okay, let us use 84. then she went -- 71, 72 -- apparently she is trying. seventy-three, 74. he said: no, ms. kemp. he come in and tell you, oh, she scored as a 40 year old. then he said: spelled world backwards. ms. kemp could not spell world backwards. i may not be able to spell -- i'm not sure, but ms. kemp did not. see, but i can use my clinical judgment. well, would you tell me those three words, ms. kemp, that i used? she could just tell one. she made up another word with it. she did not get them right. but yet he is going to tell you because, see, you do not have the benefit of all of the information. he is going to come in here and make it look like ms. kemp was not being frank, when in every situation and circumstance ms. kemp was told -- and ms. kemp was a few weeks from dying. been on oxygen for years. but they are going to say, ms. kemp, you were foolish. it is all your fault. everybody in that generation, you all are fools for falling for my lies and conspiracy. you a fool. it ain't right, members of the jury. i told you before that our jury system speaks. it speaks loud. it speaks louder than any speech ever written. it speaks louder than dr. martin luther king's speech. when he said i have a dream, it speaks. you speak much louder than that. it speaks louder than president kennedy's speech when he said ask not what your country can do for you, but ask what you can do for your country. it speaks loud. the reason i say that, members of the jury, is because you get a rare opportunity that you will never get again. you will not get no opportunities like this. many are called, but few are chosen. you got the opportunity when you catch them wrong, your verdict speaks. in america, do not nothing speak louder than a verdict that deals with making somebody take responsibility for what they do. yeah, ms. kemp got to take responsibility for what she does too. but so do they them, them, them, them and them. they do too. and we -- yes, these are not easy circumstances. yes, they got some great lawyers that are going to come up here in the morning and be very, very articulate. everybody got different styles. everybody's different. they would not have the same style i have. they may comment about my style, and say i do not do it like mr. lewis did. so, hey -- and that is's fine, i got that. i understand that. but they are smooth. they are good too. they are going to tell you all the things that ms. kemp did. everything that ms. kemp did. and what i'm suggesting to you, members of the jury, is that what they did, they did it for a reason. and the reason -- i did not show you all of it, but i want to show -- let us go to slide number -- first, let us go to slide number 4, please. you know what, before we do that, go to five and then i'm going to come back to four. i apologize. members of the jury, i shared with you what one of them said, but -- mr. philipson, will you highlight the first one? this is the whole goal. it is not me. if we move -- and this is found in pt 4791. if we remove or we move toward reduction or elimination of nicotine from our products, then we shall eventually liquidate our business. so if you make cigarettes nonaddictive or if people do not crave them, need their fix like ms. kemp talked about, then let us just liquidate our business. we do not have no more business. who wants to smoke some cigarette or something that do not have nothing that is going to give me that fix? so they say we are just going to liquidate our business. pt 1809. without the chemical compound -- and there is some other good stuff in here, not from mr. lewis, but from the companies. without the chemical compounds, the cigarette market would collapse. philip morris would collapse. and we would all lose what? our jobs and our what? consulting fees. that was the bottom line. get paid. get the young people, hook them. pt 1820: however, we cannot ever be comfortable selling a product which most of our customers would stop using if they could. that is to say if the exit gate from our market should suddenly open, we could be out of business almost overnight. so what did they do? what was the conspiracy all about, members of the jury? it was simple. they say, and they recognize in their documents, that we are in the business of selling nicotine. we know nicotine is addictive. and if ms. kemp is a member of the engle class, it ain't no -- like the -- he was trying to say, it can be. it can be. no. do not try to hedge like that. it is addictive. it is unequivocal and uncategorical and there is no question about it. so you cannot hedge on it. it is addictive, and they knew it. so what did they do? they had to create a controversy. they had to conceal and omit information regarding the health effects and addictive nature of nicotine. now, when you see things -- you all do not get to see -- you know, you all are citizen servants, but these words have meaning. we do not have an opportunity to discuss them with you to explain it very well. if ms. kemp is a member of the engle class, all of these defendants concealed or omitted -see, this word is important. you know, do not just gloss over it. that word is called "material." it could have been immaterial. it could have been any other word, but the court is telling you that it is material information. it is not irrelevant. it is not immaterial. the reason that is important is because what they will do, they want to say, well, the reader's digest had an article that said smoking was dangerous. your husband told you smoking was dangerous. everybody in america told you smoking was -- everybody knew smoking was dangerous, everybody. so they are going to come up here, i take it, probably for minutes and minutes and minutes and sit here and tell you about all the places that was talking about smoking was dangerous. like i said, i have just as many press releases giving different information. what is the goal of it? if you find that ms. kemp was a member of the engle class, you are bound to say that this is material information. so they had other information that was more than what the public knew, okay. they had more information. let us think it through. i do not have time to go through every document. we know they just put up a list of their chemical agents in cigarettes. not all that long ago, okay. they have additional information. they have got scientists and studies. remember, they talked about this tirc that we all -- this group, that we are going to let you, in that frank statement, study this stuff. they did not study anything. they got a public relations firm called hill & knowlton that had a lawyer draft this white paper, is what they called it, if you can remember correctly, and i know you took copious notes, but share them with you -- what they did was they got a lawyer. they did not get no scientist. they got a lawyer and a pr firm to do what? create doubt. do you remember the document that said create doubt. doubt is our business. they said that. it is not me making it up. that is what they said. so what they do is they have got additional information that the public do not. so just because you have some information, like, cell phones might cause some issue. or you believe there is ufos. you might believe something, you could do it superficially. you might have heard of something. you might have looked in a book and saw something. we do that every day. but just think, if they had all the information that these people did in 1953, ms. kemp and millions of americans could have been on the road to quitting their addiction a lot sooner. that is the point. ms. kemp, you kept on smoking? yeah. yeah, you told me these filters were cool. you told me they were good. you told me low tar, low nicotine was okay. and they continued telling people that. you remember dr. burns and dr. cummings talked about people's addiction and continuing their addiction and they get in an addiction cycle and they start rationalizing things to keep on their addiction. you know that. you got -- you do not got -- just use your common sense. because that is what they did. so let us create the doubt. every good thing that comes out that the public health is doing, we have got to do something also. you remember the document that i showed you with dr. cummings -- this puts everything into perspective -- that the public health agency -- and like i said, they may have every single public health agency piece in the world that exists that they put in evidence. you heard every last one of them numbers that they was calling out yesterday. what in the world? number this, number this, number this. that is all that stuff. just think about it, members of the jury. in the ftc report that i showed you -- you look at the document, it is back there, but you have got your notes -- it said that -- this is a public health agency -- the cigarette companies spend more in one day than is our total budget for a year. so this is what ms. kemp and other addicted people are dealing with. yeah, the law reigned them in some. they required them to put caution labels on it. ms. kemp, you saw the caution label. yeah, i saw the caution label. millions of people saw the caution label. they came and played the song with this country western guy. and i am like, who is this country western dude? i never heard the song. it was a catchy song. then i got the words to it and he said he would murder the person who made the cigarette in the first degree, i think is what he said and i read it. the guy said he would because he died -- he died of lung cancer. they had larry hagman. everybody knows. let us get this public service -- quit for one day and it will lead to everybody quitting. did he quit? he just recently died of cancer. they had another man, mr. reasoner, i think they used him. same thing. they had the man who was actually on the news after the surgeon general came out talking about this is what the evidence is about smoking. did he quit? he died of lung cancer. it is powerful. every agency in the world, the world health organization, which dr. burns is international -not just in south florida or -- he is international. people all over the world contact dr. burns. the guy they called yesterday, i believe dr. andrews, was renowned. the surgeon general would say come in here. joycelyn wiles, when she was the surgeon general, c. everett koop when he was the surgeon general of the united states of america, they would be calling these people in for help. help us. you know what he did, which i found was interesting. mr. norton had an opportunity -- and it is tough to cross-examine, because these people are professional. okay? he puts a lawyer in a situation where it looks like he is trying to beat up the dude, and it makes us look like, i do not know. i do not know how we are coming off. but just do not check your common sense at the door. what he did was -- he was a member -- he said he was a pulmonologist and was a member of the american thoracic something, something. and they -because they know -- the organization knows that this do not just affect ms. kemp. this affects a nation. it affects a nation of people. and the reason i'm telling you this, if you get to this point about punitive damages, it do not just affect ms. kemp. you are going to get the instruction that says you can use it, that it affects everybody. hundreds and hundreds of thousands of people. that is why you got to punish them. that is why we respectfully request that you punish them and say that there is an entitlement to punitive damages for this type of conduct. it do not go like that in america. you cannot do that. it is not just mr. lewis talking. but so what he said was that, yeah, i was a member of that group. and then mr. norton pulled out and he found -- which i thought was amazing. i did not discuss it -- he pulled out the guidelines of the group and it said something about if you are going to be working in the tobacco industry, man, you are supposed to be a pulmonologist. yeah, i tell everybody not to smoke. but yet still you are going to come in and get paid -- i cannot remember if he said 568 or $768,000 for doing what he is doing with tobacco companies. it is an oxymoron -- but still you are going to tell people quit smoking, quit smoking. but in the back frame you are supporting tobacco companies and their interests. mr. norton pointed it out, that it was against their background. and when it was pointed out in a case, i guess it was, he realized and recognized that and he quit. quit the organization, so he could keep getting paid. he quit it. and he is all, no -- he was a smooth guy. no, i just forgot that was on my cv. i just need to take it off, mr. norton. it made mr. norton look like he was the bad guy. mr. norton was not the bad guy. he was just pointing it out. and the reason we are pointing it out is because, as the judge said, you have to weigh people's credibility. you have -- he said a couple things already. he said: dr. dosovitz, have you ever written on smoking and addiction? he told ms. briggs in the deposition he do not just cure eighty percent -- he told 85 percent. that is what he told you all. he told ms. briggs one hundred percent. i cure everybody. well, did you ever write a paper about that? do something. it seems like he is never written. not one article has he ever written. compare that with dr. cummings who has written hundreds. you remember how painstakingly -- the reason i did it -- and i know you do not understand everything we do in these cases. it is like you sitting in a vacuum trying to figure everything out. man, this is taking a long time. so that you, when you go back there and someone is talking about this person, dr. dosovitz, vis-a-vis dr. cummings, the way it was going was very astutely because you have got good lawyers. maybe dr. cummings, are you being hostile? i want to get the people the truth. he wants to make his statements. so in this context, it ain't like we talking in a living room. you know it ain't true. you know this is what it says. you cannot just stop right there. read the other part. so then we have got to get up and remember everything he said and read on to page 11 and the other line. so you look at the qualifications, their competencies and their excellences. you look at it. it is no comparison. zero comparison. so the question is initially, was vivian kemp addicted to nicotine in cigarettes? that is the first question that you are going to be required to answer on the verdict form. and you are going to get the instruction and you are going to get the form. that is the form that you are going to get. i was going to show you. you can look at it. but this is going to be the form, okay. so that is the first question, was ms. kemp addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine. what was the evidence on it? i do not want to -- you remember the evidence. put up this slide, please. we believe uncategorically -- and remember, one of the -- put up the slide, please. you are required to look at the evidence. these jury instructions tell you how you are supposed to answer the question. what is the standard by which you are to judge. okay? because you judge the facts. remember, this is not a criminal case where things have to be proved beyond and to the exclusion of all reasonable doubt. remember the folks that i talked to during jury selection, i put my hand here and one up here to mean beyond to the exclusion of all reasonable doubt. that is not the standard. the standard is what is more likely true than not. okay. what is more likely true than not true? you got a person who smoked cigarettes since she was 16 or 17 years old. you do not got to check your common sense at the door. she smoked between a half a pack and a pack of cigarettes every day for 47 years. did it really take dr. burns or dr. cummings with their fancy degrees to talk about whether that person is addicted to nicotine? i do not care what they say. sometimes you have got people that are smokers in denial. there is nothing wrong with that, but that is part of the rationalization process that people go through. you have seen the documents. the documents tell you that is the way -- so the question is not whether ms. kemp quit and all of that stuff. you are not going to get no question, could ms. kemp quit smoking cigarettes. you will not get no question like that. so we spent a lot of time talking about that. that is not an issue in the case. this is the issue. ms. kemp maybe should have quit smoking cigarettes sooner. we do not say that she should not have tried harder. we do not disagree with that. ms. kemp went all the way for three weeks and did not smoke a cigarette. she is not addicted. gotcha. common -- use your common sense. use your good judgment. you do not have to check it at the door. people has tried to stop smoking all the time. because she was able to stop smoking for that period of time, she must not have been that addicted. well, there is nothing saying -- and i asked the doctor the other day, does it talk about, can you be a little bit addicted? not addicted at all? maybe moderately addicted? can you be a little bit pregnant? it do not work that way. people stop smoking. people try to stop smoking. you have got a gamut. some people smoke two packs a day. some people smoke more. some people smoke less. a social smoker is different. but when you smoke that much every single day of your life, with the exception of a few days or some days within there, you are addicted. it do not take rocket science to figure that out. the greater weight of the evidence on that question is ms. kemp was addicted to the nicotine in the cigarettes. so we asked dr. burns. dr. burns? he says there is no question about it. dr. cummings? there is not even a question. i've done thousands of these people. it is not even a question. she is addicted. dr. irvin? she was addicted. now, see, look, these people are family practitioners. so you get your lawyers in there and get them asking them questions, you are not going to give them no opinion about addiction. you did not put it in your records about nicotine dependence? no. tell him that so he knows, oh, i got him now. i'm going to try to preempt him from giving an addiction opinion. but ms. briggs said, oh, no, you cannot do that. you do not have no right to try to preempt me from asking him no question. so ms. briggs stood up on behalf of ms. kemp and said i want you to assume these facts, and she went through the facts. and what did he say? you remember i sat up there and read -- mr. norton was asking questions. most assuredly so. if those are the facts, of course you are addicted. do you need to be a psychiatrist with addiction medicine background and all of that to know that a person like ms. kemp is addicted to the nicotine in cigarettes? he said absolutely not. i do not need to do that. i see people every day in my practice who i know. i know they are addicted. he said ms. kemp was addicted. same thing, ask dr. belk. ms. briggs did the same thing, but they did not go through all of that preemptive and all of that stuff. they asked the question, told what the circumstances were. absolutely she was addicted. but then what the kicker is, oh, ms. kemp, according to dr. dosovitz, she really did not try. the fact that she bought cigarettes for a dime and went to a smoking cessation clinic, tried to quit multiple times in the '70s, husband fussing at her all the time to quit. everything going at her. and what he said was, if you got a person like ms. kemp, then that person is addicted. she is addicted. dr. cleveland, same thing. he came in and testified before you. he was a witness, if you can recall, in the case that dr. cummings was on the stand and mr. norton had to put him on out of turn because he could not come because he was such a busy practitioner here and he came when he could come. so they asked him, he said, it is clear. well, the cross, do you have any psychiatric training and all? he said i do not need to. i know this. so then they tried to cross-examine him and tell you he was not credible. this is a doctor who is been practicing in this community -- you heard him -- for many, many years. because he had smoked at one period of time, and he was able to quit, what he said was his addiction, he knew how hard it was. well, you are just against cigarettes. he said, yeah, i treat so many people with conditions that i'm against it. oh, therefore, do not believe him. that is basically what they are saying. do not believe him because he ain't for the cigarette industry. duh. that is what he does. so all he is saying is, from our perspective, i've been doing this for 40 years, i know a person is addicted when i see them. that is what he said. now, let us go to dr. dosovitz. remember, he gave us this dsm-iv criteria he said was the gold standard, which he acknowledges is going to go out of -- this gold standard is going to go out of circulation in a month or something like that. i think that is what he told you. but it is the gold standard. it is like the bible. it is like saying it is getting ready to go out of circulation next month. it makes no sense. you do not have to accept that. the judge read you the law, said you can accept it or you can reject it. we respectfully request to reject it. straight out. the reason why is this, when i had an opportunity to cross-examine him, never met him a day in my life, but what i did have was a transcript from a case that he had testified friday of last week. he told that jury, oh, yeah, the same question, i guess they got these scripts, exact same question. how many people do you see? he said: oh, about 5,000 people. he came here and he put on his script -- we asked him the same question: how many people do you see? oh, 6,000. 6,000 sounds better than five, which is true. i mean, come on. yeah, you might think it is nitpicky, but 5,000? 6,000? is it that easy to tell you all something that is not quite that correct? so if he ain't going to tell you something that is correct, he might not tell you something else that is correct. and let us continue. so what did he do? we went through what he said about ms. kemp. so he goes in -- and i got him to admit, because i had gotten his reports and i looked at his reports. all of them are the same. he just changed the name. changed the name on all of the cases that he does for tobacco, and it says the exact same thing: person is not addicted to nicotine in cigarettes. they know they cannot defend these cases -- this is not me making it up. that is the document that i showed you. we cannot defend these cases if the person is addicted. then you remember the other document says that the guy was trying to give analysis to these people's thought processes and psychology, and what he said was that, hey, these people say they can buy their expert and do whatever they want to do for purposes that they need them for. i did not make it up. you do not see -- i did not make it up. you got the documents. you saw it. you took the notes on it. you saw it. so what he says is that, hey, yeah, i saw her. so he went through and said to you, she is like a 40-year-old. we know that is not true, number one. number two, he says that i did not say she was addicted because she do not meet the criteria. so i'm like, man, you do not meet the criteria? so i'm looking at the document i've got and saying, well, she described anxiety. she described withdrawal. she described trying to quit. she described all of the things. remember, you just had to get three of them to be considered addicted under that particular standard that he was using. i think i stopped at five. he said i'd give her one, tolerance. so one of the questions was, do you intend to smoke this long? ms. kemp started smoking when she was 16. do you think she thought she was going to smoke for 48 years when she took that first little cigarette with her sister's friend? absolutely not. absolutely no way. you use your common sense. she had all the characteristics with the exception of -- he uses the standard talking about they do a legal thing basically to go get their drugs. you know that do not have nothing to do with smoking a cigarette. you can go right down the street and get a cigarette. they are talking about something totally different. that do not apply to ms. kemp. so if you really, really look at what he had in the document that he had -- i did not make it up, it was not mine. i did not just make it up. it was what he had. i kept having to go to the judge, give it to the judge, give it to him. go to the judge, give it to the judge. does this refresh your recollection? yeah. yeah. she told him every last one of those. what did he say, i just disregarded it because i ain't thinking -- it was slight or something like that. i said, well, does it say something about moderate, minimal or severe? it do not say nothing like that. so if you use his criteria, the evidence is she was addicted. so you should have put a check here. yeah, we put a check by every one of them. and all you have got to do is have three of them at any 12-month period of time in your life. one year of your life. common sense. that is not right. because you know, they cannot defend these cases -- free choice. i want you to take a pad, if you can, if you can remember. you will put a line down. put free choice on it and you count, just put a little check mark, free choice, free choice, free choice, free choice, free choice. i heard that so many times in this thing, free choice. free choice. you will never see an instruction that tells you anything about free choice. that ain't the issue. that is not the issue. the question is was ms. kemp addicted. that is the first question. [#deleted recess#] mr. lewis: may it please the court. members of the jury, where we left off, let us go down to the document, please. i did not have the document up. now i've had time to put it up. cigarette smoking is more addictive than using heroin, hooking two-thirds of the people who ever smoke. these are their documents. then go to the next one. this is what i was trying to say with the document. but i do not think the questions i now raise are academic. shook hardy reminds us, i'm told, that the entire matter of addiction is the most potent weapon a prosecuting attorney can have in a lung cancer cigarette case. we cannot defend continued smoking as, quote, free choice, end quote, if the person was, quote, addicted, end quote. what is the number? pt 2184a. so that is the document. it is not coming from mr. lewis. you all saw it a couple of weeks ago. let us put the other document up. he also said, this was going back and reporting what the people in the cigarette industry had said, and what is the number of the document? mr. philipson: this pt 1913. mr. lewis: pt 1913. he also said: although i cannot recall his exact words, that our medical/scientific witnesses will say whatever we want them to say. clearly implying, if not stating, that they lacked credibility and integrity. that is not me saying that. that is their documents. thank you. i just wanted to give you those documents and those numbers, so you could see and hopefully you recall that, and that is in your notes. the second question on the verdict form, members of the jury, is, was addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine a legal cause of vivian kemp's copd and death? it is pretty simple. it is not rocket science behind it. the court is going to tell you and find that cigarette smoking of cigarettes containing nicotine, and her smoking them, was the cause of her copd and death. there is no question about that, okay? that is what the law of this case is. smoking cigarettes containing nicotine caused her copd and death. the question you have to answer is, was addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine a legal cause of vivian kemp's copd and death? now, there are certain instructions that you need to look at when you answer that question. instruction beginning at instruction number 10, it says, addiction, and these are artfully crafted, okay? so when you are talking about these, think about this. addiction is -- okay, perfect. addiction is a. it does not say the. that is the first thing, okay? it does not have to be the only cause. you will get the instruction. it could be a lot of different causes. it could be because ms. kemp should have quit sooner. it could be because of a number of different things. it just says is it a, is it one. okay? so addiction is a legal cause of copd and death if it directly, and in a natural and continuing sequence, produces or contributes substantially to producing such copd and death so that it can reasonably be said that, but for the addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine, the copd and death would not have occurred. there is nothing fancy or spooky about that. it is pretty simple. if she was not addicted to cigarettes, she would not have smoked them for 46 years and developed copd and died. that is it. that simple. so the answer to the question is, we respectfully submit, we ask you to check yes. let us go to the next one, please. in order to be regarded as a, like i said, legal cause of copd and death, addiction need not be the only cause. addiction may be a legal cause of copd and death, even though it operates in combination with the act of another, ms. kemp's, they say, negligence, as we also say. it could be any number of things that it can act in combination with, if such other cause occurs at the same time as the addiction and the addiction contributes substantially to producing such copd and death. so we believe that that is -- the evidence on the issue from our perspective has been pretty overwhelming. you will not get any instruction that says whether ms. kemp had a free choice, whether addiction prevented ms. kemp from quitting. none of that is anything that you will be asked to speak the truth through your verdict. the question is simple. number two, was addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine a legal cause of death of vivian kemp. was it one? we believe that the evidence is not only more likely than not, but it has been clear and convincing and to the exclusion of any reasonable doubt on that issue. so we respectfully request that you answer yes to those. if you say no to one or two, then ms. kemp loses. her estate loses the case, and you will check no, and you will sign the verdict form after you check no, and ms. kemp's estate will lose the case. we believe the evidence has been clear, that she is a member of the engle class, with respect to her addiction and her addiction being a legal cause of her copd and her death. the next issue that you are going to answer on the verdict form, number three, did vivian kemp have copd before may 5, 1990? now, we talked a lot about this issue. the evidence is pretty clear on what the evidence is, but the question is, did vivian kemp have copd before may 5, 1990. if you answer no to question 3, skip question 4 and answer question 5 through 9. if you answered yes to question 3, please answer question 4. so the first question, did vivian kemp have copd before may 5, 1990? what is the evidence? the evidence in the case is that ms. kemp went to dr. belk, dr. irvin from 1988, i believe, to 2003 or 4, 2005. did she have copd before may 5, 1990? there was nothing in the medical records at all suggesting ms. kemp had copd before may 5, 1990. nothing. you look at the records in 1988. you will have the medical records there. you will have the medical record for what she went for in had absolutely nothing to do with anything relating to copd. you come to january of 1990, and in january of 1990, there was a circumstance where -- can we have the medical records, please? let us put up the medical records. mr. philipson: what? mr. lewis: the 1988, we will start there and then we will look at 1990. we will just go through it real fast. okay. 1988 she had a general exam, it says. 1989, february of 1989, she had the flu. 1989, she had allergies. she had polyps on her colon in 1989. she was there, she was feeling anxiety and depression. taking care of her mom, who died when her mom, she said, i believe the evidence was 93 years old. so, in january of 1990, she comes in with the flu symptoms, dizziness, headache, generalized achiness, sore throat, nasal congestion, postnasal drip and cough. they did her objective stuff. her assessment was she had the flu, and they said, due to the patient's smoking, feel she would do best to be on prophylactic antibiotic. so they gave her some cipro. cipro is an antibiotic, because she had the flu. so prophylactic means to prevent something from occurring. so they gave her this prophylactic antibiotic. and then she was there. she said -- and look at the top of 118, as needed for aches and pains. she just had the flu. so, 1-23-90, there was a circumstance where she was in the hospital for what they said was thrombocytopenia, meaning she had a low platelet count. her platelets were low. she was here to have a blood count drawn, a platelet count, because the evidence was she had a bad reaction to the cipro that the doctor had given her, and they said that is nothing unusual about that. that does happen at times. so she was there for follow-up. she had the flu. she was experiencing shortness of breath at that time. they did some spirometry, which showed some obstruction, which we have been talking about this whole case. now, think this through. the chest x-ray was done. it was normal. cbc is much improved. her platelet counts were going up. she was to continue this prednisone and recheck with us on friday, at that time, to have a new platelet count. she is also to start proventil inhaler, two puffs. now, if you see on the record, they have codes. ms. briggs, when she took the deposition of dr. belk, talked about the codes. i do not have time to go through all the testimony right now because we do not have time. the code was for bronchitis. she had shortness of breath due to an acute bout of bronchitis after she had had a negative reaction to the cipro. so she had acute bronchitis. everybody said that does not mean that she has copd. they did spirometry testing, and the doctor even that they hired said spirometry testing that could show an obstruction could be from acute bronchitis. just think, if ms. kemp had copd, and this spirometry testing showed that she had copd, what benefit would it do for ms. kemp for the doctors not to diagnose it? it would not benefit ms. kemp. what benefit would it do for the doctors not to say we diagnosed you with copd at that time? there is no evidence on this particular issue, as you can recall, you will get the instruction, that this is the defense of what you call an affirmative defense, meaning plaintiff, if you prove everything you say, we have an affirmative defense because the statute of limitations issue benefits us. if we are in a criminal case, yeah, i shot you, but i did it in self-defense. that is an affirmative defense. yeah, i did it, but i had a legal reason for doing what i'm doing. that is what that is. so on any affirmative defense, they have the burden of proof, not us. we do not have the burden of proof. so what was the proof that they brought to you on that issue? they are taking a round peg and trying to put it into a square hole. we asked every single doctor, dr. belk, dr. irvin, dr. cleveland, all that were involved. ms. briggs asked the question in the deposition, had you diagnosed copd, would you put it in your record? had you diagnosed copd, would you put the billing code as thrombocytopenia? it was acute bronchitis. if she had copd, it would have been all over the record. you would not let somebody go around, in 1990, with copd, and not tell them and not be in the record. the evidence was, from dr. irvin, did anybody tell ms. kemp? just think about it. use your common sense and good judgment, because we do not have to check it. if you got copd, what benefit would it be of the doctor to not put it in his record, to not put it in his codes? do you have any indication, dr. irvin, dr. belk, anybody, that ms. kemp was told in 1990 that she had copd? no. no. every single doctor who took the stand admitted, under oath, that no one, there is no proof, they are asking you to guess. they are asking you to surmise. they are asking you to speculate. they say, well, would not the doctor be obliged, if she had copd? no, that is speculating, is not that? you have got the burden to prove that, not if or what or speculate. so what did we do? we asked the doctor. dr. irvin said, no, there is no evidence that i told her anything. dr. irvin remembered ms. kemp. dr. belk remembered ms. kemp. this doctor yesterday said that he did not, but you all got your notes. it was dr. cleveland who took the stand and said -- he came here live and said that he did not remember her as he sat there. he just did not remember her. because remember, he just saw her one time. put up his note, please. he saw her in 1996. so what they are trying to do is, trying to convince you that their affirmative defense is a good affirmative defense, and you should answer the questions in their favor with this. and if you do, ms. kemp loses, her estate loses. but what they are trying to do is, do what good lawyers do, make this an issue such that use ms. kemp, who was being deposed, like i said, by their lawyer, who knew all the issues, okay, and say, that, hey, ms. kemp, who was the one that told you about copd? you are going to hear that probably many times. you heard every time they got an opportunity, they put ms. kemp up there and pulled out little snippets to say something that ms. kemp said for those three days. you all saw her. you all saw ms. kemp. she was there for three days, trying to do what she could do to give her testimony. okay? so they say, oh, dr. irvin, i remember dr. irvin telling me this. well, that is true. there is nothing wrong with that. that is very consistent with what the evidence is in the case. my impression that ms. kemp has a nonallergic rhinitis. i feel she has emphysema. he told her she has copd. he did the spirometry testing. if you can recall, ms. kemp said, i had to go someplace. they did the spirometry testing. and what did dr. cleveland do? put it on the back page, please. put it back down there to dr. irvin, please. he gave the report to dr. irvin. that was her doctor. so he said to -- dr. cleveland said, yeah, i would tell her that. the person that she had her relationship with was dr. irvin. so, yes, ms. kemp was absolutely right. they were right. dr. cleveland did the spirometry testing, which is what happens, as we know when we go to a doctor. our regular doctor may send us to somebody else, another specialist to do the testing, send a report to our doctor, and let our doctor talk about it. there is nothing spooky about that. but no, they want to try to make it like something surreptitious that really did not happen then. it happened in 1990, even though it is not in nobody's records, even though dr. irvin said no, i did not do that. it is not in there. if i did it, it would be in my record, and the code would have been copd. i have no reason to put a code of thrombocytopenia if the spirometry testing, back in january of 1990, said she had copd. it makes no sense. so they are trying to bring a compelling, and just do a great job getting all these witnesses to say, well, she could have had copd during this time. well, look, this is the bottom line. even if you assume, for the sake of argument that is the case, but it is not, because you remember dr. cleveland, when he took the stand, mr. norton asked dr. cleveland, is this the picture, he went through every record, of someone who has copd? he said there is absolutely no way to tell. so then they had to go after dr. cleveland to make him hate the cigarette company, so you all will not believe him. okay. so what did dr. cleveland say? dr. cleveland went through every record, check your notes, you rely on what you say, he said this is not a picture of copd. so what did they do. remember, they have the burden of proof. well, dr. cleveland, after 1996, this is not a picture of copd either. we know she is got copd at this time. so this is not a picture. so if that is not a picture, this is not a picture, so how do we know? it does not work that way. you cannot guess that way. dr. cleveland said anybody who tells you that, they would be guessing, like what they got dr. -- i think it was irvin or belk to do, it may have been irvin in his. yeah, well, it may have been as a result of that, the skillful questioning of the lawyer, it may have been as a result of copd in 1990 or the beginning stages of it or something. that is not the point. the point is, did they tell that to ms. kemp. dr. cleveland says that there was no evidence from the record that she had copd. we asked dr. burns, who was also a pulmonologist, who was a renowned pulmonologist, world-renowned pulmonologist, to review the record and discuss it. she -- ms. briggs went through every record with dr. burns also. he said, yeah, he showed -- remember, he cut the little stocking and all that, and showed you how copd develops? he said, yeah, i mean, you know, it just takes some time to develop, but the question is do you have symptoms from it. you are going to get the instructions, what was it that ms. kemp had in 1990 that she thought that she had a smoking-related illness? nothing. remember mr. harvey. he testified. he took the stand and testified and recalled that, during the summer of 1990, he was stationed in alaska. remember, he is a w-4 warrant officer in the service. he is a pilot. ms. kemp raised some great kids. we are going to talk about that for a second, but he said, i brought my mother to alaska. she got to come to alaska. what did you do? we walked a glacier. we walked a mile. she did not have no problem doing any of that. she did not have no issue. the only evidence you have where ms. kemp had an issue that people recognized, this is the evidence in the case, they want to get ms. lamotte to say this was in the '90s. they are asking her, in 2011 or 12, whenever she testified, what happened almost 20 years ago, and she said the '90s, and that is, aha, i gotcha again, i gotcha. so she must have had copd in 1990, aha. when she looked at it, and what she said when i brought it out, what her sister, ms. taylor said, was when i was here, she could not -- she had to stay in the car. and she did not want to walk on the beach. and her children, ms. lamotte's other children, her two other daughters, were young, and her mother had to baby-sit them while they took care of her other baby girl, who had been diagnosed with a form of leukemia. so when she was talking about the early '90s, if you can remember, they was, oh, man, now she remembers, this was in 1994, because my daughter died in 1995, and she -- my sister -- my aunt was here during that time period in 1994, when she had to get her bone marrow transplant. that is what the evidence is. so yes, you heard -- what is this 1990 stuff about? now you see why. so what they are trying to do, like i said, to take a square peg, put it in a round hole to make it fit, so suggest that they got a statute of limitations defense that somehow bars ms. kemp's claim, and the evidence just does not support it. they did not meet their burden of proof on that issue, and they will get up, and i know they will, and they are going to be saying all of this stuff, medically, i think i can maybe get them to say that she was a pulmonary tech. well, yeah, was she an assistant, like somebody says, or was she a respiratory therapist? what is she? you all keep calling it the same thing. so they put those interrogatories up that said she was a pulmonary tech. when we go back and check, she was a pulmonary tech. she was not a respiratory therapist. she was a pulmonary tech. so that evidence is to somehow suggest that, hey, she was a pulmonary tech, so she is seen a man who had a smoking-related illness. do you remember she said, yeah, i remember that, and i was thinking, you know, man, that was it, but i just never thought that this would be me. she was rationalizing, that they talk about that addiction, and when you look at the ftc report in 1981, they talk about people rationalizing. that is what she did. they are going to use that to try to come at ms. kemp and say, well, she was a pulmonary tech, she did the oxygen settings, which is what she did. she was not a respiratory -- she did not have the training to do that. she was just a tech, okay? that she must have known, as that, that she had some smoking-related illness before may 5, 1990. aha, gotcha again. there is no evidence of it. did they have any evidence in 1988, 1989? the only thing they have got of 1990 when she had the flu, and had a bad reaction to the cipro, she came back, she had the shortness of breath. they did spirometry, and they did not diagnose copd. but they want you to believe that they met their burden of proof and proved that, number one, she had copd prior to may 5, 1990, and they did not. their doctor came in and said, oh, i believe she had it for decades. he said years. i cannot remember how many decades he said. now, come on. you got to talk to dr. cleveland. you got to see what he said. the judge said you all got some questions, ask them. you heard what dr. burns said. that does not even make common sense. yeah, it takes some time to develop, but they are trying to say decades, and put it way before may 5, 1990. put it way before that. there is no evidence of it. dr. cleveland told you, and i hope, at some point in time, maybe when we get our second, we will actually put the testimony up. anybody who comes in here and tells you that, they would be guessing. that is what it is, and you cannot guess here. you have got to follow the law. if someone talks about that and they start guessing, remind each other of what the law is, because that is not what the law is, ladies and gentlemen of the jury. so there is no evidence. that question is, did vivian kemp have copd before may 5, 1990? what is the evidence? we believe the evidence -- they did not prove it, should be no. check no. if you answered no to question 3, skip question 4 and answer question 5. however, if you answered yes, then you got to answer question 4. we do not believe you should answer it yes. let me be clear. we believe you should answer it no, and then skip 4 and go directly to number 5. but number 4 is, did vivian kemp know or by the use of reasonable care should she have known, before may 5, 1990, that she had copd, and that there was a reasonable possibility that such copd was caused by smoking cigarettes. what evidence is there of that? zero. there is none. they did not put on any evidence to support or suggest that at all. there is no evidence. i cannot even comment on it. they are asking you to stack an inference on an inference on an inference, and you can infer this and infer that. they got the burden of proof. there is nothing to infer that ms. kemp knew, before may 5, 1990, that she had copd. so what do they bring you? they bring you a record. they bring you a record where ms. kemp has some neck pain as she got older. i cannot remember the exact year, but you can recall the record. they put it up yesterday. some doctor had filled out a history on the thing and said, this is from 20 years ago now, talking about 1990, and she is talking about something, i want to say it was in 2012, okay, a year before she passed away, that she had copd in 1990. again, i gotcha. but there is no evidence of it. the only evidence of it is that when they went to the part -they did not show you this on direct, we had to wait for mr. norton to get back up on redirect of the doctor, and look at the part that ms. kemp filled out. she said '90s. so they are asking her to go back 20 some odd years to figure out this date. she did not know, at that time, how relevant that was, or she got a -listen, ms. kemp got beautiful children that she raised. she was a good woman. she got a nurse. she raised good people. a w-4 in the military. we know what a w -- you cannot get no higher than that right now, a pilot. another daughter, who is a college professor, who could not be here today because she had to give finals. another daughter who is a general manager in the hospitality business. ms. kemp is a good woman. she did not have no reason to know how important it was, well, let me make sure that this particular date was right. all she said was sometime in the '90s. say, baby girl, ms. beth -- and her daughter, nurse, not just a nurse, getting ready to go get her master's and ph.d., these are the type of people she raised. that is the thing about smoking. these are good people. it ain't like, you know, you are talking about people who -- not saying nothing bad about nobody, okay, do not get me wrong, but you are talking about pillars of our society, who during their time, got caught up in this. the people who was giving the news. j.r. ewing, you know, the actor. all -- they had to go through every athlete at that time that died from lung cancer, the people they put up there. the people who were singing the song. all of those people in that generation. we are not talking about people who have some illegal drug problem that may not be pillars of our community. we are talking about pillars of the community. so she could have easily told her daughter, who knows medical stuff, baby, this is an issue, let us go get this and let us get it right. but she did not know that. so they want to play this gotcha, so you all can check those boxes so they, if you do that, will not be held responsible for their conspiracy. that is what they want you to do, and make you feel, oh, yeah, they could not prove it. that is their burden. they have got to be held responsible for the conspiracy that began in 1953 to the american public, where the evidence was 443,000 people a year die from that product, that the court will tell you, if ms. kemp is an engle class member, was defective and unreasonably dangerous, and, not me talking, okay, nicotine in the cigarettes is addictive, smoking cigarettes causes copd. all of these defendants placed cigarettes on the market that were defective and unreasonably dangerous. you are going to get that in the instruction, that these defendants, all of them, concealed or omitted material information not otherwise known or available. they had stuff that was not even available to everybody, okay? that is why it is material. they got stuff that is not available. that is the law of the case. so when they stand up and say, ms. kemp, you do not even know what the frank statement is, i wanted to ask, sir, have you ever heard of the frank statement? sir, tell the members of the jury who tirc is. sir, who is ctr? who in the world is going to know? i asked 100 people in this room, unless they do these cases, know who those people are? do you think it is reasonable for anybody? no, you do not know those people. they sit in the back room. they spend the money. they want to create the doubt to keep the people smoking. that is what they want to do. so they tell ms. kemp, you do not know who they were. you did not look at none of these statements. ms. kemp, no, what are you talking about? that is not how it works. that is not how a conspiracy works. that is not why they was patting each other on the back saying this is working, let us keep it up. let us go to congress, take our hand to god and lie. that is what you are dealing with. that is what we are dealing with here. so, yeah, mr. lewis, you are histrionic. please forgive me if that is the case, but it is not just me talking. this is what the documents say. i'm not making it up. i cannot make that up. they failed knowing that the material was false or misleading or failed to disclose a material fact concerning the health effects or the addictive nature of smoking cigarettes, or both, that these defendants agreed, agreed, that is where conspiracy comes in, to conceal or omit information regarding the health effects of cigarettes or their addictive nature with the intention -- remember, i told you this is what the difference is in negligence and something that is intentional? see, right here, you have got to find they was negligent, which ms. kemp said all right, so i'm negligent, too. so you all figure out the percentages, but not here. they did it with the intent that smokers and the public would rely on this material information, now, on this information to what, their detriment? i did not make it up. that is what the law is. you told us you would follow the law. and if the people do not want to follow, you ought to remind each other to follow the law. and the people i talk to, and the people have discussions about these issues, to follow the law, you knock on the door and ask the court a question, so that you can make sure that you understand what the law is. so the issue is, with respect to that affirmative defense, we ask you to answer number 3, no. if you answer it yes, however, then we would ask you, on number 4, to answer it no. and then the next question is number 5. was smoking cigarettes manufactured by r.j. reynolds tobacco company a legal cause of vivian kemp's copd and death, and the same question is for all of them. you go through rjr, lorillard, philip morris, liggett, all of them. now, this is what the defense is from some of them. you are going to have to read the instructions so i can explain to you the significance of it. put that up, please. yeah, that is a cigarette controversy that i was not making it up. he just put that up for me, that they came out in 1968. put up the verdict form, please. now, the next one, like i said, it is going to be a series of questions right there. now, ms. kemp smoked lorillard cigarettes for most of the time. she smoked them, i believe, for about 37 years of the time she was smoking. she smoked r.j. reynolds brands and liggett brands for, i think, about five years, i think the evidence is going to be from when she started smoking. remember she said that by the time she was a senior, after about the first year, she thought she was addicted to the cigarettes? so she was smoking their products -- she was a daily smoker, and in her testimony, she thought she was addicted after the first year. but for about five years, philip morris, those virginia slims, where they asked you all at the beginning of the case, is it okay to market to women? there ain't nothing wrong with marketing to women. you can market whatever you want to women, there ain't nobody saying that. do not get us wrong. there is nothing wrong with doing business. what is wrong is this. that is why they are here. what is wrong is breaking the law because you are negligent. what is wrong is placing unreasonably dangerous and defective products in the stream of our american commerce. that is what is wrong, and these intentional acts to engage in a conspiracy. so the question is -- and remember dr. burns. he was the one that took the stand and talked about that. he told us that cigarettes work this way. every cigarette counts. and it continues to feed your addiction. so you cannot just take one little group, like r.j. reynolds or liggett or philip morris, and take it out of the equation. if you try to do that, well, that is not the facts of the case. she smoked every one of those cigarettes that continued to feed her addiction. now, you are going to get to determine the percentages of responsibility if you get there, so that you can deal with that with respect to the proportionate amount that ms. kemp smoked. for instance, was smoking cigarettes manufactured by rjr, and then go through all of them, a legal cause of vivian kemp's copd and death? we respectfully request that you say yes to every one of those questions, because it was. those are the facts. that is what she smoked for 46 years, all of their brands of cigarettes. and when it says a legal cause, again, remember, it does not have to be the legal cause. so when they stand up and say, let them respond to that, because it could be in combination with any of them. you read the instruction where the judge said, if you cannot really make that determination, then it is a cause. see, that is what the purpose is, because just take it to its logical extent, there is nothing spooky about it. if you could just say, okay, i smoked r.j. reynolds for two years, i smoked this one for two years, two years, two years, two years, and had different manufacturers all the way to 46 years, then nobody could be held responsible. does that sense? absolutely not. the reason it does not make sense is because that is not how it works. every cigarette counts. so every last one of them should be responsible for the whole with respect to that. now, when it comes to proportioning it out, let us go down to the next one, please. this is when you get to put the percentages. please state the percentage of fault. r.j. reynolds, liggett, philip morris, lorillard. now, if this was a negligence claim, and just a negligence, remember, strict liability, okay, if this was a negligence and strict liability claim, and with what i described, you would say, well, people, you know, every -- remember, they asked, if you get hit by a bus, he asked you, do you ask these questions. you have got to figure out who is at fault. maybe it is 50/50, okay. so you give 50/50. you give ms. kemp fifty percent, give us fifty percent, but see this is different. because ms. kemp does take responsibility for her negligence with respect to the strict liability claim, the unreasonably dangerous product and the negligence claim, she takes that responsibility. so you hold her responsible, but then this case is different. so what you do with these people, though, because they did something more than just be negligent and put a dangerous product, like a regular product liability case that we see. they did something that was deceptive. they concealed. they conspired together. so you should take some of the percentage away from ms. kemp because of that, and then give it to them. so if you take all four of them, and you say ms. kemp was fifty percent responsible, and you take ten percent from lorillard for engaging in this conspiracy, ten percent from philip morris -mr. mccarter: object. that is misstating the law relating conspiracy to this claim. the court: sustained. rephrase. mr. lewis: yes, sir, your honor. if you take ten percent away from philip morris, you take ten percent away from rjr and liggett, then -- or whatever you think is appropriate, then you should reduce ms. kemp's responsibility by that. and so it may very well be that ms. kemp has 10 to twenty percent of the responsibility. we would suggest that range. we would suggest the range for lorillard, that they have a bigger share. they do, because she smoked their product, and they told her about all of these filters and everything after 1953 and further. i did not even get to the filtration is an illusion and all of that. i hope you took good notes, and we get an opportunity to get back up and talk about all of that stuff later, but they should have a lion's share. r.j. reynolds, liggett with respect to that, philip morris, these -- r.j. reynolds and liggett should probably have about 5 percent. liggett should probably have about 5 or 6 percent, philip morris should probably have the same, because she smoked their product about the same amount that she smoked liggett and rjr, and then lorillard should have the rest, and then give ms. kemp 10 to twenty percent. that is what we suggest. let us go to the next one. but the total must be one hundred percent. number 10, i do not have much time, and i'm going through this and i'm almost done. please bear with me. was the agreement among and between r.j. reynolds, liggett, all of these defendants, to conceal information regarding the health effects of cigarettes or their addictive nature a legal cause of her death? now, listen, the evidence on that issue has been unequivocal. it is been overwhelming. it is been beyond and to the exclusion of all reasonable doubt. let me explain why. they, their documents tell you how much the conspiracy worked. when you see the kent marketing guy, mr. robinson, when their lawyer put up that curve, he said after that reader's digest article, we are talking about after 1953, now, after this conspiracy started, they continued. i did not get a chance to put up the ad where they said kent, these filters, low nicotine, these are better for you, keep on with your addiction, do not worry about it, you are going to be straight with these. that is what they told ms. kemp. so when they was asking ms. kemp all these questions, these lawyers, being polite, being nice, being so polite, trying to get ms. kemp to say something that they knew would try to torpedo her case in front of you. but she told them, look, i tell you, i went to this brand because of that. and they kept trying, and they kept trying, and then they said, well, you already knew it was dangerous. there is not a question about that. we do not deny that. but then what ms. kemp said, and i did not get to it, and i hope we get to on rebuttal, when mr. norton gets back up after they finish, what she said was, in hindsight, i knew it. that is what she said. they did not play that part. she did know it in hindsight. well, hindsight is 20/20. she did wish she had quit a lot sooner, and she would have quit a lot sooner, because you know how you know this? remember i played for the -mr. dosovitz, i was trying to go, he said motivation to quit is the key. so, okay, if motivation is the key, you have got to be motivated to quit. if you are not motivated to quit, you will not quit. they put that up 100 times, because that is their case, ms. kemp, ms. kemp, ms. kemp. if you are not motivated to quit, you are not going to quit. so what did they do? create the controversy. lied to people in congress and telling people, man, there ain't nothing wrong. this stuff ain't addictive. no, ain't no evidence. there ain't no statistical. remember the man said about applesauce is dangerous, too. i hope you took good notes and remember all of that stuff. i cannot tell you all of it. they kept doing this and doing this to people. so i do not care how many textbooks mr. maguire puts up, how many articles, none of that. the bottom line is you know the common sense that you know, use your common sense and your good life experiences, that it worked. they made money. the curve went up, and then ms. kemp had been smoking 20 years before the first caution. they keep calling it a warnings. it did not say nothing about warning. what the package said in '60 whatever it was, caution. you will get it. they will say it said caution. it might, may be, when they knew, in 1954, that there was a link. and there was documents that they said it was a link. they knew it back then. so just think that ms. kemp said, man -- they did not want to play this for you, i had to get back up and play it. the reason why i finally quit when i quit was all the information, it was just mushrooming on me. just think if she had all that information in 1954 that they had, all this -- i'm not making it up -material information that they had. just think if she had it in 1955. that is why punitive damages should be awarded in this case, members of the jury. we think you should put yes, yes, right there very strongly, okay? because it did work. they went all the way to the bank knowing it worked, and it did work on ms. kemp, and had they not entered this conspiracy, she would have been able to quit and be motivated a whole lot sooner. he did not want to answer none of those questions. he ran as far away from me. he said i ain't no expert in that. well, you an expert in what motivates people to quit. well, if you are not going to motivate somebody to quit, which is what they did, and their documents say we need to intercept smokers who quit. let -- do not let them quit their addiction. that is not me making it up. that is what he they said. you are going to see documents in that date and time that they had these dow documents, and you will look at them in evidence. what they say is -- judge, five minutes. what they say is -- what those documents say, it is not me. you got anything to say, you read these documents. it will tell you straight, because you ain't seen these yet. but they in evidence. these people, this is how overt they are. how they, you know, they got this -- how -- with the arrogance they are. it says, they say, per -through a series of meetings over the past few years, dow, which is this company who sells pharmaceutical products, had been repeatedly advised of our displeasure over the anti-smoking nature of dow merrill's nicorette program. we have been assured that nicorette would have a low-key introduction and would be aimed only at those smokers who had to stop for medical reasons. dow continually insisted that they were not taking an anti-cigarette industry position, and backed the assertion two years ago by withdrawing the smoking cessation newsletter. this document was circulated to physicians and contained much anti-smoking propaganda. only one issue was printed. go to the next part, please. so what they did was, they got mad at dow because dow had a program where they was selling nicorette, and trying to get people to stop smoking. so these people said, look, we got -- where is the one that shows how much money? they made $4.4 million off of the cigarette companies, because they bought some glycinol. they bought different products from them. here he said, in 1980, we spent $4.4 million with these people. that is what the cigarette companies are saying. this is philip morris. in 1981, we spent $6.2 million with them. in 1982, we spent 7.7 million on these products right here. so then they go on, philip morris, telling dow, hey, why are you trying to sell this nicorette? why are you trying to give nicorette to people to help them stop smoking? go to the next one. so since our becoming aware of dow's involvement with the nicorette in '82, we have conducted an ongoing dialogue with dow, attempting to eliminate or at least tone down the nicorette marketing and promotional activities. some of the more significant events which transpired, dow's agreement to cancel the smoking cessation newsletter. this is for the money. cancel the newsletter telling people to stop smoking. how can you get more overt? do not tell people to quit smoking. dow's agreement to cancel. suspending our glycine, propinyl, glycol and teg purchases due to the offensive nature of nicorette's introduction. so they said that it was offensive for this company to try to sell nicorette to help people quit their addiction. how much more overt can it be? that is why punitive damages are appropriate in this case, members of the jury. that is why you call them wrong. punitive damages are appropriate. the next issue on the verdict form, members of the jury, is under the circumstances of this case, whether you find, by clear and convincing -- it cannot be no more clearer -- clear and convincing might be right here, members of the jury. more likely than not is right here. it was clear. punitive damages are -- was it reckless? was it in a reckless disregard of the life and safety of people? you can consider what it did to other people. what all of the people, just think what it did to a nation. if 443,000 people die, they got cancer, they got copd. well, who was going to take care of all them? the nation has to. that is why punitive damages are appropriate, members of the jury. so it do not just hurt ms. kemp or the next person in these -- in the engle class. it hurts a whole nation of people. and so we suggest that you say yes to every one of them. go back to 14, please. now, with respect to compensatory damages in the case, under the compensatory damages, it tells you what is the total amount of damages sustained by susan barclay for her loss, and it goes to elizabeth, francis williams, robert hardy, elizabeth lamotte, and you have got to get a total. you have got to get a total. the suggestion that we make, if this was a little car accident, or a back injury case, it might be worth $10,000. if it was something where someone had a more significant injury, a crushed leg or something, it might be in the hundreds of thousands of dollars, the verdict we would have to request. death -- they say she is 81 years old. she led a full life. well, okay. that is why we put the mortality table in front of you. she had another nine years to live. these people had a right to have their grandmother, to be a grandmother to their children, to get guidance from their mom. this is the most precious person in their life. i could go on and on about what is appropriate for a mother. we are talking about momma. we are talking about your mother. so it should be something respecting what they lost. we suggest, and it could be more, it could be less, it should be $8 million. that is what we suggest. you could accept that or you can reject it, but we respectfully request that the verdict, once you add all of those up and go through, it should be 8 million. now, you may say, mr. lewis, i disagree with that, and you think it could be more. you have every right to do that. you can say i think it should be less. you have every right to do that. you do what you think is fair and reasonable, given what they lost, and then answer those questions on punitive damages, and then we will have another opportunity to talk to you if your verdict says that they need to be punished for this conspiracy. members of the jury, i took a little longer than i had anticipated. it is a lot of information. thank you so much for paying so great attention to me. on behalf of ms. kemp's family, we thank you very much. thank you very much, your honor. the court: that would conclude the argument for today. we will resume in the morning at 8:30. please remember the admonitions. you have not yet heard all the argument or the final instructions. do not talk about the case among yourselves or with anyone else. do not listen to or read any news accounts that may be published or broadcast. do not have any contact with the parties. do not do any internet searches or postings of any kind whatsoever while we are in this phase of the trial. what i'd like you to do, if you will, is please be here ready to go at 8:30 in the morning. i do want to mention, i do not know, once the case goes to you for a verdict, i have no idea how long your deliberations may take. i intend to go to a reasonable time, with the possibility of having supper prepared for you tomorrow night. we are not going to go terribly late, but a reasonable time into the evening, possibly around 9:00 or so, trying to get this case moving forward. so, with that in mind, if you need to make any preparations, i wanted to give you a heads up. will that be a problem for anyone? very well. we will see you back tomorrow morning at 8:30. thank you.