mr. finch: may it please the court. counsel. morning, can you-all here me? people have rights. the courts protect those rights. karen lennox had the right, just like every person in this country, not to be hurt by the negligent, careless, and reckless or intentional acts done by another person. karen lennox was hurt very badly by the careless, reckless negligence and intentional acts of rj reynolds. she came to court to ask you, judges of the fact, 62 1 to protect those rights. 2 now, those words, people have rights, courts 3 protect those rights, i did not make those up. every time 4 you walk into this courtroom you went through a metal 5 detector and on that metal detector there was a big sign and 6 it says, people have rights, courts protect those rights. 7 you are the court here. you are the judges of the facts 8 here. you are the people that get to do justice. 9 the judge, judge burns, has done an excellent job of running this trial and instructing you on the law and the law means to do justice. so let me back up and start by thanking you on behalf of karen lennox and my whole -- our team of lawyers that have been representing her, mr. pendell, mr. maiden, my superstar paralegal, faith brown. we all thank you for your attentiveness, we thank you for your patience, and we thank you for the time you have taken to really listen to the evidence. i saw you. you were taking notes. you were paying attention. i also want to apologize to you for anything that i might have said throughout the trial or mr. pendell that may have upset you or thought was not quite right. i have a very heavy burden. we have a very heavy burden. we have a burden to prove this case to you by preponderance of the evidence. i tried to the best of my ability to explain to you the evidence and to explain to you the evidence and 63 1 explain to you what our view of what the evidence is. but 2 if i said something that does not sit right, please do not 3 hold that against ms. lennox. we have that burden and i'm 4 going to shortly put that burden on you. 5 and another thing i'm going to apologize to you is 6 the time. it is going to take me about an hour to an hour 7 and a half to walk through what i believe the evidence 8 proved here. and if we were all sitting in my living 9 room -- you would all barely fit in my living room. if we were sitting in my living and talking about this, you could say, all right, i get that point, mr. finch, i understand that point, i do not need to hear any more evidence about that. but we are not all sitting in my living room. you are sitting right there, i have no idea what you are thinking. i have to make sure i prove everything by a preponderance of evidence. i think on lot of this we have proved beyond a reasonable doubt that karen lennox was addicted to nicotine from smoking their cigarettes. i think we have proved beyond a reasonable doubt that that addiction was a substantial factor, the cause, of her repeated long-term smoking of cigarettes and that that smoking caused her copd. we brought you three medical doctors. what causes diseases is a medical question. did they bring in any medical doctors? so i want to thank you, i want to apologize to you 2 if i take too long. but i have to, i have to -- i have to 64 3 cover this evidence in -- 4 5 john, may i have the presentation, please. the evidence today karen lennox, 1981, 1982, and 6 what drove that nice looking young lady to become the karen 7 lennox you heard for three hours, four hours testify 8 yesterday, what drove that. 9 your honor, may i move the easel around a little bit? the court: yes. sure. mr. walker, if you need to see or look on, you are free to move anywhere you want in the courtroom. mr. walker: thank you, your honor. mr. finch: addiction to nicotine from their cigarettes drove repeat smoking cigarettes, which led to her copd, which is the cause -- two doctors told you was caused by her repeated smoking. that, ladies and gentlemen, each of these boards is 120 packs each, three times 120 is 360. that is one package. if you were to try to put in this courtroom the total number of pack years of cigarettes, their cigarettes, every one of those was defective and unreasonably dangerous, every one of which had nicotine, every one of which had harmful chemicals that caused the disease process to cause copd. if i wanted to put the 40- 65 1 to 50- to 60-pack years, what the evidence showed, in front 2 of it, it would cover the entire courtroom. addiction. 3 now, let me talk about the framework of how you 4 are to decide this case. as the judge instructed you, this 5 case arises out of a class action called engle. and in the 6 engle case you are either on the bus or you are not on the 7 bus. if you can prove you are part of the class, there are 8 certain things you have to prove, then you get the benefit 9 of the findings. and the first -- the first four -- there are going to be some questions on the verdict form. the first two are not even in dispute. so the first thing we have to show that she is a member of the engle class is that she is a resident of florida. the second thing we have to show, does karen lennox have a disease that could be caused by smoking that first manifested -- that manifested before november 21st, 1996. it does not matter when it first manifested for her to be class member. you will get instructions from the judge. instruction no. 10 says, you just heard it, in order to be a member of the engle class, the plaintiff must prove, first, she is a resident of florida. i do not think anybody has disputed that, and that her copd manifested at some point before november 21st, 1996. she was diagnosed with copd in november 1991. so 66 1 she clearly meets that. but then it goes on to say, she 2 does not have to prove that her copd first manifested after 3 may -- may 5 of 1990 or any other date. that -- that cutoff 4 date is the statute of limitations, and that is their burden 5 to show. and you have to show a lot more in manifestation 6 in order for them to say her lawsuit is out of time. but 7 for purposes of being an engle class member, is she a 8 resident of florida and did she have the disease prior to 9 that end date of november 21st, 1996? there is no dispute about that. just as there is no dispute now, there is no dispute now that smoking causes emphysema and copd. from 1953 all the way up to 1999, rjr would tell people in every form that ever came into whether it was congress or a courtroom or legislature, whatever, they said no proof smoking causes copd. now, they say it does. the supreme -- the surgeon general, surgeon general, first surgeon general report, this is a page of this, that are relevant in evidence, this is 571, this was in 1984. this was the first time the surgeon general stated conclusively that smoking caused copd -- copd and emphysema. i'll show the page out of that where they said that. you saw it, it is 571. it is in evidence. so now they do not dispute that copd is a disease that can be caused by smoking. but they did all the way up to 1999. but again, looking at this diagram, this 67 1 flowchart -- my father is an engineer and i do not know how 2 to draw a diagram. but the idea is these first two things, 3 there is no dispute. what is in dispute is, was she addicted 4 to cigarettes that contained nicotine and was that nicotine 5 addiction a legal cause of her copd. 6 talking through all the evidence that goes to 7 that. if you find those things, she is a class member. she 8 get the benefit of those factual findings that the judge 9 told you you had to accept, even if you personally may not agree with them. so in assessing this evidence -- the next slide. preponderance of the evidence. you heard the judge say it just means greater weight of the evidence. i think we have put an overwhelming amount of evidence before you this lady is addicted to nicotine. i think we have put an overwhelming amount of medical evidence before you that that nicotine addiction drove her repeated consistent long-term smoking. i think we have put an overwhelming amount of evidence in front of you that the smoking -- repeated long-term smoking causes copd. and if you do find that she is addicted and the addiction was a cause of the copd, all these factual findings apply: that nicotine in cigarettes is addictive, smoking cigarettes can cause copd, that rj reynolds sold 68 1 cigarettes that were unreasonably dangerous and defective, 2 and negligent, and that they made false statements or 3 omitted material information. and i'll get to the false 4 statement part of the case way on down the line. but this 5 is a case that is product liability case. every cigarette 6 they sold is defective. they were careless in putting those 7 things on the market for 50 years after they knew they were 8 dangerous. 9 so on the question of addiction, what is the evidence that we brought you? first of all, you have ms. lennox's testimony itself where she told you about her smoking history, told you she started at nine years old, told you she wanted that cigarette first thing when she got up, told you she was smoking a pack or a pack and a half a day, told you that she tried to quit, told you that it was hard to quit. all those factors are important in addiction. is there any doubt in your mind that she started smoking at nine and was regularly smoking winston at the age of 14? and that she tried to quit? but beyond ms. lennox, you have got her sister's testimony that corroborates the details of her smoking history. you have her daughter, daylene, came here yesterday and talked about when she tried to hide her cigarettes, her mother was fiending on cigarettes. who 69 1 behaves like that with their daughter if they are not 2 addicted? but more importantly, addiction is a medical 3 question. 4 and we showed you through dr. werner a whole group 5 of medical records where other doctors, her treating 6 doctors, doctors who had a duty to treat her, concluded that 7 she had nicotine abuse, history of tobacco addiction, 8 tobacco abuse, tobacco use disorder. those records and 9 medical records are in evidence, we put all the ones that mattered in evidence, 6005e, 6005g, 6005a, b, c, e, g, i, j, o, p, r, and u. now, i'll go through those a little more slowly when we get to them. but what does addiction mean? it is a brain disease, compulsive drug seeking use despite harmful consequences. what does the surgeon general of the united states america say? he says that the behavioral pharmacological processes that drive this addiction are similar to heroin and cocaine. rj reynolds, when it is not in the courtroom, when you go to its website, exhibit 1767, says go look to the surgeon general of the united states, refer to make decisions about smoking. ladies and gentlemen, you are people who have to make a decision about smoking right now, right here, to apply the law to the facts of this case. what does the surgeon general tell us about how 70 1 addictive and how powerful the addiction is to nicotine? 2 it also says in that same exhibit that is 3 exhibit 174, the whole book is not back there, but the 4 pieces that matter are there, look at any exhibit you want. 5 174, understanding addiction is critical for both treating a 6 user and for understanding why people continue to smoke 7 despite known health risks. that is a classic example of 8 addiction. you know something is potentially bad for you, 9 you keep doing it, you keep doing it, keep doing it, that is addiction. what else does the surgeon general of the united states of america tell us? this is in exhibit 1302. that is the 2012 surgeon general report. what does that say? that says if you start smoking young, as a teenager, you have got a two-third's chance of becoming addicted. what it says is of every three young smokers -- can you-all see that, surgeon general report? okay. every three young smokers, only one will quit and one of those remaining smokers will die from tobacco-related causes. most of these young people never considered the long-term health consequence associated with tobacco use when they started smoking, and nicotine, a highly addictive drug, causes many to continue smoking well into adulthood, often with deadly consequences. that does not describe karen 71 1 lennox to a t, i do not know what does. 2 so one of the witnesses said, diania murphy, 3 sister, i'm not gonna go through all this in great detail, 4 but she basically said that she knew karen was smoking 5 cigarettes from the time she was 12 years old and she smoked 6 winstons and sometimes diania had to buy winstons for her. 7 she observed her chain smoking, lighting one cigarette off 8 the butt of another. that is the classic sign of addiction. 9 she smoked in the house. she also said that karen tried to quit. there is lot of evidence here that karen tried to repeatedly quit smoking unsuccessfully that the medical records prove and i'll get to that in a minute. ms. lennox's testimony was that she started at nine and was smoking regularly by 14 and she was smoking winstons by 14. she tried to quit many times. and mr. walker's suggestion in opening that she only tried to quit twice. well, look at the medical records that are in evidence, look at the medical records that i talked to dr. werner about, how she would try to cut back, when she goes to cessation counseling. she did not remember -- ms. lennox did not remember when she was asked questions about, well, did you ever go to a stop smoking clinic? well, the medical records show she saw a video about how to stop smoking. she went, she got antismoking literature, the smoking cessation literature. take a look at 6005t, as in tiger. that is 2 actually a thick record we put in evidence. in there there 3 is smoking cessation literature that she saw, where she 4 talks about how bad it is to smoke, i got to quit, i got to 72 5 quit. 6 she smoked when she was pregnant. her third 7 husband died from lung cancer. she smoked after she was 8 told she had copd. that is a classic sign of addiction. 9 after her husband died of lung cancer, she tried to quit and she was not successfully able to quit for 14 more years her medical records show. she smoked first thing in the morning and sometimes when she woke up in the middle of the night she, would get a cigarette. and these are the various ways that is medical records -- do you remember when i asked dr. werner about this series of medical records? i showed her the records, i put this little summary on the screen. this is going to come back in evidence for you, but all these records are, 6005a as in apple, b as in basketball, c as in cat, e elephant, p, purple, r, red, u, unicorn. they all come back into evidence. and dr. werner was the only medical doctor who came in and talked about addiction. they could have brought someone, they did not. you are going to hear mr. walker give you a lot of lawyer talk about, well, she was not addicted, she could have 73 1 quit. that is not the question. the question is addiction 2 is a medical disease. if you want to find out if you have a 3 medical disease and, if so, what is causing your medical 4 disease and what are the consequences of that medical 5 disease? who do you go ask? you go to a doctor. and that 6 applies throughout this. it applies to the question of 7 addiction, it applies to the question of the cause of the 8 copd, it even goes to the question of what did karen lennox 9 know and what should she have known about her disease process. what did a doctor who treated her in the fall of 1991 conclude, the first one that treated her? and i'll get to that in minute. so you heard from dr. werner. she diagnosed karen lennox has having severe nicotine addiction, three different methodologies, not just one, but three. she told you about each of those methodologies, cage questionnaire, fagerstrom test, dsm-v, and under each one she was severely addicted. cage questionnaire is four simple questions: did you ever feel you need to cut down? yes. did you ever get annoyed or angry because your smoking -- when someone told you to quit smoking? yes. you ever feel guilty about smoking? yes, she clearly does. and do you smoke in a half hour of waking up? yes, she did. 74 1 the other test used, the fagerstrom test. that is 2 one where it is the ten question checklist based on that she 3 had a score of eight out of ten. she is severely addicted. 4 she also used the dsm-v criteria. mr. walker will 5 probably tell you you should not use that checklist. she 6 did not use the checklist, she said she used it as a guide, 7 used her clinical judgment and experience in applying it, 8 and she found that she was severely addicted. the 9 questions -- i'm not gonna repeat them here, but the questions are, did you keep smoking longer than you want to? did you -- have you made persistent efforts to try to cut down or quit? did you -- those are just some of the things. and she took into account all the things, all the medical things that were necessary for her to diagnose and she diagnosed her as being addicted to nicotine. that is a medical determination. severe nicotine addiction under the dsm-v in dr. werner's medical judgment. dr. werner gets appointed by the governor of the state of florida to go in and do competency assessments for people who are on death row. i mean, this is a lady who knows brain science and knows -- she treats heroin addicts and coke addicts and people with cigarette diseases. remember the testimony about when they made the inpatient hospital where she works nonsmoking, all the cokeheads and crackheads stopped showing up, because 75 1 they could not smoke. what does that tell you about the 2 power of nicotine? this is a lady the governor of the state 3 trusts to come in and make assessments. if we are going to 4 execute somebody and she came in and told you based on her 5 training and clinical judgment that karen lennox was 6 addicted to nicotine. 7 who did they bring you to say that she is not? so 8 other doctors -- this is exhibit 6005e. i just skipped 9 through. 6005e, history of tobacco addiction, nicotine abuse. that is a medical record from around 2006. 6005g for gorilla, another medical record, nicotine abuse, extensive nicotine abuse. 6005i, as in ice cream, tobacco abuse. 6005j, as in jaguar, history of tobacco addiction. 12-1-2006. 6005o, o as in oscar, tobacco use disorder. that is a diagnose for both under medicare guidelines. these are all records that are in evidence, you will get to look at them. i suggest you take the medical records out and just look through them. dr. werner also told you that nicotine addiction is a medical disease. the surgeon general of the united states teaches us it is a medical disease. you get to apply your common sense and the jury instruction says use your common sense in making a decision. outside of this courtroom, want to find out about 2 nicotine addiction, you can go to the surgeon general of the 3 united states of america or go to the doctor. the doctor 4 would tell you. should not do anything different in the 76 5 courtroom. 6 what medical doctor disputed that karen lennox was 7 addicted? for rj reynolds to be right, all -- that she is 8 not addicted, all of these people and things have to be 9 wrong. the national institute on drug abuse, united states surgeon general, dr. montoya, remember some of his records referred to nicotine abuse. dr. fraifeld, dr. bhattarai, dr. hayden, i'll butcher dr. gogioiu's name, but that is exhibit 6005o. whatever the healthcare professionals handed her, smoking cessation literature, and dr. werner. and as the for the first question you will get a questionnaire, it is gonna look something like this, it is called a verdict form. first question: was karen lennox addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine? i think we have proved that beyond a reasonable doubt. so now the second question: addiction as a legal cause of her copd. on this issue, i'm gonna go over the pieces of testimony you need to think about and assess. you have dr. werner's testimony. remember, she told you that the surgeon general of the united states of america says 77 1 nicotine addiction is the fundamental reason that people 2 persist in smoking and that this persistent smoking causes 3 smoking-related disease. that is the medical conclusion of 4 the surgeon general of the united states of america. 5 dr. montoya. dr. montoya is her treating doctor. 6 he took time out of his busy schedule to come here and tell 7 you about his treatment of her and his conclusions that he 8 went -- that he made along the way. he was a completely 9 neutral witness. he came in and told you -- what did he tell you? he told you that in his view smoking was the cause of her copd. he was a careful doctor. remember after he determined -- he determined in 2006 and 2010 for sure, probably that smoking caused her copd. then he then said there is this genetics test, karen, they can also tell you whether you are somebody who is unusually susceptible to copd. even if that test came back positive under the legal definition of legal cause, as the judge instructed you, cause does not have to be the only cause, it could be multiple causes of disease, but here he did that genetic test. and she was little resistent to that, she did not want to do a test. you know, karen was a headstrong woman, but she eventually did that test. she followed his orders maintaining to the things that -- that care for her, like oxygen. he told her, said she was very compliant with that. she did that test and the test came 78 1 back and dr. montoya told you that her genetics had nothing 2 to do with her copd, it was the smoking. 3 dr. gravelyn, a pulmonologist who has treated 4 thousands and thousands of copd patients just like 5 dr. montoya, what did he tell you? he told you that smoking 6 was the cause of her copd. 7 and then ms. lennox's testimony is on this slide, 8 because she obviously testified about what she did, what she 9 smoked. i do not know if there is any doubt she smoked winston cigarettes from the time she was 14 years old, a pack or more a day all the way until she was finally able to quit. occasionally she bummed some marlboros, but it was winston, winston all the way. and remember, dr. werner said she was addicted by the time she was 16 or 17 years old. she was addicted then and that drove her smoking behavior. like i said before, the judge gave you instruction on legal cause. a legal cause, not the only cause. and the instruction talks about something -- a legal cause is something that naturally and in continuous sequence produces or creates substantially to producing a certain result. such that the addiction directly and in natural and continuous sequence produced or contributed substantially to producing her copd, so that it could reasonably be said that but for her addiction, her copd would not have occurred. addiction need not be the only cause of 79 1 plaintiff's copd, you may find addiction is a legal cause, 2 even though the addiction operated in combination with some 3 other cause, such as the act of another or natural cause or 4 some other cause, providing you determine the addiction 5 contributed substantially to producing ms. lennox's copd. 6 well, i like to think of it like a flashlight that 7 had a battery in it. if one of those -- if you say, maybe 8 she had five reasons for smoking, but if one of those 9 important reasons was addiction, that drove her to continue smoking and i think overwhelming reasons she did. but the reason she continued to smoke was addiction. dr. werner's testimony proved that. but even if you say, okay, well, maybe she had another reason to smoke besides addiction, she liked it, she enjoyed it. well, gee, it is a drug, enjoyment, pleasure hits dopamine receptors. that is evidence of addiction. you pull out the addiction, it does not work. does not make sense somebody would smoke 40, 50, 60 packs of winstons, just like you pull out one battery in a flashlight that has several batteries, pull one out, the flashlight does not light. you pull out the addiction, none of this makes sense. the fundamental cause of her copd, surgeon general says, nicotine addiction is the fundamental reason people keep smoking, a but-for cause of ms. lennox's copd. this is the causal chain, addiction drives smoking, smoking causes the disease. 2 the surgeon general, this is an exhibit, exhibit 3 237, talks about addiction being a fundamental reason people 80 4 persist in smoking. 5 remember what dr. werner said. there is absolutely 6 no medical or scientific support for the argument that in 7 addicted smokers nicotine addiction is not a substantial 8 cause of their continued smoking. there is not any 9 literature out there. did they bring you a doctor to say there was literature out there? remember how i took this big book up, this 2010 surgeon general report, asked dr. werner, how many medical scientific articles are in the reference section. went on for 40 pages with just article after article after article. where is i a recall a, where is medical doctor that will say addictive smoker, nicotine addiction is not the fundamental reason that they continue to smoke? and what did dr. werner say specifically about karen lennox? dr. werner, the governor of this state trusts to decide whether or not people are competent enough, mentally able enough, to be executed. she said nicotine addiction was the fundamental reason karen lennox repeatedly and persistently smoked cigarettes for 40 years. but for her nicotine addiction, karen lennox would not have engaged in heavy smoking for as long as she did and she was addicted 81 1 by the age of 16. 2 all right. so this is just -- you got testimony 3 of nicotine addiction drives persistent smoking. this is 4 the easy connect-the-dots puzzle. my son, seven years old, 5 he draws pictures, he loves to connect dots. you saw -- i'm 6 sure some of you have seen connect the dots puzzles. all 7 you have got to do you have add a dot and you connect the dots 8 and you see a picture of a tiger, elephant, whatever it is. 9 well, this is a three-dot connect-the-dot puzzle. addiction drives repeated smoking, repeated smoking caused the disease. what did dr. montoya tell you. he told you that ms. lennox smoking is the cause of her copd, nothing else. this is one of his records, 6005e, as in elephant. 6005e, as in elephant, chronic respiratory failure secondary to nicotine abuse. this is a record i that actually talked some length about with dr. montoya, i asked him, what do you mean by that prior tobacco use. he said her cigarette smoking. when you wrote this record, did you come to the conclusion about what was causing her copd? absolutely, smoking, smoking was the cause of her copd. so we also talked to dr. gravelyn, who has seen and treated thousands, thousands of patients. what did he tell you? she has severe pulmonary disease related to her inhalation of smoking winston cigarettes. and he said, were it not for her long-term smoking of winston cigarettes, she 82 2 would not have developed copd. 3 this is the 1984 surgeon general's report. it is 4 in evidence, that is 571. this is 1984. they say, on the 5 basis of the evidence reviewed in this volume, we are now 6 able to reach a much stronger conclusion. this is the first 7 time the surgeon general, 1984, in the united states 8 concluded strongly that cigarette smoking is a major cause 9 of chronic obstructive lung disease in the united states to both men and women. the earlier surgeon general report says there was an association, but it was not strong enough to say causal relationship. and this -- actually, this slide only has part of what i read you, but the whole exhibit is in evidence, exhibit 571. and it talks about the 1964 surgeon general's report. they say at that time the committee concluded a relationship exists between cigarette smoking and emphysema, but it has not been established that the relationship is causal. you will be able to see this. i just -- i neglected to put it in my presentation. but they did by 1984 say cigarette smoking is the major cause. so the surgeon general in 1984 first draws the conclusive causal link between smoking and copd and emphysema. that is 1984. keep that date in mind. then they go on and say 80 to ninety percent of cases of emphysema and chronic obstructive lung disease, which is 2 the same as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, are 83 3 smoking related. 4 you had two medical doctors come in here and tell 5 you beyond a reasonable doubt that ms. lennox's copd was 6 caused by her repeated smoking. what doctor came in and 7 disputed that conclusion? what doctor came in and told you 8 that cigarette smoking was not the cause of her copd? 9 i recognize that we have the burden of proof. remember, mr. walker told you in opening, you just wait, there is a lot of things i would say, a lot of things i could respond to, i'm gonna get up and respond. he had his chance to put on whatever evidence he wanted to put on yesterday to respond to our evidence on the issue that we bear the burden on. there was not. where is the doctor? what doctor came in here and said she is not addicted? what doctor came in here and said addiction did not cause her repeated smoking? what doctor came in here and said her repeated smoking did not cause her copd? karen lennox testified she started smoking winstons, regular brand, at the age of 13 or 14. you got so see her, you got to look her in the eye in that video. is there any doubt in your mind that that is the truth? nicotine addiction is the fundamental reason that individuals persist in using tobacco products and this 84 1 persistent tobacco use contributes to many diseases 2 described in this report. this is the connect-the-dots 3 puzzle that i was talking to you about. this is a much 4 simpler connect-the-dots puzzle than the ones my 5 seven-year-old routinely draws when he is making elephants or 6 monkeys. 7 addiction, dr. werner testified she is addicted, 8 she testified the addiction caused her repeated smoking, and 9 repeated smoking, two of the medical doctors testified, that it caused her copd and there is not a shred of medical or scientific literature that refutes that proposition. what doctor came in and disputed this causal link? now, they may say to you, well, karen lennox could have quit. karen lennox enjoyed smoking. karen lennox made decisions about her life. these questions have nothing to do with whether or not addiction is a legal cause of her copd. addiction is a medical question. cause of disease is a medical question. was she able to quit smoking? that is not it. the question of whether or not somebody is able to quit or not able to quit does not tell you anything about whether they are addicted or whether their addiction drives their smoking and drives their disease process. heroin addicts are able to quit. sure, somebody ods on heroin and dies, well, they could have quit. does that mean that heroin addiction did not drive the od which drives deaths? 85 1 karen lennox enjoys smoking. well, she smoked 2 because she enjoyed it. she smoked from the time, you know, 3 you was -- they are not going to conceded she was addicted by 4 16, but they did not put on a shred of evidence against it. 5 she was addicted by 16, she liked to smoke. why did she 6 like to smoke? nicotine is a drug. every time she smoked, 7 she got a hit of nicotine. so enjoying smoking, that is not 8 it. 9 she is able to control her smoking? sure. for some period of time she could control her smoking. that does not mean that addiction was not the fundamental reason she persisted in smoking and that persistent smoking was the cause of her copd. they asked dr. gravelyn questions, well, she quit as a kid, if she stopped smoking when she got to be 18, would she have developed copd? he said, no, they would not. not smoking to cause copd. but she did not. she did not quit, because she was addicted. she was addicted as a kid. sure, if they could go back and rewrite history, it would be a different -- it would be a different case. but that is not the case you are asked to decide. the case you are asked to decide is was she addicted? yes. did that addiction play an important substantial role in her persistent smoking? i submit to you absolutely. did that repeated, repeated long-term smoking cause her copd? not a 86 1 shred of evidence from the other side, although they have 2 whatever mr. walker will tell you in closing, which he is a 3 fine lawyer, he will say all kinds of things in closing. just 4 remember, the evidence comes from witnesses, documents, 5 medical evidence. it is a medical question. 6 now, i'm gonna get to you -- this is the question 7 on the verdict form. so as to question no. 1, was she 8 addicted? yes. 9 question no. 2: was the addiction a legal cause of her copd? that is -- we have overwhelming proved that. now, question no. 3: did she know or should she have known in the exercise of reasonable care on or before may 5th, 1990, that she had copd and that there was a reasonable possibility that her copd was caused by cigarette smoking? that is their burden to prove. and the funny thing is, all the evidence on that we provided. i think if we had to prove that she did not know she had copd before 1991, we absolutely proved that. we had to prove that someone with her intelligence and means and understanding and knowledge would have known that they had copd prior to 1991. the evidence is clear she did not know and the evidence is clear that the doctor she saw in september of 1991 in the emergency room, he clearly did not consider her to have copd. now, i'll walk you through that in just a minute. 87 1 but first, there is an important legal concept to 2 have in mind. remember, the judge instructed you that to be 3 a class member all we have to show is that ms. lennox was a 4 resident of florida and that she manifested the disease 5 prior to november 1996. it is right out of instruction 10. 6 must prove she was a resident of florida and her copd 7 manifested at some point before november 21st, 1996. 8 she does not have to prove that her copd first 9 manifested after may 5th, 1990, or any other day. so as long as she had the disease before 1996, she is in the class and the factual findings apply to her. and i'll get to that in a minute. remember mr. walker showed dr. montoya a slide looked kind of like this and said, well, is not it true she -- he said that this case is all about karen lennox, but he spent a good portion of his cross-examination of dr. montoya asking him questions about another smoker in another case. he said -- he said, you know, well, manifestation, that is when the disease was potentially detectable, is not it true in this other case somebody was diagnosed in 1998, you could have detected it if you had done the test earlier, you could have detected the disease process? he said, sure. in karen lennox's case, she was not diagnosed until 1991. were there manifestations of the disease before 88 1 that doctor? dr. gravelyn said, sure. but that is not the 2 question on the verdict form. the question on the verdict 3 form is gonna be, did karen lennox know or should she have 4 known in the exercise of reasonable care on or before 5 may 5th, 1990, that she had copd and there was a reasonable 6 possibility that her copd was caused by cigarette smoking. 7 and the way you analyze that is instruction 10a. and this 8 is rjr's burden to prove that ms. lennox knew or should have 9 known she had copd before may 1990. and it was smoking related. and they bear the burden of proof. if the plaintiff knew or by the exercise of reasonable care should have known before may 5th, 1990, that she had copd and it was a reasonable possibility that her copd was caused by cigarette smoking. now, read the whole jury instruction. the judge read you the instructions. you have to read all of the instructions. you cannot take out one piece and say, well, what about this piece? you have to read them all together. if manifestation is all rjr had to prove, we would not be here. we would be out of court. we can see if by manifestation you mean the disease process was at work in her body, yes, it probably was prior to march of 1990. but that is not the question on the statute of limitations for class membership purposes. the question was, is the disease process in her body before november 1996? does not matter 89 1 when before, but for the statute of limitations, it is a very 2 different analysis. and you have got to read the whole 3 instruction. it is not just disease process there. 4 they have to show that she knew or should have 5 known she had copd in the exercise of reasonable care. and 6 she got some reasonable medical care before dr. jeremy ben 7 zvi diagnosed her with copd. now, we will talk about that in 8 just a minute. but they have to show not only that she knew 9 she had the disease or should have known she had the disease, but also that she should have known the disease was caused by smoking. so -- and the instruction goes on, it says, in making this determination, you know, the means to obtain the knowledge is ordinarily equivalent in law to actual knowledge. but you have, in assessing the means to obtain knowledge, the plaintiff had information that would normally have led a reasonably careful person of the same age, mental capacity, intelligence, training, and experience to make inquiry through which such a person would certain to learn certain facts. what was the evidence about her age, training, and experience? daylene testified that her mother was a maid and worked as a maid and a bingo parlor. daylene and aunt diania testified that karen had limited ability to read. sure, she could read some, but she did not have the ability to comprehend and understand things that perhaps a better 90 1 educated slightly smarter person might have. you have to 2 take that into account. but i want to suggest to you even 3 if she were a harvard-trained doctor, even what happened in 4 the fall of 1990, 1991, there is -- there is no way she 5 should have known that she had copd and that she should have 6 known to file a lawsuit. 7 so let us walk through what -- karen's testimony 8 was quite clear that she did not have any health problems in 9 the '80s, she is started having shortness of breath in the early '90s. she remembers she was still working at -- she went on disability in 1991. before that she was working as a maid and a bingo parlor. she was having symptoms of shortness of breath. but she was having, you know, coughing. but there is a laundry list of things that can cause those symptoms. she did not know until 1992 that smoking was hazardous and she was not told by any doctor her breathing problems were copd related to smoking until she was diagnosed in 1991. daylene williams, you saw daughter yesterday. her daughter told you the first time she was aware her mother had copd was when daylene was in her 20s. and there was a time when daylene and her mother lived with her aunt and it was not clear exactly when that was. diania testified that karen lennox and her niece lived with her in '89 or '90. daylene may have put it a little bit back in time. mom gets 91 1 sick, she goes to the hospital. she is down in the bed sick, 2 she goes to the hospital. the aunt and mother go to the 3 hospital. and daylene did not go to the hospital. daylene 4 did not hear what, if anything, was told to her mother. both 5 ms. lennox and ms. murphy were quite clear they never heard 6 of copd or emphysema at that point in time. 7 so 20 years later, when daylene is getting 8 deposed, they asked what happened and she says, i do not know 9 what happened, but i think that may be when she was diagnosed with copd. she was looking back on it 20 years later. she was not there. she did not know. no doctor told karen that she had copd or dr. ven zvi did in 1991. and in fact, the mother went back to work after getting out of the hospital. she went back to work as a maid, she went back to work at the bingo parlor. diania's testimony, diania was the one that went with karen to the hospital. the first time she knew her sister had emphysema was when she went with her to see dr. martinez. dr. martinez treated karen lennox after she was diagnosed with copd by dr. jeremiah -- dr. jeremiah ben zvi. exhibit 6005 apple, apple, and 6005z, these are the medical records in the file for dr. martinez. the first record for him is in 2001. so take a look at those records. john can you pull up, actually, exhibit 6005aa? all right. that is a record from dr. martinez's -- may i move over here, your honor, so i can read 92 2 it? 3 4 the court: yes. mr. finch: dr. martinez's record from the june of 5 '02, carlos martinez, m.d. so whatever -- you know, the 6 people that would have known ms. lennox herself, diania 7 murphy, they certainly did not say that sometime in the '80s 8 karen was told she had copd. dr. -- 9 john, can i go back to -- dr. gravelyn. he testified there is no doubt that ms. lennox was first diagnosed with copd in november of 1991. he told you that manifestation is not the same thing as having enough information to know you have the disease. he was quite clear on that. and he testified that no reasonable patient in ms. lennox's position in 1989 or 1990 would suspect or know they had copd. so let us go through the chronology here. she is having symptoms and she goes to the hospital in september 1991. we know that from exhibit 6005a. this is in evidence. this is the record where dr. ben zvi diagnoses her with copd. so she goes to the hospital, recently it has been -- let us talk about her symptoms. recently it has been worse. she goes to the hospital, was seen in the emergency room on september 13th, 1991, in century medical clinic 93 1 because of shortness of breath. and that doctor did 2 something that is very important. what that doctor did, he 3 put her on a cough suppressant and gave her a rescue 4 inhaler. and i'll get to that in a minute. 5 but i want to talk with you about another record 6 this was record we showed you yesterday. 7 can i have 6005pp, double p. i do not know how we 8 got pp. late night. but it is 6005 double p. can we have 9 that, john? all right. 6005 double p. can you-all see that? all right. what it says is she has not had a hospitalization, treatment in an emergency room, or with a doctor for her lung condition. she went to medical -- medicaid emergency once. that is going back to that september, earlier -- this is october '91. she was told at age 17 she has bronchitis and emphysema. now, dr. gravelyn told you there is no way she could have had bronchitis or emphysema at 17. there is just no way. and her testimony, consistent testimony of every witness who knew her, is that her breathing problems did not start until the late '80s. if she had emphysema or bronchitis as a teenager, you would have heard a lot more evidence about breathing problems in the '70s and '80s and just there was not any of it. so whatever -- whatever that meant, it is just -- it is just a mistake. cannot possibly be that she had bronchitis or 94 1 emphysema at age 17. but what it does say, she has not had 2 hospitalization, treatment in an emergency room, or with a 3 doctor for her lung condition. 4 5 and so go back to 6005a, john, in powerpoint. so what does she do? she was seen in the 6 emergency room. you-all have 6005a. seen in the emergency 7 room on 9-13-91 in century medical clinic because of 8 shortness of breath. that is the medicaid emergency care 9 referred to on this other document, the double p document. okay. so remember, the jury instruction on statute of limitations is all about a reasonably careful person, what they would have learned if they applied reasonable care. and the verdict question is: should she know or she should have known in the exercise of reasonable care on or before may 5th, 1990, that she had copd and there was a reasonable possibility her copd was caused by cigarette smoking? she got reasonable care in september of 1991 when this doctor saw her. and he treated her. she is being treated with proventil inhaler and tuss organidin medication. now, what does that mean? she got treated for a disease by a doctor with a short-term inhaler and a cough medicine, cough suppressant. dr. gravelyn, a board certified pulmonologist, came and said, look, a short-term rescue inhaler is not going to do anything for copd. does not do anything for copd. it is for a reversible condition like 2 asthma. and this cough suppressant, the tuss organidin, 3 that would be the exact opposite, wrong thing to do if a 95 4 doctor thought she had copd. 5 so let us put yourself in a time machine. it is 6 september 13th, 1991. karen lennox, she is had vague 7 symptoms of tiredness, shortness of breath, and cough that 8 have gotten worse and she ends up in the emergency room. 9 she has not been to the doctor or hospital before that, she ends up in the emergency room. you are having difficulty breathing. do not you think, even a person of her limited understanding, if she knew that she had emphysema or copd, do not you think -- you are going to the emergency room, doctor is a saying, do you have any lung diseases that i need to be aware about that might cause your breathing problems? doctor is asking her that. if she had told him that she had copd or emphysema if she knew that, he would have committed malpractice to have given her a short-term inhaler and a -- that tuss organidin, that cough expectorant. now, the symptoms in exhibit 6005, shortness of breath, cough, tired. i asked dr. montoya and mike asked dr. gravelyn what are the things that causes cough, shortness of breath, or tiredness in the morning? and i asked that question to dr. montoya and he looked at me like 96 1 i was crazy. i said, well, it would be a laundry list of 2 diseases? he said, yes. well, mike, who is more careful 3 and studious than i am, actually had dr. gravelyn walk 4 through all these things that could be causing those 5 symptoms, some smoking-related, most of them not. 6 deconditioning, anxiety, panic attack. the lady was on 7 valium because of panic attacks. and then the doctor, cannot 8 read his handwriting, but he went through a whole list, 9 asthma, copd. yeah, that is one thing, but was she told that? these are things that cause shortness of breath. all these things cause shortness of breath. tiredness, there is a million things that can cause tiredness. that was the question i put to dr. montoya. so what doctor did rjr bring to tell you ms. lennox or her doctors should have known she had copd prior to november 1991? reasonable care. reasonable medical care. she was having vague symptoms of shortness of breath and tired. she keeps going to work. she goes to work. finally it gets so bad she goes on disability and she ends up at the emergency room in september of 1991 and a doctor treats her and that doctor treats her with things that you would never ever prescribe to someone if they had copd. and so you have to say what would a reasonable person take from that? what would a reasonable person of 97 1 her intelligence, training, experience, what would they take 2 from that? would they have known before the doctor told 3 them that? the doctor -- that doctor in september of 1991 4 made his best medical judgment as to what was going on, what 5 was causing her breathing problems, and copd was not one of 6 them or else he would not have given her that cough 7 suppressant and he would not have given her that rescue 8 inhaler. 9 why in the world do we hold karen lennox to a higher standard of care than a trained medical doctor who saw her? well, that is just not -- that is just not what the law requires. what rj reynolds would have you do is what some people call monday morning quarterbacking. any of you heard the term monday morning quarterbacking relating to football? one of my favorites, at least my wife says i watch a lot of football, she is not a football fan. and this super bowl was an absolutely -- you know, the seahawks had a chance to score touchdown with 20 seconds left in the game, they could have handed ball off to their star running back. instead, they through a pass and it got intercepted, patriots won the game. so the coach of the seahawks is getting second guessed by people again and again and again. that is what monday morning quarterbacking is. what rj reynolds wants you to do is monday morning quarterbacking. that doctor who saw karen lennox in the 98 1 hospital in september of 1991 -- they want you to monday 2 morning quarterback her, she is supposed to have figured out 3 she had copd by herself, she is supposed to diagnose herself? 4 daylene lennox, is she diagnosing doctor? what doctor came 5 in here and said a reasonable patient would have known or 6 should have known prior to the time of the fall of 1991 they 7 had copd? had that doctor, we do not know his name, but he is 8 in the medical record, and it is 6005a, he treats her with 9 two things you never give to someone with copd. and they basically want you to come in here after the fact and make a determination that that guy committed malpractice because he treated her for something other than copd. and is it reasonable to you that if karen lennox knew she had copd or emphysema when she was going to the emergency room having difficulty breathing that she would have -- she is going to not tell the doctor that because she wanting to save the statute of limitations and a lawsuit against rj reynolds 24 years later? come on. does that really make a lot of sense? all right. so if you answer the class membership questions, that is one and two. and question no. 3, i think there is an overwhelming amount of evidence on question no. 3, should she have known in the exercise of reasonable care on or before may 5th, 1990, that she had copd and it was a reasonable possibility her copd was caused by 99 1 cigarette smoking. that is no. if you answer that 2 question, yes, we are out of court, do not get to do anything 3 else. you have to answer the rest of the questions on the 4 form. but if you answer that question, no, karen lennox 5 loses. and they have the burden of proof on that. they 6 have the burden. mr. walker said, well, i do not have the 7 burden. he had a motion on before in the case, what did he 8 bring you as evidence? think, the first thing, very hard 9 what evidence he brought you, what doctor came in and said that she should have known. so there is some questions about -- so if you decide she is a class member, class membership, this may 5th date is -- it is a disease that she had sometime before 1996, addiction, addiction causation. so the factual findings apply. i'm not going it read them off to you, you are going to get them in the jury instructions. but one of the first two is that rjr was negligent and rjr made a defective and unreasonably dangerous product. even if you believe that karen lennox never relied on anything in her entire life in any way, shape, or form, even though she knew that winston taste good like a cigarette should because she heard the ad, he said, that had nothing to do with her choice of brands, you still go to the question of comparative fault and you go to the questions on damages. i think actually there is strong evidence that her 2 initial choice of brand was based on things they said. even 3 the president of american tobacco said when we showed his 4 deposition taken many years ago, we expected people to rely 100 5 on our advertising. 6 how was karen lennox to know that winston taste 7 good before she ever tasted them? yeah, she liked them when 8 she started, but she did not know what they taste like the 9 first time she tasted them. where did that idea come to her head? it did not spring into her head like athena from zeus' brow. so the question of comparative fault, here it is rj reynolds' burden to prove how much karen was at fault, whether she was at fault and, if so, by how much. your honor, may i move the board around? the court: sure. mr. finch: all right. i'm gonna have these boards up here a long time. you-all are going to get sick of listening to me. look at the boards and read them. but i'm going to walk through what did rj reynolds do wrong and what -- so let us start with them. they were negligent. that is an engle finding. may not agree with that finding, i think we proved beyond a shadow of doubt, but they knew in the '50s that smoking caused death and lung diseases, yet they kept telling their customer for years and years and years they did not. they 2 chose to keep selling defective and unreasonably dangerous 101 3 product. 4 they knew by the '50s that nicotine addiction was 5 the real reason people continued to smoke, yet they chose to 6 tell their customers smoking is your right, smoking is a 7 choice. they chose to set nicotine levels in their 8 cigarettes, a level designed to sustain addiction. they 9 designed their whole cigarette program around that. they knew in 1962 that nicotine addiction was why people smoked and that cigarettes were addictive, yet they did not tell the surgeon general that. they did not send the surgeon general those documents. when the surgeon general finally concluded that nicotine was addictive in 1988, what was their response? did they agree with that? no, they chose to dispute it for another 15 years. they marketed their cigarettes irresponsibly. and who were they trying to become loyal brand smokers? they knew that 60, seventy percent of people that are going to smoke were smoking by the age of 18. they did surveys of high school kids in the '50s. why would you do surveys asking kids their names and addresses when you were not interested to marketing them? why would they write memos in the '70s trying to determine why people smoked? why people smoke their first cigarette, knowing people first started smoking 102 1 at the age of nine, ten, 11, 12, 13, why would they be 2 considered? why were they interested in that? purely 3 academic reasons? 4 they promised america in 1954, in the frank 5 statement -- of course, karen lennox never saw this. her 6 parents may not have even seen this. but hold them to their 7 promises. they promised america that we accept an interest 8 in people's health as a basic responsibility paramount to 9 every other consideration in our business. did they put people's health paramount to every other consideration in their business for the next 50 years? i submit to you they did not. so what did karen do wrong? was she negligent? they have to prove her negligence. what did she do wrong? was trying cigarettes at the age of nine, was that negligent? maybe. but can you hold a nine-year-old responsible for the rest of their lives for a choice like that? becoming addicted to winston cigarettes by age 16, that is what they want her to do. she was addicted by the age of 16. how can she possibly be negligent when she is doing exactly what they want her to do? and the drug is reinforced, by the time she is 16, she is hooked. was she negligent? is that negligent? maybe. i do not think so. not breaking her addiction until 2010 or 2011, which is the last record of her finally quit. that is in 103 1 6005u. dr. montoya, where he congratulates her for quitting 2 a year ago. so okay, she is smoking, she is addicted by 16, 3 she keeps on smoking. and what she did is entirely 4 consistent with an addicted smoker, not paying attention to 5 the warning on the pack, not trying to quit until much later 6 on. 7 the question is how much fault do you put on her 8 versus how much fault do you put on them. that is the 9 question. every cigarette that she smoked was defective and dangerous. they were negligent the entire time. they wanted her to keep smoking those cigarettes. you heard the president of american tobacco. he would not put any fault on the smoker for smoking two packs a day repeatedly. that is the cigarette company president saying, do not put any fault on smokers for smoking our products, yet now they want to come in here and say it is all her fault. is not fair. so addiction. they are going to say, well, she was at fault for enjoying smoking, she is at fault for finding smoking relaxing, she liked the taste, she did not want to stop, she did not try to quit smoking until 1997. those are classic signs of addiction as dr. werner told you. can you fault her for being addicted? can you fault her for being addicted to smoking, doing exactly what they wanted her to do? yeah, okay, you can put some fault on her if you choose. i submit to you that you should not fault her for doing exactly what they wanted her to do, you should not say 2 she was legally wrong for doing exactly what they wanted her 3 to do. but it is always been legally wrong to sell 104 4 cigarettes to minors. 5 so let us talk about responsibility and choices. 6 and you can analyze this based on who knew what, when, and 7 what did they do with that knowledge? i'm going to go 8 quickly through this material. all the exhibits will be in 9 evidence. but let us go back in time. let us look at the entire suite of the 20th century. there is an exhibit in evidence, it is exhibit 1755, which shows the per capita cigarette consumption in this country over the 20th century. i believe i may have a board of that, too. well, somewhere there might be a board of that, but let us just go. 1906, florida health notes. rj reynolds is 31 years old in 1906. this is exhibit d25. 1906, cigarette is looked upon by all smokers as the very worst form of tobacco addiction. so there we are in the 1906. that is what rj reynolds knew if you wanted to go out and get a cigarette. this in 1962 where you have got astronauts smoking, you have got movie stars smoking, you have got fred flintstone smoking. it became socially -- so socially acceptable. that is the world karen grew up in. her parents were smoking because they made it socially acceptable. why did that 105 1 happen? cigarettes became easier to smoke and the 2 advertising they used to sell them was designed to make it a 3 cool thing to do. they were the cell phones of the day. if 4 i walked down the street and you saw me outside on the 5 street and i put my hand in my pocket and pulled something 6 out, you would say that is an iphone. how many people have 7 iphones? you do that in 1955 when karen lennox's dad was a 8 young man, a man reached into his coat pocket, what would he 9 pull out? a pack of lucky strikes, camels, winstons. it was the cool thing. i mean, karen testified about how john wayne and clint eastwood, they -- this did not happen magically and it did not happen overnight. by the time karen was a kid, that is the world she is growing up in. that is the graph i was looking for. i thought i -- that is the exhibit evidence that shows the per capita cigarette consumption from this country over the 20th century. and this goes from 1900 to 1962, up, up, up, up, up. despite whatever warning might have been in the reader's digest, were the american people stupid? were the american people, did they not care about their children in the '50s and '60s? of course they did. but the advertising made it cool, made it fun, made it something that was not viewed as dangerous and not viewed as deadly and not viewed as addictive. 106 1 you think karen lennox's parents, if they had 2 known that there was a two-thirds chance a kid would be 3 addicted to cigarettes and fifty percent chance they would die 4 from that, people knew that in their head, would not they 5 have behaved differently? 6 so you do not have to take my word for what drove 7 this. the tobacco company's own documents, 580, the 8 cigarette industry dramatically demonstrates the force of 9 advertising in the united states today. we have millions of individual purchases every day. the rise and fall of every brand of consequence has been traced in detail and their year-to-year success. the government says this, federal trade commission, it is in evidence if you want to read whole thing. have fun, it is a great read. but the key parts of it, expenditures on cigarette advertising promotions increased each year during '63 and '66 reaching $300 million in 1966. cigarette advertising reaches virtually all americans who can either read or understand the spoken word. they are advertised on network spots, television, radio, magazines. cigarette advertising is virtually impossible for americans of almost any age to avoid cigarette advertising. youth is also exposed to cigarette advertising. and then there is virtually no evidence that the 107 1 warning statement on a cigarette package has had any 2 significant effect. if you do not want to believe the 3 government, believe the cigarette companies. there is an 4 exhibit in evidence, it is 527, it is a philip morris document 5 where they are talking about how the surgeon general -- i 6 showed it dr. kyriakoudes, the surgeon general's warnings 7 had very little effect on smoking. and if you doubt that, 8 this chart here came out in the 2000 surgeon general's 9 report, chart of cigarette consumption. look at where cigarette consumption is in the '60s, an all-time high. so you will have that in evidence, you will look at it as long as you like to. still on the clock here, so i'm trying to wrap this up. so here we go. who was rj reynolds trying to attract as new customers? so this is the example of the exhibit where they are looking at surveys of high school students, that is exhibit 3024. 1959, research study of high school students, can cover letter is 50, the survey itself is at 751. in 1974 they write a memo that says, the purpose of this memo is to answer the question, what causes smokers to select their first brand of cigarettes. and they have some statistics in there, the percentage of people and the age they start smoking. and they -- what they conclude, if a person is going to smoke cigarettes, he generally starts during his teens primarily to conform with a close friend or friends, to give himself greater confidence in stress 2 situations, or to avail himself of physical enjoyment of 108 3 smoking. 4 there is a table in the back of that report that 5 says a cumulative percentage of people smoking, which goes 6 from nine percent by 12 and under to 68 percent by 18 for 7 men, 47 percent at age 18 for women. it is always been wrong 8 in this country for cigarettes to be sold to minors. always 9 been wrong to advertise to minors, always wrong to have minors to have a choice, let them do that procedure in hospital, do that for cigarettes. and in 1984, look back at the document 146, the whole thing is in evidence. read it. they talk about the importance of younger adult smokers, younger adult smokers have been a critical factor in the growth and decline of every major brand over the last 50 years. younger adult smokers are the only source of replacement smokers. repeated government studies have shown that less than one-third of smokers started after age 18 and only five percent of smokers started after age 24. here i was talking about 527, talks about this is where philip morris company estimates that 45 million youngsters begin smoking every day. that is the surgeon general saying that. if this is true, this is philip morris writing, it means that 40 to fifty percent of potential new 109 1 smokers smoking and does not imply a significant reduction 2 in smokers. curiously, 18 million quitters was precisely 3 the figure used a year and a half earlier and suggests even 4 earlier evidence, no smokers quit smoking since 1964. so 5 there is the chart. surgeon general's report is the beef. 6 so again, assessing comparative fault, who knew 7 what when. 1953, karen lennox was born. what did she know? 8 what did the executives that met at the plaza hotel know? 9 what did they know? that is when they came out with the frank statement. came out with the frank statement and made some promises, believed their product was injurious to health. they accept the responsibility for their products and we have always, always will, cooperate closely with those whose task it is to safeguard the public health. hold them to those promises, because while they were making those promises, rj reynolds files in 1953 surveys and scientific literature, including studies of clinical data tending to confirm the relationship between heavy and prolonged tobacco smoking and the incidence of cancer of the lung. exhibit 160. in 1962, exhibit 168, they have include that the amount of evidence accumulated to indict cigarette smoke as a health hazard is overwhelming. the evidence challenging that is scant. in 1963, brown & williamson, which rj reynolds, is 110 1 responsible for, an internal private memo, june '63, what do 2 they say? we will assume the surgeon general's report to 3 say, despite the effect of nicotine, they have certain side 4 effects. they cause a predisposal to lung cancer, 5 predisposal to cardiovascular disorders, they may well be 6 truly causative in emphysema, et cetera, et cetera. this is 7 a cigarette company executive writing this in 1963. 8 remember the surgeon general of the united states 9 did not finally conclude that smoking causes copd until 1984. these guys were way ahead of the medical curve. and until the '64 report comes out, what do they say? what was the response of rj reynolds and the tobacco companies for the next 35 years? let us go back to 1953 again, the subject of addiction. what did the cigarette companies say in their internal private documents that were written about the time they met at the plaza hotel? one of them says, it is fortunate for us that cigarettes are a habit they cannot break. that is exhibit 86. 1962, another private internal document, exhibit 77, what does rj reynolds, who is a successor of brown & williamson know? as a result of these various researchers, we now possess knowledge of the effect of nicotine far more extensive than exists in published scientific literature. the work proposed should give an 111 1 objective comparison between mode of action of nicotine and 2 tranquilizing drugs. it should also lead to understanding 3 of the menace which creates addiction. 4 1962, menace that creates addiction is known to 5 the cigarette industry, rj reynolds. again, that same 6 exhibit i showed you a second ago, exhibit 163, what is this 7 brown & williamson exhibit say? nicotine is addictive. we 8 are in the business of selling nicotine, an addictive drug 9 effective in release of stress. those are internal private documents that never saw the light of day until 1999. by the way, here mr. teague, he is the man who was the chemist who figures out smoking causes lung cancer in 1953, when i showed you 169, make the filters change colors, people might believe they work. well, that is a great advertising mind, it is not a good citizen. he writes in his private confidential memo, tobacco product in essence is a vehicle for delivery of nicotine. our industry is based on the design, manufacture, and sale of attractive doses and forms of nicotine and our company's position in our industry is determined by our ability to produce dosage forms of nicotine which have more overall value to the consumer than those of our competitors. rjr knew all this. they had control over the design of their cigarettes, set the nicotine level, any level. what did they set it at? a level necessary to 112 1 sustain addiction. they knew nicotine was addictive since 2 the '50s, it is the fundamental reason why people smoke. 3 what did they tell the public? what did they do with that 4 knowledge? what did they do with this surgeon general's 5 report? what did this report say about addiction? said it 6 was not addictive, did not meet the definition of addiction. 7 those internal records, the surgeon general, the exhibit i 8 just showed you? those guys were not talking about classical 9 definition of addiction, they were talking about the medical definition of addiction. they were talking about addiction is the reason people smoke. and the coe of all cigarette companies under oath before congress, what did they say? nicotine is not addictive. and why do you think they would take that position? because they knew internally, this is a 1980 document, this is exhibit 94, they knew that we cannot defend continued smoking as free choice if the person was addicted. they now that. that is why they were so resistent to this whole idea that nicotine is addictive, because they knew once people realized nicotine was addicted and addiction was treated as a medical disease, people would get medical help and stop smoking their products. it would make it a lot harder for them to come in and tell people, oh, it is a choice, not an addiction. so on this question, percentage of fault, and this 113 1 is question no. -- it spills over, it is question no. -- i 2 believe it is going to be question no. 8. i'm not sure if i 3 have a final version of the jury form. 4 but, ms. corb, is question no. 8 the comparative 5 fault question on the final version of the verdict form? 6 7 8 the court: yes. mr. finch: thank you, your honor. the question is going to say: please state the 9 percentage of any responsibility that you charge to each party for karen lennox's copd. now, i suggest to you i'll leave that to your sound discretion. rjr's already been proven negligent. they have to prove that she was negligent and how much so. i would suggest to you, remember, every cigarette she smoked was defective, every cigarette she smoked was unreasonably dangerous, they were negligent. even if you decide she did not rely on anything that was ever said about cigarettes ever, by far the greater fault falls on them than on her. what did they know in 1953? what did she know? what did they do in 1962? what did she do in 1962? what were they doing in 1964 and '65, '66, '67, '68, and '69? that caution label, caution, smoking may be hazardous to your health? okay. may be hazardous. lots of things may be hazardous. do not you think karen lennox or karen lennox's parents would have liked to have known then that if 114 1 you started smoking as a teenager you had a two-thirds 2 chance to get addicted. if you got addicted, you got a 3 fifty percent chance of dying of cancer. that was what is 4 omitted. so even if you say, okay, i'm not -- assuming she 5 was blind, deaf, dumb, never walked out of her apartment 6 anywhere, they are still primarily at fault here. i suggest 7 that the percentage should be a great weight on them, very 8 little on her. you guys, the beauty of our jury system is 9 you can talk about this, you can arrive at your own conclusion about that. all i will say on the intentional tort questions, remember those questions based on faults, that rj reynolds concealed or omitted material information or that they were part of a conspiracy. those questions go to the issue of punitive damages. if you think that what they did here was so reprehensible, so reckless that disregarded karen lennox's life and other people's life, you have to check one of those questions yes. you have got to check one of those questions that it happened both before and after may 5th. and the simplest way to do that, winston taste good like a cigarette should. karen lennox had no idea what winston taste like before she heard that. she was bumming lucky strikes, stealing lucky strikes from her parents. she said, why would her parents smoking lucky strikes? because they grew up in a world where it was the cool, hip thing to do? 115 1 why did she smart smoking? cool, in thing to do. but she 2 chose a brand that was a lifelong brand and that is what 3 killed her, because shy heard somewhere they tasted good. 4 that did not come to her magically from the air. you saw 5 lots of commercials. that was their jingle for many years. 6 so she picked the brand and she tried them because she 7 believed the advertising. their advertising said winston 8 does not taste good, winston is going to kill you, or if 9 their advertising said, winston does not taste good, if you smoke one winston you have got a huge chance of becoming addicted for life and looking like that 50 years from now. they could have said that. they could have said that in 1962 or '63 or '64. but they said no, winston tastes good like a cigarette should. and she believed that and she started smoking and she got hooked. and once she was hooked in the cycle of addiction, everything else follows. so one of these questions i suggest to you for questions 4 or 6 an answer should be yes. i'll leave that up to you which one. regardless of even if you answer no, you still go on to the question of comparative fault. and then you get -- just before i leave that thought, the 1981 ptc record in evidence, that is exhibit 129. that showed that the cigarette companies spent far more -- spent $365 for every one dollar spent on public service announcements. 116 1 now, i suspect that mr. walker is going to say, 2 well, who showed you all these documents? who showed you 3 the internal tobacco company documents? who showed you the 4 government reports? well, it was dr. kyriakoudes. and they 5 say, well, that guy was biased against the tobacco industry. 6 and you know what? he is. but there is different kinds of 7 biases. you can be biased for illegitimate reasons or you 8 can be biased for legitimate reasons. and if you are biased 9 against co-workers because of the color of their skin, gender, or their sexual orientation, that is wrong. if you are biased because your testifying in a lawsuit and you have -- you make money if one side or the other wins, that is something you can take into account. but dr. kyriakoudes does not make more money if we win or if they win. there is a jury instruction about someone makes a substantial portion of their income from testifying. dr. kyriakoudes made 400 grand over 15 years. yeah, that is a lot of money. but he is also been a professor for 15 years. but the bias that he has is from studying historical evidence. even if you disregard him completely, the exhibits, internal documents, came from their files, their exhibits. read them and draw your own conclusions. those documents say what they say. the government reports of 1967 ftc report, 1989 ftc report, they say what they say. dr. kyriakoude's bias is equivalent of a historian doing an 117 1 economic study, historian studied soviet russia in the '20s 2 and '30s and '40s and came to some pretty strongly held 3 views that communism ain't a great way to distribute goods 4 and services in the world. that is a historical -- bias 5 based on the review of historical records. he looked at 6 their historical conduct, which killed 20 million americans. 7 with the kind of behavior we saw out of claude teague and 8 these other people that we stipulated are all dead. those 9 guys are dead, rj reynolds is still here. look at the evidence, make your own determination. all right. that guy, robert heimann, the guy who said, hey, i disagree with the warning, i disagree with congress, i disagree with the world health organization, i have more ability to understand those studies than all these other people. those guys that started out as an officer under the president of american tobacco, rose to the title of president, and he sat there in deposition, you saw a half hour of it, where he disputed all this stuff. and he said, hey, our advertising is truthful and people should rely on it and i do not blame a smoker for smoking two packs a day. god bless him, but that is reckless disregard for other people's rights. you have the ability to do something. if you do not think that their strategy worked, look at this. this is that surgeon general chart, 1755. look at this smoking in 1980 compared to what it was in 118 1 1960. 2 all right. so how does rj reynolds' choice affect 3 karen lennox? i'll skip through this. she did exactly what 4 they wanted her to do. their defenses is -- well, you are 5 going to hear their defenses. i suggest to you you should 6 give them very little weight. she knew or should have known 7 she had copd before 1991. what is their evidence on that? 8 gonna be that record from -- that says, oh, she was told she 9 said copd when she was 17 years old. she had no breathing problems until the late '80, because daylene williams speculated that, well, when i was a kid, my mom and my aunt went to the doctor and i was not there, that is maybe when she was diagnosed with emphysema. you got to look daylene in the eye. she said, look, i did not know what emphysema was. then i was looking backward. it was the concept of taking what you know now and putting it back in the past. we all do it, but that is how you have to evaluate the evidence, based on what people knew at the time. think about this: in the real world, if you were told smoking cigarettes for 40 years and a medical doctor diagnosed you with addiction and another medical doctor diagnosed them that the addiction caused their copd and another medical doctor said that the smoking causes copd, would you listen to that? and in real world, if you went to see a doctor and the doctor -- you were having problems 119 1 breathing and doctor gave you some medicine, would you 2 second guess that doctor, the doctor gave you a cough 3 suppressant, doctor gave you an inhaler, short-term inhaler, 4 would you second guess that doctor, would you say, oh, no, 5 i'm a harvard medical doctor, that is the wrong treatment for 6 me? you should test me for copd. you know, you may be 7 getting this wrong, run a bunch of tests. maybe. but 8 that is not what happened. and on the scales of justice i 9 think we have overwhelmingly presented our case and proven our case and they have issues they have the burden on, i suggest to you. hardest question: this is the questions as to which i'm gonna be able to give you very little advice. total amount of damages. there is an exhibit in evidence, past medical bills are roughly $163,000. that is exhibit 6004a. and there will be future medical expenses. you can assess what she looks like now, she will be here -- obviously here for a while, probably not gonna be here for more than a year or two. she is on her way down, dr. montoya told you she was on her way down, end stage copd. what does that mean for her? but there is going to be some oxygen bills which she is going to incur over the next couple of years. and in the back of exhibit 6004a you can see the monthly cost of oxygen. i'll leave that to your discretion. pain and suffering and all the other items of 120 1 damage that the court says you have to consider, that is the 2 hardest question. remember, do not discount whatever the 3 damages come up with by her. the judge has already said, if 4 you find that she is ten percent at fault or 15 percent at 5 fault, whatever it is, do not discount the damages by that 6 percentage. find a full and fair measure of damages in this 7 case. 8 now, some people have the view that pain and 9 suffering damages, i just cannot factor that in. i cannot value it. and that is fine. but in a courtroom, that is what you have to do. and it is very, very hard, because we go through life and we put up filters and put up blinders, we do not want to think about someone else's real pain and real suffering, whether it is diseases in africa or war in europe, in the middle east, or people getting shot in the streets of tampa or dying from any number of causes, we do not really want to get our heads around what that really means. and that is okay unless you are in a jury box. and then you have to. and there is nine of you and you have enormous power. you have enormous responsibility. and there is no absolute truth on what all the harms and losses karen suffered, what that is worth. each of you talk about it from your own perspective. i'm going to suggest a couple of ways to think about it. but you, you, have the power, you 121 1 get to decide, you get to make the decision yourself. each 2 of you has your own view, each you should be heard on this 3 and talk about it. how much is a breath worth, a breath of 4 fresh air? wake up in the morning, take a big deep breath. 5 how much is a breath worth? 6 testimony from the pulmonologist was that an adult 7 woman breathes 12 to 16 times a minute. there is a medical 8 record in evidence, 6005a, the exhibit that diagnosed -- 9 where she was first diagnosed with copd, 20 breaths per minute. let us make the math easy. ten breaths a minute, 60 minutes in an hour, that is 600 breaths in an hour, 14,400 in a day, 5 million -- 5.2 million. you think a clean breath of fresh air would be worth a dime to karen lennox? you think clean -- every breath she is taken since 1991 has been obstructed. since 2002 she is been on oxygen. how do you value that? you have to put a value on it. you have to put a value on it. other people may say, well, mr. finch that is not quite the right way to do it. that is fine. start talking about how you would -- somebody loses a finger, maybe $50,000 pain and suffering. we are not talking about hot coffee being poured on some lady's lap at mcdonald's. we are talking about the inability to breathe. breathing is the most fundamental thing we do. if you did not eat for a week, you would not be happy about it probably. if you did not drink for two days, you would be unhappy about it, but you 2 would survive. how long can a person go without being able 3 to breathe? it is the most fundamental basic need a human 122 4 being has. 5 and the same part of the brain that controls 6 breathing, that is where the dopamine starts. that is where 7 addiction gets all -- that is what dr. werner told you. so 8 $50,000 for losing a finger. some lady spills hot coffee on 9 her at mcdonald's, i would suggest to you that is zero. but what if somebody loses their leg, a baseball player, you are not -- baseball player losses their leg, that might be a million-dollar injury. let us say somebody losses both legs. i suggest to you a reasonable group of people in tampa may say, well, that is worth $8 million. they may say it is less than that. but you get to decide -- that is beauty of the jury system, this is even more fundamental than that. this lady, not only is she worse off and she cannot go anywhere, she is tethered to oxygen. and what does she have to fear? you heard her on her deposition. she fears choking to death, strangling to death. these are some of the things. each one of these things, put some value, talk about it. talk about it. the judge's instructions give you what the things that you are to take into consideration. and so my suggestions here, value of taking an unimpeded breath, being 123 1 scared to death, being scared of being alone, not being able 2 to bathe yourself, not being able to take care of your 3 grandkids, not being able to be around for your grandkids, 4 those are not things that we can put a table and say, this is 5 worth that. that is just not the way our system of justice 6 works. 7 juries have been deciding things like this for 8 hundreds of years in this country. the jury system is the 9 only place in this country where an individual person stands on the same level playing field as a corporation and have justice done. you have the power. you have the power to decide justice here. so please do that. and whatever -- whatever you come up with, we are not here for the $100,000 in medical bills. this company, every decision they did based on money. that is the only language they understand. and this is an enormous pain and enormous loss of ability to perform daily functions, all of which the jury instructions talk about. please, please, please, value that. even if it is hard. even if you say, i do not want to do that. please, you took an oath, you said you would consider it. listen to each other. karen lennox went from the lady you see on the right to the lady you see on the left and she did not get there by accident and she did not get there by herself. their choices mattered, too. their decisions, what they did, their negligent conduct, their defective and dangerous 2 product, that matters. that resulted in this here. there 124 3 has to be accountability. 4 on punitive damages i cannot think of a situation 5 that more cries out for punitive damages. whatever amount 6 of money you award in compensatory damages, please check the 7 box yes for punitive damages. because we if you do so, we 8 will get to come back, present evidence to you as to a 9 guideline for what that amount should be. i suggest to you that the compensatory damages or for a full and fair amount of her harm, her suffering. but if ever a company needed to be punished for recklessly, carelessly, intentionally disregarding the rights of karen lennox and millions of other people like her, this one does. you go back to the plaza hotel in 1953, what would you tell those guys? you cannot. you cannot get in a time machine, you cannot do it. you could go back and talk to mr. horrigan, ceo of rj reynolds, there is no stipulation that he is dead. he may be dead, he may not be. probably he is still here. that same old company, 1875 all the way to here, it is still here. thinks and when it says, we accept interest in people's health as a basic responsibility paramount to every other consideration in our business. what do you think was the paramount consideration in their business? was it people's health or was it 125 1 profits? do not let them get away with it. 2 stop. i'm done. i will sit down. mr. walker 3 will tell you i'm sure lots of things. but listen very 4 carefully to what he tells you. think about what it is, the 5 evidence, what it is he is talking about. i suggest to you 6 that you have the power to do justice. please do justice 7 here. karen lennox was harmed very badly by their careless, 8 reckless, and intentional conduct. 9 i thank you for your time, i thank you for your attention, and i thank you for your justice. karen lennox does not need sympathy, but she does need justice and now you have the ability to do it this afternoon. thank you, your honor. that concludes the plaintiff's closing arguments. after mr. walker talks, if there is anything i feel like i have not covered, mr. pendell has been chomping at the bit, or i may stand up and talk to you a little more, but i think we have proven our case beyond a reasonable doubt, every issue that we have the burden of proof they have not brought you anything real on the issue they have the burden to prove. do you really think that karen lennox should have known she had copd when the doctor she saw in september of 1991 did not treat her that way? you have got to look at the whole jury instruction, the whole picture, do not look at part of it. 126 1 2 3 thank you, your honor. mr. finch: may it please the court. mr. pendell 7 decided since i talk faster than him i ought to get the 8 chance to go last and i'm going to go through this as quick 9 as i can. i've been told since i was knee high to a duck i talk too fast, so i'll go through this as fast and slow as i can. the end of the day every trial comes down to who do you believe? do you believe ms. lennox and the witnesses that she brought you and her lawyers or do you believe them and the witnesses and evidence that they brought you? may i have the elmo, robin? mr. walker showed you a slide on his statute of limitations defense. first thing he said is 1970, has bronchitis, emphysema. that is this social security record, 6005 double p. he asked you to rely on that. well, he also showed you a slide that said if she had stopped smoking at 18 she would not have gotten copd. there is no way that she could have had bronchitis and copd in 1970, there is no way that that could be the basis for statute of limitations. 199 1 the next thing he said, diania murphy said that 2 her sister was coughing for up to five years before going to 3 see a doctor. the doctor -- only doctor diania murphy 4 remembered going to see with her sister was the carlos 5 martinez. carlos martinez, 6005z as in zebra. the date of 6 that, 2001. he could have asked diania murphy, which doctor 7 you are talking about. mr. pendell had to ask, it was 8 mr. martinez. so that cannot be knowing or should have known 9 she had copd. so then we get to daylene williams' testimony. daylene williams, in elementary school, her mom goes to the doctor, she was not with her, her aunt was, and daylene williams is a diagnosing doctor in this case. daylene williams says, well, looking back on it 20 years later, that is -- that is when i think my mom was told she had copd. she had no way to know that. there is a jury instruction that says in evaluating witness testimony, you think about could they know or perceive the information. sure, she could have -- she did learn at some point her mother had copd or emphysema, but you really think as a ten-year-old kid? rjr wants to put a lot of responsibility on children. they want to say that nine-year-olds, ten-year-olds, 11-year-olds, 12-year-olds, they are responsible when the choices they make affect the rest of their lives. they want to say that a kid that knows what happened with her mother 200 1 went to the hospital and her mother -- think about it, the 2 mother went to the hospital, the mother got out of the 3 hospital and went back to going to work. 4 mr. walker said i was accusing whatever doctor saw 5 ms. lennox in september of '91 of committing malpractice. 6 i'm not saying that. i am saying that do not you think that 7 if ms. lennox really had -- knew she had copd and knew she 8 had emphysema when she saw that doctor in september of 1991 9 she would have told him that? she is -- you know, she is having breathing problems, slowly getting worse, she goes to the emergency room. she does not have access to healthcare on a regular basis as the pp record i showed you demonstrates. she goes to the emergency room. if that doctor thought for a minute she had copd or emphysema, he sure as heck would not have prescribed the cough suppressant and given her the short-term inhaler. so -- and this 1990, there is no medical record from 1990 in this case that says she had a fev-1. he says dr. gravelyn said, well, yes if they had done a test. but they did not do the test. and in assessing this, you have to look at ms. lennox's experience and knowledge and information. what did she know? and she has to know she had copd or should known she had copd and that it was caused by smoking. if the doctor in september of 1991 did not conclude that, i do not think you can lay it on her. 201 1 and finally on this point, dr. montoya, he was the 2 medical doctor, look at exhibit 6005f. this is a doctor who 3 did tests who concluded she has copd, that the copd was 4 caused by smoking. look what he writes, she has been 5 disabled since 1991. do you think dr. montoya would have 6 written since 1991 if she would really had copd years before 7 that? do you think he would have written that in that way? 8 he was a careful doctor, you got to see him. 9 what else did mr. walker try to tell you? that ms. lennox is not addicted, because tonya werner, dr. werner, did not take the right steps to diagnose her with nicotine addiction. i'll get to dr. werner in a minute. but who are you going to believe, him or your own eyes? look at exhibit 6005e, nicotine abuse, history of tobacco addiction. 6005g, nicotine abuse, 6005i, tobacco abuse, history of tobacco addiction, tobacco use disorder, 6005j and o. all of those exhibits are in evidence. i'll read them real slow, 6005e as in elephant, g as in gorilla, i as in igloo, j as in jump, o as in octopus. but octopus is getting trouble, they squirt ink everywhere to try to distract and confuse. all right. as to the whole addiction causation question, mr. walker says, what did karen do between the doctor -- first of all, it did not happen in the early '90s. remember the testimony was she was seeing dr. ben zvi. he 202 1 says -- he tells her, hey, he is got -- walking out the room, 2 remember ms. lennox says, the doctor is walking out of the 3 room, hey, doc, what is wrong with me? you have emphysema. 4 she did not know what that was. there is nothing in 6005a, 5 which is the medical record where initially he diagnoses 6 her, that -- where he tells her in the record that it is 7 smoking related or even tells her to quit smoking. maybe he 8 did, maybe he did not. 9 but whenever this happened, certainly did not happen -- say it did happen in the early '90s. what did she do? if she did nothing, that is addiction. remember, the definition of addiction is to continue to ingest or use the harmful substance despite known health risks. that is the classified definition of addiction. and as to never trying to quit or cut back, remember, i showed this to dr. werner. three months ago she cut down to one pack every three days. so she was trying to cut back. she was not able to quit, but she was trying to cut back, and that is one of the criteria to look at under tobacco use disorder. so mr. walker showed you this slide. all these reasons why karen wanted to keep smoking. well, read the definition of legal cause. it does not have to be the only cause. sure, she might have kept smoking because she wanted to smoke. well, why would she want to smoke. maybe 203 1 addiction? she was headstrong, she liked it, she enjoyed 2 smoking. okay. you can believe that. and you maybe even 3 believe some of those reasons had nothing to do with 4 addiction. but she had a brain disease called addiction and 5 the addiction drove her desire to smoke. 6 now, the governor of florida did not come into 7 this courtroom, mr. walker is right about that. but look at 8 that seal behind judge burns. united states district court 9 for the middle district of florida. judge burns recognized dr. werner and dr. montoya and dr. gravelyn and dr. kyriakoudes as experts in every subject they gave testimony on. mr. walker: objection, your honor, improper argument. the court: sustained. i made no finding on that. mr. finch: dr. werner was the only addiction expert. there is no medical or scientific support for the argument that an addicted smoker's nicotine addiction is not a substantial causes of their continued smoking. what did she say? she testified that karen lennox was addicted and that she met the dsm criteria by age 15 or 16. that is exactly what she said. she said she was addicted by age 15 or 16 and she met the dsm criteria by 15 or 16. nicotine addiction was a fundamental reason she repeatedly persisted in smoking for 40 years, but for her nicotine addiction, she would not have kept on smoking for as 204 2 long as she did. 3 i think as to was addiction an important cause, a 4 real cause, fundamental cause of her repeated smoking? 5 absolutely. 6 mr. walker used an analogy of faulty brakes on a 7 car. well, we are not suing a mechanic for faulty brakes, 8 this is a case where rj reynolds made the car and made the 9 brakes and they told people, even though they knew the brakes were faulty, i.e., addictive, they said you can drive this car as fast as you want, it is cool, you can keep driving it. and not only do those brakes not work, not only do those brakes not work, they also make the car go faster. so they are completely at fault for making the faulty brakes, designing the faulty brakes, making it so that people think that, oh, smoking is just a choice and i can quit anytime i want. but really it is a disease that is very, very difficult to quit. and the addiction drove the smoking, which caused the disease. mr. walker said that dr. kyriakoudes never showed you any ads that would have appealed to youngsters for the brands that ms. lennox smoked. this is a 1962 ad, lucky strike. you do not think that teenage or younger girl would think that is neat? or what about ms. lennox, the mother, frank gifford was the star of the day. but leaving that 205 1 aside, i have a little homework assignment for you and i'm 2 going to give you pages to look at. the 1967 ftc report is 3 in evidence. it is about that thick, it is a government 4 report. they were studying why the labeling on the 5 cigarettes that came out in 1966 was not effective at all. 6 and they made some very pertinent conclusions. they talked 7 about youth is exposed to cigarette advertising. 8 they go on on page -- this is on page 12. page 13 9 they talk about -- what do they say? they say, these included 151 million viewers ages two to 12 and 141 million viewers ages 13 to 17 during network program when cigarette ads run. this means that on the average each of the 18 million inhabitants of the united states age 13 to 17 during the week in question. this represents a substantial increase. intentional or fortuitous, teenagers appear to be a prime target for televised cigarette ads. so whether they were careless or reckless or intentionally doing it, cigarette advertising was hitting people hard that were teenagers. and of course, if you start smoking as a teenager, you have got a two-thirds chance to get addicted. and once you are addicted, addiction is a fundamental reason that you would continue to smoke. they also in that same report they talk about winstons specifically. some filter cigarettes are not only supposed to taste good, but are supposed to taste good each time for a good taste every time, winston filter. winston 206 2 taste good like a cigarette should. 3 and that 1967 report, it goes on to explain 4 advertising can be false, not because of what it says, 5 because what it does not say. 6 this pack in 1966 would have had a caution label 7 on it. advertising in 1966 would not have had anything on 8 it. what does the advertising say and what it does not say? 9 there are binding findings which you have to accept that there was material -- i think material information omitted from those ads, themes that are not used in cigarette advertising, this is again same report, plaintiff 177, cigarette ads totally ignore the health hazards posed by smoking. and then it goes on to say on the next page that after the surgeon general's report was established, cigarette clinics were formed throughout the country to help people to stop smoking, yet most of them have now been dissolved because of the poor results, i.e., people cannot quit smoking because it is hard to do because it is addictive. advertising for cigarettes never show this side of smoking. so my homework assignment for you is just read exhibit 177. do not have to read whole thing, but just look at it. i think it absolutely shows that the decisions and choices and statements that rjr impacted karen lennox just 207 1 like they impacted the entire generation of americans who 2 started smoking in this window. i mean, do you think 3 americans, if they truly believed that cigarettes were 4 hazardous as we know today and addictive as we know today, 5 that parents would have been letting, you know -- ms. lennox 6 was openly smoking around her parents at the age of 15 or 7 16. there is a big difference. 8 this is america. we give people the benefit of 9 the doubt. we give criminal defendants the benefit of the doubt. there is a big difference between, oh, the government says this might be bad for me, and the maker of a product coming out and saying, yes, this is very, very bad for you, yes, this is very, very addictive. think about that. please state the percentage of any responsibility that you charge each party for karen lennox's copd. karen lennox is a hundred percent, even though it is a binding finding that they were negligent and their products were unreasonably dangerous, every cigarette she smoked was unreasonably dangerous. she was a kid when she started smoking and she is a kid when she got addicted to them. finally, they say that karen was a strong-willed person, did what she wanted to, did what she wanted to do no matter what. well, the real -- the fact is some things were in her control, but some things are not. and most importantly in this case, her inability to quit smoking, her 208 1 addiction to nicotine, what started the nicotine addiction, 2 the age at which she started, and the impact of that, farm 3 more of the fault lies on them than on her. do you think 4 karen wants to be in this position where she cannot take an 5 unimpeded breath, cannot stop being scared to death, cannot 6 feel like she is -- feel like she is suffocating, cannot shop, 7 cannot do laundry? they say they have no responsibility for 8 any of that. 9 the fact of the matter is, ladies and gentlemen, for many years rj reynolds took the position that cigarettes were not addictive and did not cause any disease. now they are saying this smoker was not addicted and our products had nothing to do with her disease. i submit to you that they need to do held responsible for their choices and actions, just as karen lennox has some responsibility for hers. but she was a child when she started smoking and she was a child when she became addicted to smoking. and responsibility is a two-way street. when i sit down you will have this case. it will be yours to decide. you have that power. ms. lennox will respect whatever jury verdict you return. six months from now, you probably will not remember her name. you might, you might not. two months from now i'm sure you have forgotten my name. you might have -- you might remember something about cigarettes. i bet you learned a little bit more about 209 1 cigarettes or a lot more about cigarettes than you ever 2 thought you knew coming into the courtroom, even with all 3 the information today. 4 but your verdict being written down, recorded, and 5 will go in the halls of justice forever. and what you do 6 here matters. and what you do here will be remembered 7 forever and will be the last chapter in karen lennox's life. 8 you have this chance to write the last chapter of her life. 9 and so even though you may have forgotten her name in six months, what you do here she will remember forever, for the rest of her life, however long or short that may be. i thank you for your attention, i thank you for your time, i respectfully request that you do justice here.