mr. walker: thank you, your honor. counsel. good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. it is nice to be able to speak with you again. i know mr. finch went for almost two hours explaining their theory of the case. i do not think i'll be anywhere near as long. and after i sit 132 1 down, he will have a chance to talk to you some more, but i 2 think i can cover what i need to cover with you in about 3 half that time. so we will see how i do. 4 before i say anything else, i want to start my 5 closing the way i started my opening and that is by thanking 6 each and every one of you on behalf i myself and 7 ms. patterson. and you have probably seen that i have a few 8 other team members who kind of come and go as whatever it is 9 they are working on comes up in court. we all appreciate your service, my client, rj reynolds, appreciates your service. you have been away from your daily lives now for i guess about a week and we know it is a sacrifice, we all do and we all appreciate it. i can tell you too that we are all always trying to see what the jurors are thinking and kind of looking over to see if there is any reaction and the only thing that i've been able to tell so far so is that you-all have taken your job seriously. you are paying attention, you have been taking notes when you heard something that you thought was important. and i bet you if you talked with some other lawyers, you could hear stories about other kinds of jurors who maybe were not as diligent as you-all have been in this trial, so we are all grateful for that. i want to start by responding to something that mr. finch said. he said to you that i said in openings 133 1 there were going to be -- we would serve -- to every story 2 we want you to be prepared, so that you could listen to 3 their evidence, but also hear our side of the story and then 4 when it was our turn to put on evidence, according to 5 mr. finch, we did not really put much in. that is not exactly 6 right. what i said at the beginning was we were going to be 7 very respectful of your time and that a lot of the evidence 8 and things that we wanted you to know and see that were 9 important for this case we would get from the plaintiff's own witnesses. so you heard, by my count, about seven witnesses in this trial. they were all called to the witness stand by the plaintiff or her lawyers. many of them were paid, but each and every one of them gave testimony that was in support of our defense, every single one of them, and i'll talk about those as we go along. we could have called more witnesses to tell you some of the same things you already heard from their witnesses. for example, i could have called a witness to tell you that ms. lennox had the ability to quit smoking whenever she was truly motivated to do so, but i did not need to do that, because she admitted that. i did not need to repeat that testimony from some other witness. i could have called a witness who could have told you that ms. lennox's copd, her emphysema, first manifested 134 1 in the late 1980s, but i did not need to do that, because 2 their own witness, the man that they paid to testify to you 3 about the timing issues, he admitted pretty freely that her 4 copd manifested by november of 1989. it would not have been 5 a good use of our time or anyone else's to call another 6 witness to repeat that testimony. 7 i could have called a witness to tell you that 8 ms. lennox did not rely on anything that she saw or any of 9 the public statements or cigarette advertisements that they showed you, but i did not need to do that, because their very first witness told you she was not looking at the magazines, newspapers, and tv programs that dr. kyriakoudes talked to you about. i did not need to call a witness to show you that. when you saw ms. lennox's testimony, at the end of the case she admitted that she did not rely on anything. i did not need to call a witness to do that. but we are at the end of the case and the job that you folks have to do, which is never an easy one, will be soon at hand. that is going to be filling out a verdict form. everything that we have done on both sides of the room has been to lead up to this verdict form that you have to fill out to make some important decisions. and what i want to do is to try to go through that verdict form with you question by question and suggest to you what we believe the 135 1 evidence showed and why you should return a verdict for the 2 defendant, rj reynolds tobacco company. 3 and before i do that, one thing i do want to say, 4 though, is that that verdict form that you get looks exactly 5 the way i told you it would look at the beginning of this 6 case. every question on that verdict form is about one 7 smoker and only one smoker, and that smoker is karen lennox. 8 there will not be a single question on the verdict form about 9 the american public, about the smoking public, about people in the 1800s or early 1900s or in europe or anyplace else. only about ms. lennox. and you have heard by now that there is this class, this class called engle that is filled with hundreds of other smokers who have their own facts and their own allegations and their own lawsuits. this case is not about any of them, it is only about ms. lennox. so what are the key points in the evidence? i want to just flag a couple of key points for you and then we will see how they come up over and over and over again for each question that you answer on the verdict form. the first key point that you saw is the evidence. ms. lennox was a willing smoker who smoked regardless of the health risks, because it was something that she wanted to do. she enjoyed smoking. and the evidence was, just as i told you it would be, karen did what karen wanted to do. ms. lennox smoked because she was not interested in stopping 2 smoking. the evidence in this case is that she went all the 3 way up until 1997 before she made even the first effort to 136 4 try to quit smoking. 5 ms. lennox successfully quit smoking when she was 6 ready to do so. she did it when she had a motivation she 7 never had before her whole life. it was not anything about 8 the health risks of cigarette smoking, it was not losing her 9 husband to cigarette smoking, it was not even when the doctors told her your own health has been affected by cigarette smoking, that was not what motivates ms. lennox, it never was. when ms. lennox was motivated by wanting to spend time with her granddaughter and her daughter, said you cannot do that for as long as you are a smoker. then and only then did she have motivation to quit smoking and she did it cold turkey. lastly, ms. lennox was never misled by anything that rj reynolds or any other tobacco company said or did. she told you that. i went over that with dr. kyriakoudes. every witness in this case that addressed that issue gave you the tools that you need to find that ms. lennox did not rely and i'll talk about that in some greater detail. let me start with the first question on the verdict form. and i have some help here. this is first question, just as mr. finch said, it was, was karen lennox addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine? and essentially 2 the evidence that you saw about this question kind of breaks 137 3 down into two issues. 4 the first one is -- is whether the nicotine in 5 cigarettes is addictive. and then the second question is 6 was ms. lennox addicted? and you actually heard evidence 7 about both of those. even though there is an engle finding 8 about the addictiveness of cigarettes, plaintiff put on 9 evidence to try to show again on top of the finding that cigarettes can be addictive, i told you in opening there was not going to be any dispute about that. the nicotine that is in cigarettes can be addictive. the evidence will show that that is been known for at least a hundred years. and the evidence showed that the industry even funded researchers who published about that as far back as early 1960. some of what you heard about the general addictiveness about cigarettes might been interesting to you. it might have been something you heard about dopamine receptors and all of those things that dr. werner was talking about, but they do not answer the question for you that really matters on this point, which is whether karen lennox was addicted, because the evidence shows that not all smokers are addicted. so what was the evidence that ms. lennox was 138 1 addicted? how did the plaintiff go about trying to meet 2 their burden of proving that to you? well, let me tell you 3 what it was not. it was not the governor of florida. 4 mr. finch must have talked about the governor of florida and 5 ms. werner about five or six times. the governor did not 6 come in here and sit in the witness box and tell you that 7 ms. lennox was addicted. neither did the surgeon general. 8 neither did a lot of the other items that they put on their 9 version of the verdict form. the person who came in here and told you that ms. lennox was addicted was their paid expert, dr. werner. and what did dr. werner actually say about addiction and who is addicted. mr. finch went on and on about this quote from the surgeon general's report that says that nicotine is the fundamental reason that folks smoke. and he showed it to you as if that is the reason that everyone smokes. everyone smokes because of nicotine. but the evidence that you heard from their own dr. werner was a little bit different than that. can i have the next slide? at the top you see the quote that they showed you, nicotine addiction is the fundamental reason that individuals persist. that is the part that he showed you. the part that dr. werner gave up freely in answering questions to ms. patterson is that only about fifty percent of 139 1 current daily smokers are addicted. and ms. patterson asked 2 her, well, how does that -- what does that mean for this 3 quote about nicotine being the fundamental reason that 4 people smoke? does not that mean that nicotine is only the 5 fundamental reason that about half of current daily smokers 6 smoke, and dr. werner agreed with that. 7 now, this dr. werner is also the witness that came 8 in and said to you ms. lennox was addicted. and how did she 9 do that? well, one of the things that she used was a rigged test. and when i say a rigged test, i mean a test that is rigged to only spit out one result. she used a test called the fagerstrom questionnaire. and she agreed that the fagerstrom is a screening tool and that every single human being who completes the fagerstrom test is found to be dependent or addicted. that means that even if you have never smoked a cigarette in your entire life, if you take the fagerstrom test, it will find that you are addicted to the nicotine in cigarettes. what does that mean? what does that tell us about this test? what does that tell us about dr. werner? it means that once you have chosen to use the fagerstrom test, you have already chosen what you want the result to be, because there is no other result of that test but a finding of addiction. now, she did use some other tests too. she used, 140 1 and maybe we have a demo on this, the next one. she used 2 the cage criteria, i think she said it was called, and the 3 dsm-v. and she told you that you are not supposed to use 4 these tests in a checklist fashion. she said, i'm 5 dr. werner, i've had all this training, i'm bringing all my 6 medical expertise to bear, and i know how to do this and 7 nobody can do this but medical doctors. then when she 8 actually started using the test, it was nothing but a 9 checklist. even when mr. finch showed you the cage criteria, it was like four questions, one, two, three, four, and there was a check box. you ask a question and you check a box. that is it. that is the extent of dr. werner's analysis of whether or not ms. lennox was addicted and she did these very same things for the dsm-v criteria. what she did not do, she did not do what she does in her practice. if someone were to go see dr. werner and say, hey, i've got these issues and i'm also a smoker, can you help me quit smoking? what would she do? she would meet with that person, she would look at them face-to-face and she would ask them questions about their smoking behavior. she did not do that with ms. lennox. ms. lennox is at her home where she is been the entire time that dr. werner has been involved in this case. dr. werner could have gone and met with her, talked to her, examined her, and figured out whether she met criteria for addiction, and she did not do 141 1 that, because she was not interested in doing that. 2 the test that she used when she testifies in court 3 were going to spit out the same result regardless, addicted. 4 and one last thing about addiction. mr. finch 5 said a couple of times that ms. lennox was addicted when she 6 was 16 years old. there is no evidence of that at all. if 7 you were to actually take even the checklist that dr. werner 8 used and try to apply those checklists to ms. lennox when 9 she was 16, the fagerstrom, of course, will spit out the answer that she is addicted. the other ones cannot be answered. the other tests for cigarette addiction that she used depend on evaluating how someone responds when they try to quit smoking. but ms. lennox was not trying to quit smoking anytime before 1997. if they are going to persist in saying that ms. lennox was addicted by the time she is 16, then they should stand up and show you, go through the checklist if they are going to use a checklist, show how those checklists apply to ms. lennox when she was 16. they will not do that, because they do not. now, i'm not gonna spend much more time on addiction, because, quite frankly, it is not the most important issue on the verdict form for you to decide. but, yes, we do think that your answer to question no. 1 would be no. by checking no you are answering the question that plaintiff did not prove that she was addicted. that is all 2 i'm going to say about it, because i want to get to the next 3 question, which is far more important than any question of 142 4 whether she was addicted. 5 so this is question no. 2: was addiction to 6 cigarettes containing nicotine a legal cause of karen 7 lennox's copd? 8 why do i say this is so important? you have heard a 9 lot of evidence about addiction, but you have heard about addiction as if it is one question. all we have to do is figure out whether she is addicted. that is most of what mr. finch talked about, it is most of what mr. pendell will talk about if he talks about addiction after i sit down. but the addiction issues are two separate questions that appear separately on the verdict form. that means that even if you think that ms. lennox was addicted on the first question, you still have to figure out whether addiction was a legal cause of her copd. can i have the next slide with the two boxes? this is kind of a visual representation of what i'm talking about. plaintiff does have to prove that ms. lennox was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, but they also have to prove that addiction was a legal cause of her copd. and that one they are also not going to be able to do. 143 1 now, before we go to the next slide, i want to 2 show you something and it is -- i have a slide that is 3 actually kind of similar to one of the ones they showed you. 4 they had a slide with some winston cigarettes like on the 5 left and then on the right they had i guess some -- they 6 were like portions of the lung or something, a cull out of 7 the lung, and in the middle they had what i guess was 8 supposed to be a person, it was like one of those 9 pepto-bismol ads where the body is turned like sideways and you can see the path down into the body. and they were showing you that slide to suggest to you that -- that smoking inevitably leads to -- i'm sorry, that nicotine inevitably leads to smoking and that inevitably leads to getting sick. but that is just not true. can i have the next slide, please? this is the true depiction of how this works. nicotine is on the left. they say that is what makes people smoke. copd is on the right. that is what can result in people who smoke cigarettes for a long, long time. in between the nicotine and the copd is a human being. and in this case, that human being is ms. lennox. ms. lennox is and always has been a living, breathing, thinking, sentient person who makes decisions that affect whether or not she gets copd or any other illness. ms. lennox decides when or whether she is going to 144 1 try to quit. ms. lennox decided how she would try to quit. 2 ms. lennox was the only person who could decide whether or 3 not she would ask for help in quitting. ms. lennox is the 4 person who made the decision not to quit smoking in the 5 '60s, the '70s, or the '80s or most of the '90s until 1997. 6 and the question that you have to decide in 7 answering the second question on the verdict form is whether 8 addiction, even if you find that she was addicted, is that 9 the reason that she smoked those years that led up to her getting copd. and that is what i want to talk about now. so what does legal cause mean? the judge will give you some instructions about it. they are pretty long. and i've tried to reprint them all on this form. you will get a copy of the judge's instructions in a while. but there is a couple of words in here that really i think boil down to what you ought to be looking for. a legal cause is one that in natural and continuous sequence produces or contributes substantially to producing a certain result. right off the bat there is this requirement of substantiality. the plaintiff must show that she was addicted and that her addiction directly and in natural continuous sequence produced or contributed substantially to her copd, so it can reasonably be said that but for her addiction her copd would not have occurred. 145 1 and then there is more language at the bottom that 2 still ends up in the same place where it started. you have 3 to determine that addiction contributed substantially to 4 producing ms. lennox's copd. 5 now, why is that important? it is important 6 because we know the following things about addiction, even 7 nicotine addiction. 8 9 can i have the next slide? we know -- and this came from their own expert, dr. werner. we know that everyone can make the decision to try and quit smoking and that everyone can succeed in quitting smoking, even addicted people. addiction does not prevent someone from quitting smoking and of the 85 percent of smokers who -- who say that they want to quit, only 35 percent will actually make an attempt. what does that mean? that means that addiction does not necessarily mean that you will smoke until you get a smoking-related disease. there are millions and millions of people in this country who started off smoking, even became addicted to cigarette smoking, but that person in the middle made a different choice than ms. lennox made, they tried to quit smoking and succeeded. and even among people who were addicted, the evidence is that there can be degrees of addiction. some 146 1 people can be heavily, strongly addicted, where the 2 addiction has such a strong grip on them that they can try 3 over and over and over again to quit smoking and fail and 4 fail and fail. there are other people, even people who are 5 addicted to cigarette smoking, who can try and quit smoking 6 the first time they really put their mind to it. 7 the question that you have to decide as to 8 ms. lennox is whether or not her addiction, if you find that 9 she had one, did it get in the way of her quitting? was she smoking all of those years because the addiction stopped her from quitting or is it because she was not trying to quit? what about this -- can i have the next slide, please? -- the evidence was that in this country 60 million americans have quit smoking. and that there were more -- there are more former smokers than there are current smokers. these are all people who have the same dopamine reactions, the same nicotine receptors, many of the same people who would be considered addicted under dr. werner's fagerstrom test, people who were exposed to same kinds of cigarette ads that dr. kyriakoudes talked about. and nevertheless, the man or woman in the middle of nicotine and illness chose to quit smoking. some of those people may have tried to quit smoking and quit without difficulty. some of those 147 1 60 million people may have experienced great difficulty in 2 quitting, but they nevertheless quit. what they all have in 3 common is that all 60 million of those people decided they 4 wanted to stop smoking and actually tried to quit smoking. 5 so what was it, if anything, that is different 6 about ms. lennox? did she lack the ability to quit smoking? 7 well, we know that cannot be it, because she had the ability 8 to stop smoking, because she did stop smoking. the question 9 is why is it that she did not stop smoking earlier? why did not she stop smoking in time to avoid getting an illness like copd? and the reason is she did not try. the evidence in this case was that -- can we have the next slide, please? the evidence in this case is that ms. lennox did what ms. lennox wanted to do and that if you do not want to quit smoking, if you do not try to quit smoking, guess what? you will not quit smoking. the entire time leading up to the late 1980s or early 1990s, if you believe plaintiff's theory about when she got copd, one hundred percent of the time leading up to her diagnose, whenever it was, she made zero efforts to quit. and i do not mean -- you know, when we started off, there was some back and forth on whether she tried to quit twice or whether she tried to quit more than two times. that was all after she was already diagnosed with copd. if you look at 148 1 the time period before she got her diagnosis, whenever that 2 was, she admitted she made precisely zero attempts to quit 3 smoking. and again, the question you have to ask yourself 4 on question no. 2 is whether or not ms. lennox was smoking 5 because she could not stop or because she was not trying to 6 stop. we believe the evidence is she did not stop smoking 7 because she was not trying. 8 now, in order to understand the choice that 9 ms. lennox made, like i said in opening, we have to understand ms. lennox. who was she? i told you who i thought the evidence was going to show that she was and then you actually saw the evidence. the evidence was that karen -- as her sister said, karen did what karen wanted to do. the evidence about ms. lennox is that she is -- as mr. finch said, she is headstrong, she is not a follower, she is a go-getter, she is feisty, she does what she wants to do. she does not let other people tell her what she is going to do with her life. she is no nonsense. she does not take any crap from anybody. remember that, ms. patterson was talking to i guess it was her daughter, daylene, and she said, oh, she does not take anything from anyone and her daughter, daylene, said, what do you mean, like stealing, like she does not take somebody's personal belongings? and then ms. patterson said, no, you know, she does not take any crap from anybody, right? and then when she put it that way, her daughter, 2 daylene, said, oh, you are right, she does not. that is my 149 3 mother. 4 she taught her daughter to take responsibility for 5 her own actions and to do what she wanted to do and not just 6 follow what other people wanted to do. even when it came to 7 her own treatment. remember i had those exchanges with one 8 of her medical doctors and i said to him, well, what is this 9 pulmonary rehabilitation, is there a risk to it, is there some downside to it? he said, no, there is no downside, there is no risk to it, it can only help you. ms. lennox chose not to do that, because that is the way that she lived her life. and i'm not saying that to criticize ms. lennox. i would never do that. the fact is this is america and people can make those kinds of decisions for themselves. you can decide -- if you do not want to be somebody who is working the same job for year after year after year, you can choose, as ms. lennox did, to never be on a job for more than a couple months. if you do not want pulmonary rehabilitation that your doctor tells you is going to make your life better, that is going to improve your -- how you live with this condition, this is america, you do not have to do that. and that is the way she lived her life when it came to cigarette smoking as well. the fact of the matter is the evidence was clear 150 1 and undisputed about this following thing: ms. lennox 2 smoked cigarettes because she enjoyed it. she liked 3 smoking. regardless of whether you or i or anyone else 4 thinks that she should like smoking or thinks that maybe 5 it is not good for her or wishes that she would have made a 6 different choice, ms. lennox told you that she liked and 7 enjoyed smoking. she liked the taste of it. she liked to 8 relax with a cigarette after doing work in the yard. she 9 liked to sit on her porch with a cup of tea and a cigarette. even her sister, diania, their very first witness, said to you, yeah, i could tell by looking at her that smoking was something that she enjoyed doing. she wanted to do it. and this part is really, really important. in ms. lennox's mind, the health risks of cigarette smoking were never a good enough reason for her to quit smoking. you heard evidence that in the 1960s and 1970s, when the surgeon general's report came out and the warning labels went on all the packages from 1966 forward, between 1964 and 1979, 30 million americans quit smoking. you also heard evidence that by the 1980s her own family members were quitting smoking. her parents, her sisters, other people in her family were all quitting smoking. that was never a good enough reason for ms. lennox to quit smoking. then in the 1980s, early 1990s, her doctors are telling her, ms. lennox, it is not theoretical 2 anymore, you have an illness that i, the doctor, am telling 3 you was caused by cigarette smoking. you need to quit 151 4 smoking. 5 ms. lennox went another somewhere between six to 6 eight years before she ever even thought about trying to 7 quit smoking. 8 she did not tell you, when the doctor told me quit 9 smoking, it can kill you, she did not say, well, as soon as he said that to me i had this epiphany and i started quitting smoking, but, my god, the addiction was just too strong, i could not quit. she did not say anything like that. she gets this news and either sometime in the 1980s or, if you believe mr. finch, in 1991, her doctors are telling her you have to quit smoking. and 1991 goes by, she tells you i wanted to smoke, i did not want to quit. '92, i wanted to smoke, i did not want to quit. that goes on year after year after year. she is not trying and failing, she is not trying. in 1997, her husband becomes ill with cigarette smoking. she said it was hard to watch, it made an impact on her, but that is not really why she quit. i asked her. you saw where i asked her the question and she said, no, no, it was about my granddaughter. it was not about health, it was about me wanting to see my granddaughter. and up until that point in time, up until she had 152 1 that ultimatum about her granddaughter, she was not 2 interested in quitting. just like we saw all of those 3 medical records where she was offered pulmonary 4 rehabilitation, record after record after record said she is 5 not interested, that was her attitude about quitting smoking 6 as well. no interest at this time. absolutely refuses. 7 not willing to proceed with this, not interested in that. 8 she is not ready for it. not interested. does not want it. 9 those are the same kinds of things she was telling her doctors when they were advising her to quit smoking, at least up until 1997 and the entire time before she was diagnosed with copd. even if you look at the way that she quit smoking when she was ready, that tells you even more about this question of -- the second question, addiction causation. what happened when she finally quit smoking? ask yourselves, as i described it, whether she did anything when she finally quit that she could not have done at any earlier point in her life. what did she do? she did not do use some prescription drug that was -- only went on the market in the '80s or '90s. she did not use any of that. she quit cold turkey. and she told you how she did it. she separated herself from her friends that smoked around her, which was something she had never tried before. she made a concerted effort to stop and she stopped cold turkey. ms. lennox, had 153 1 she wanted to, could have done every single one of those 2 things at any point in her life before then. 3 regardless of whether you think that she was 4 addicted or even when you think she is addicted, if you think 5 she is addicted, the thing that she did to quit starting 6 sometime in 1997, she could have done those same things, for 7 example, in the early 1980s when her family members wee 8 quitting. the fact is addiction is never what got in the 9 way of ms. lennox stopping smoking. ms. lennox is what got in the way of ms. lennox stopping smoking. now, and that is -- can we have the next slide? that is why the answer to this question should be no. but i want to give you an example. i want to give you an analogy that i think will help as you think about this. and i'm going to assume, because we are on the second question, i'm just going to assume that ms. lennox is addicted. think of it this way: think of addiction as being like faulty brakes on a car. you take your car to the mechanic, the mechanic works on your brakes, you leave thinking your brakes are fine. but in reality, your mechanic did not do a good job and your brakes are not working at all. so you get out on the highway, wherever it is, i'm not from here, you-all will have to forgive me, i do not know 154 1 in it is 275 or i-4, someplace where you can just let loose 2 with your car. you put your foot on the pedal, you put the 3 pedal to the medical, that car is speeding down the highway. 4 maybe your brakes are not working, but you do not know it. 5 and then you get into an accident. and the whole way while 6 you are driving that car before you got into that accident, 7 you never put your foot on the brake. then, after you are in 8 the accident, you decide you are going to sue the mechanic 9 who worked on your brakes. did the mechanic cause the accident because the brakes that you never stepped did not work or was the accident the result, was the accident legally caused by the fact that you were not putting your foot on the brake to begin with? you were not trying to stop the car. that is exactly the analogy that explains ms. lennox's behavior. driving that car is the same as her smoking cigarettes. dr. werner said that if you are addicted, especially if you are really addicted, it can make it a lot harder for you to stop. but until you put your foot on the brake, addiction has nothing to do with it, in the same way that faulty brakes had nothing to do with the accident that i just described. now, the judge is going to instruct you that if you answer no to either the first or the second question, as i've argued you should, your job is actually done. there is 155 1 no more questions on the verdict form that you have to 2 answer if you answer no to either of these first two 3 questions. and what i would love to do is tell you that 4 your job should be done. in fact, i did just did tell you 5 your job should be done at this point. but it is my job to 6 discuss the other questions on the verdict form, so i'm 7 going to do that now. 8 the next question on the verdict form is this one 9 and this is one that mr. finch actually spent a lot of time talking about: did karen lennox know or should she have known through the exercise of reasonable care on or before may 5th, 1990, that she had copd and that there was a reasonable possibility that her copd was caused by cigarette smoking? and you know by now that copd and emphysema are basically the same disease. i want to show you the judge's instructions on this, because i agree with mr. finch about one thing here. the instructions on limitations are critically important. and i think you should take as much time as you need to read them, because they are going to be helpful to you, especially on this one. this is the first part of it: defendant has raised a statute of limitations defense in this case. it is a provision of the law requiring that suit be commenced in court in certain times of claims within a prescribed period 156 1 of time, otherwise suit is barred or precluded. 2 that means you cannot have a claim, you cannot be on 3 notice that there is something wrong with you and just 4 waiting around forever before bringing your case to court. 5 in this case, plaintiff's suit would be barred if 6 plaintiff knew or by the exercise of reasonable care should 7 have known before may 5th, 1990, that she had copd and that 8 there was a reasonable possibility that her copd was caused 9 by cigarette smoking. and we have the burden of proof on this issue. next one, please. now, defendants do not need to prove that plaintiff was actually diagnosed with copd to prevail on this defense. for purposes of this defense, the critical event is not when a disease or medical condition was actually diagnosed by a physician, but when the disease or medical condition first manifested itself. now, mr. finch spent a lot of time telling you that manifestation does not matter, it is not the only thing you have to decide, never mind that their expert said that it manifested before may 5th, 1990. do not worry about manifestation, it is not the issue, it is not a big deal. well, it may not be the only thing that you have to prove, but this instruction tells you that it is the critical event for this question that you have to answer. not when it was 157 1 diagnosed, when it first manifested. 2 then it goes on to explain: plaintiff knew or 3 should have known that there was a reasonable possibility 4 that her copd was caused by cigarette smoking if the injury 5 manifested -- there is that word again -- itself to her in a 6 way that supplied some evidence of a causal relationship to 7 cigarette smoking. 8 and you can consider what she knew about cigarette 9 smoking before may 5th, 1990. and let us have the last bit of it. this is the third paragraph in this instruction: with regard to the plaintiff's knowledge, you are instructed that having the means to obtain knowledge is ordinarily equivalent in law to knowledge. if it appears from a preponderance of the evidence that plaintiff had information that would normally have led a reasonably careful person of the same age, mental capacity, intelligence, training, and experience to make inquiry through which such a person would surely learn certain facts, then plaintiff may be found to have actual knowledge of those facts, just as though she had made such inquiry and actually learned those facts. that is a lot of words right there. what that one boils down to is, if she had the information in front of her to know something, the law treats it the same as her knowing 158 1 it. that is why the question that you answer on the verdict 2 form says, knew or should have known. 3 so what is the evidence about this one? first part 4 of it is, did she know or should she have known that she had 5 copd before may 5th, 1990? there was a lot of evidence on 6 this. lot of evidence that mr. finch did not discuss with 7 you. 8 well, the easiest place to go is daylene. 9 daylene's testimony was that ms. lennox was diagnosed with emphysema in 1987. that was that passage from daylene's deposition that you-all probably were shown about 20 times. mr. pendell and i went back and forth on it with their pulmonologist, and then they even brought her in here and she testified differently than what she said in her deposition and ms. patterson had to show her that testimony again. daylene's testimony was that when she was living with her aunt diania when she was in elementary school for six months, that is when ms. lennox went to the doctor sick and short of breath and was diagnosed with emphysema. now, you saw the transcript where daylene said, i was born in '77, this was in elementary school. that puts it in '87 when she is about ten years old or so. for some reason they brought daylene in here to tell you, no, no, that was all wrong, i actually had no idea that my mother 159 1 had emphysema until i was in my 20s. 2 well, what would that really mean? when was 3 daylene in her 20s? well, she turned 20 years old in 1997. 4 so that would mean that she first found out that her mother 5 had emphysema sometime between 1997 and 2007? even under 6 their theory of the case, her mother found out about her 7 emphysema in 1991. how could it be that daylene went six, 8 seven, eight years before she found out her mother had 9 emphysema, that it was in her 20s? that does not make sense. what makes sense is that ms. lennox found out about her emphysema, just like daylene said when she was under oath the first time, when they were living with diania in miami and they went to the doctor and that is when she got the diagnosis. then they showed you -- plaintiff's introduced this one. they showed you this social security record that said, you know, they like one part of that record -- do we have that record? can you pull that one up? it is easier to find if you squint at this screen. okay. so this is -- this is the record that they wanted to show you, right? no, that is not it. just go back to the last one, please. mr. finch: 6005pp. mr. walker: they showed you this record, we cannot find it, i do not have it in my hand. but this is the one 2 where they said we like all this information in this record, 3 starts off, great, it says, x, y, and a. and we like the 4 end of the record too where it says these other things about 160 5 her not being hospitalized. 6 the part of the record that they asked you to 7 ignore is the part where in that phone conversation that led 8 to that record ms. lennox told whoever was talking to her 9 that she was in fact diagnosed with bronchitis and emphysema before this 1991 time period. whoever wrote it down said that it was at age 17, does not matter whether it was age 17 or 27. what matters is it was before may 5th, 1990. that sentence is a little hard to read there. she was told at age 17 she has bronchitis, emphysema. all right. can we go back to the other slide? now, so what about manifestation? the critical event is not when it was diagnosed, but when it manifested. that is the key question that mr. finch took me to task for not bringing a witness, but why would i? they paid the witness to come in here to testify based on his expertise, his training, his education. he is the first person that told you that because ms. lennox had severe copd in 1991, that does not happen overnight. he told you that he knows that by november of 1989, before may 5th, 1990, 161 1 ms. lennox -- ms. lennox's copd manifested. 2 and then we had an exchange, well, what does that 3 mean? what does manifestation mean? the judge asked that 4 question. and he said, that means that it is diagnosable 5 based on symptoms or testing or both. 6 so i went back to him, i said, well, when you said 7 that ms. lennox's copd manifested back in '89, does that 8 mean that ms. lennox's copd was diagnosable on symptoms or 9 testing or both? and he said, yes. and then we understood why he was saying that. well, what is the testing piece of it? he agreed with me that more likely than not, to a reasonable degree of medical probability, ms. lennox's fev-1 percentage was under seventy percent as of the first day of 1990, before the cutoff. that means she had copd. we went through the symptoms that she had going all the way back, that chronic productive cough that their first witness, diania, said she had for five years before she went to the doctor, the shortness of breath that the medical records show she had at least as far back as 1989, the fact that she had trouble getting out of bed as far back as 1989, the fact that she was unable to do things for herself going back into the late 1980s. those are the mid to late 1980 symptoms that dr. gravelyn was talking about when he said that her copd manifested in 1989. then i said, well, what is the standard of care? 2 long-term smoker walks in the door to the doctor and says, i 3 have a chronic productive cough, shortness of breath, i get 4 tired on exertion, i have trouble getting out of bed, and i 162 5 cannot do things for myself. 6 and they showed you this chart back there that 7 i've got facing the wall, all these other things that might 8 be in the differential. well, we might think about all 9 these things. and i asked him, well, if somebody walks in your door, they have got this cluster of symptoms, are you going to figure out what it is, are you going to like, you know, test that person and find out what is going on with them? and at first he fought with me. he said, well, maybe if you are an ob/gyn doctor you might not do that. and i said, well, let us assume -- you know, let us assume that she is smart enough -- i know there was a suggestion that she is not smart. okay? they use that instruction to say to you that she is not smart, she is not intelligent, she is -- apparently the argument on this question is that ms. lennox was clueless. but that is not what the evidence was. ms. lennox had enough sense to not go to an ob/gyn doctor. any doctor that she went to would have done precisely what dr. gravelyn said was the standard of care. there is no evidence that that did not happen. the standard of care allows you to infer that if she had gone to the doctor the way her daughter said that 2 she did, she would have tested positive for copd, just like 163 3 dr. gravelyn said she had. 4 now, next question: did she know or should she 5 have known that there was a reasonable possibility -- 6 7 can i have the next slide? -- a reasonable possibility that cigarettes were a 8 possible cause of all of her symptoms of her copd? 9 what was the evidence about that? well, that too came from dr. gravelyn and also from dr. montoya. what was the standard of care back in the late 1980s? was the standard of care that somebody comes into your office, you diagnose them with copd, and you do not tell -- they are a long-term smoker, you do not tell them cigarettes was the cause? he said, no, of course not. the standard of care then and now is if you have a patient who comes in who is a long-time cigarette smoker, they have these symptoms and you diagnose them with copd, you tell them, your cigarette smoking probably contributed to it. even if you diagnosed them with a different injury, even if it could be just regular bronchitis, he said you still tell them that it could have contributed to it. if nothing else, you tell them that your cigarette smoking might be aggravating your condition. even if you do not do any of those things, the standard of care was to advise 164 1 patients to quit smoking. 2 all of those things would have put ms. lennox on 3 notice that the symptoms she was having, the productive 4 cough, the shortness of breath, the very things that her 5 daughter, daylene, said took her to see the doctor in the 6 first place, there was a reasonable possibility that 7 cigarette smoking was the cause. 8 and if that was not enough, guess what? it is right 9 on the side of the packages that she was smoking. starting in 1985 this warning label that we have here specifically calls out emphysema as one of the things that cigarette smoking can cause, the very thing that she was told in the late 1980s that she had. and we will talk later about this idea that she would not have known what that meant, but let us just say this for now: this is what they say happened in 1991 when ms. lennox went to the doctor. she goes to the doctor, she brings her sister with her. whatever questions she has about what the doctor is telling her, her sister explained it to her. are they really telling you now that when she went to the doctor in the 1980s, like her daughter said that she did, with her sister, that her sister refused to explain to her what emphysema was? of course not. ms. lennox is not this mindless sheep that they want to make her out to be. regardless of what her reading 2 level was, she knew how to get the information that she 3 needed. that is why she brought her sister. her sister was 4 with her in the late 1980s, just like they say she was in 165 5 the 1990s. 6 now, so what does all of this mean? again, 7 dr. gravelyn was our expert on this question. they say we 8 did not call anybody, they got to him first. he became a 9 defense expert on this issue because he is testified about it before. it was not like it was this big surprise to us that he would agree that if you have severe copd in one year, it means you had a manifestation of copd two years prior, because he gave that same testimony like just last year. and so we went over with him these facts: she had severe copd in '91. that means it goes back two years, to 1989. and it takes a long, long time to develop copd anyway. can i have the next one, please? then we said, well, you gave this opinion last year, i just want to make sure there is nothing different here than there was then when you gave this opinion. medical records first available on one day, at the time of that date, there is wheezing, coughing, a productive cough, shortness of breath, was -- i asked him, was the conclusion in berger any different than it should be here? no, it is the same. manifestation two years before. he agreed with 166 2 me right away. 3 then we looked at this chart. remember this one? 4 so we have on here the green area is like the class period, 5 you know, 1996 and earlier. if it is too late, that is why 6 it is red, you do not qualify. if it is too early, if it is 7 like to the left of may 5th, 1990, then you are checking no 8 on question 3. so there is this green zone in the middle. 9 and we know what -- mr. finch: objection, that is an incorrect statement of the law. the court: no. overruled. mr. walker: we know what he said in the berger case. and can we just slide that same opinion over to apply to ms. lennox. the answer to question 3 is no based on dr. gravelyn's testimony. they paid him, but his testimony supports our defense. let me say this one additional things about this issue too. mr. finch made a lot about -- there was something about monday morning quarterbacking, like we were somehow criticizing the doctors who prescribed the medications that ms. lennox apparently was on in -- i guess it was october of 1991. we did not do any such thing. ms. lennox -- this is the sum total of the 167 1 evidence on this issue: 2 according to their witness, dr. gravelyn, 3 ms. lennox had severe copd when she went to the emergency 4 room in september of 1991. if some doctor there prescribed 5 her something that she should not have been prescribed 6 because she had severe copd, we are not the ones laying blame 7 for that, they are. they are the ones saying that she 8 should not have been given these medications for severe copd 9 when she had severe copd. but none of it matters, because regardless of what she was prescribed or not prescribed in 1991, dr. gravelyn's testimony remains the same. she had severe copd in 1991, that means, to a reasonable degree of medical probability, that if her copd manifested, critical event, manifested two years earlier as of november 1989. and any doctor applying the standard of care that she would have seen according to daylene -- and even diania, diania did not say she went to the doctor in '90, she could not remember when they went. any doctor that she would have seen except maybe an ob/gyn, would have told her something about smoking that put her on notice that there was a reasonable possibility that cigarette smoking was causing or contributing to her illness. the answer to question 3 is yeah. now, i want to move on to a different part of the 168 1 verdict form. 2 3 can we have the next one, please? i have skipped -- you see i have questions 4 and 6 4 and i skipped over questions 5 and 7, because those are the 5 ones that have to do with like 1982 and all that. you 6 actually will not answer those questions if you answer no to 7 these two and i'm going to take these two together to save 8 time. 9 mr. finch spent very little time trying to argue to you that ms. lennox relied on something to her detriment in this case. there is a reason for that. the reason is this is a very usual case when it comes to the fraud. why do i say that? because you can only accept their fraud allegations if you ignore the testimony of their own witnesses. you do not see that every day. the very first witness that they called was ms. lennox's sister, diania, who said that ms. lennox did not read newspapers, did not read magazines, specifically did not read some of these life, reader's digest, did not watch the tv news, and did not listen to the radio news. that is witness number one for the plaintiff. immediately after that, they called dr. kyriakoudes, who starts off by telling you about this machine and what was going on in the 1800s and early 1900s. and immediately after that, he proceeded to tell you about all the ads and statements that ran in that same media that 2 their first witness, diania, told you ms. lennox was not 169 3 watching. 4 their first witness established that their second 5 witness was almost entirely irrelevant. he starts showing 6 you ads for cigarettes that ms. lennox did not smoke, ads 7 like chesterfield, ads that ran in magazines she did not read 8 like life, ads in newspapers she did not read, ads that ran 9 before she was born. there was even that one moment where we had that one with like the 40 or 50 ads on it and i said, well, why do not you show us, show us the lucky strike ads on here. you know, that was brand she smoked, show us the lucky strike, and he was so proud to announce that he found 12 to 15 lucky strike ads. i have circled them right here, mr. walker. until i said, well, when did they run? oh, they all ran before she was born or whether she was a baby. then he showed you ads and tv show sponsorships that ran -- that aired on programs she did not watch. you had to watch tobacco executive statements on tv news programs that she did not watch. right up to the very end, even yesterday, we all had to sit and watch about 45 minutes of tv news programming that ms. lennox had just testified she did not watch. the evidence from diania and ms. lennox was that 170 1 she was not watching nightline, but they were going to be 2 sure that you saw it, 25 minutes of nightline. she was not 3 watching face the nation, but they wanted you to see that 4 too. it has nothing to do with ms. lennox. 5 and in fact, dr. kyriakoudes was on the stand for 6 something like eight hours doing this. until i started my 7 cross-examination and you found out in about the first three 8 minutes of that that nothing that he talked about had 9 anything to do with any question that you are going to answer on this verdict form about ms. lennox. and then at the end of the case, so it is diania, dr. kyriakoudes, then ms. lennox, and she tells you in no mistaken terms that she was not interested in any of it. i asked her about news stories and i said, well, ms. lennox, what if there was a news -- you told me you did not watch the news, i get that. but you are a smoker. what if there was a news story about smoking? what if there was a senate hearing about smoking, would you watch that? that is something you would watch? she said, no, i would not watch that. when i asked her about the senate one, remember what she did, ms. patterson had to take the stand and we read this part of it. what would she do if she was -- if it is like something on a senate hearing. she said, click. and i said, well, what is that? that is the sound of me 171 1 changing the channel. 2 that means that this clip, maybe they will show it 3 again, that clip is playing just like it is now. if she was 4 actually watching this on tv, she would click the remote and 5 turn it off. she was not interested in that. she was not 6 watching it and she most certainly did not rely on it. 7 they paid this dr. kyriakoudes over $10,000 to 8 come here and to talk to you about everything but the only 9 smoker whose name is on the verdict form. he was only interested in talking to you about what the american public knew or the general public or at one point he even said, well, really i'm just talking about a portion of the american public. but since he brought it up, we explored it were him. he talked to him about it. you want to talk about the american public, let us talk about the american public. and the evidence showed that the american people were never these mindless sheep that he wants you to think they were, they were duped into believing everything that tobacco company executives said. we showed you the evidence that at the times he was talking about this conspiracy going on -- can i have the next one, please? -- there were polls that were being conducted and those polls showed that ninety percent, ninety percent, ninety percent, 92 percent, 94 percent, 94 percent of americans believed, 172 1 not was just aware, believed that cigarette smoking was 2 harmful to their health. 3 4 can i have the next one, please? then we said, well, what about the other side of 5 the debate, what are the american people, since that is what 6 you want to talk about, what are -- are they buying into 7 stuff that you say the tobacco companies are selling? and 8 we look at the polling results for that. nobody, five 9 percent at its highest, from three to five percent of people from 1968 all the way up to the early 1980s, almost no one said that the tobacco companies were a reliable source of information on smoking and health. can we have the next slide, please? what does that mean? that means these clips on tv that he wanted to show you that ran that ms. lennox was not watching, even if she was watching, if she was like most americans, she paid no attention to it. when this says that only five percent of the people were listening to the tobacco companies and finding them reliable, this is what this poll is talking about. people like the people they showed you, ann browder, heimann, some random ti spokesperson walking down a bunch of stairs, ed horrigan that we watched yesterday, cullman, joseph cullman that we watched yesterday. nobody was relying on these people and certainly not ms. lennox. 173 1 now, how do people end up -- how does it come to 2 pass that ninety percent or better of americans believe that 3 cigarette smoking was harmful to health? i'm going to do 4 this part really fast, because it is really not relevant to 5 ms. lennox, but because they raised it. 6 7 can we have the next one. because it was all over the newspapers. cancer 8 cause found in cigarette smoke. u.s. strengthens cancer 9 sigh, article after article after article in evidence showing the other side that dr. kyriakoudes, even when he is talking about the american public, did not want you to see. next item, please. magazines, we did not show this to you, because it was not worth your time. ms. lennox was not paying attention to magazines. but this is what was out there. next slide, please. news coverage. we did not show you this, because it is not worth your time, she was not paying attention to any of this. but there were people on the news, just give them five or ten seconds of this. (video published to the court and jury.) mr. walker: that is 1955. america was not this place where the tobacco companies had the stage and no one else did, that there was no corresponding message. let me have the next slide, please. just go to 174 1 the next one, please. 2 even in movies -- these are all in evidence. 3 there are movies, like you only live twice, james bond, 4 smoky and the bandit, superman. these are all in evidence, 5 the video's there if you want to see them, where in popular 6 culture people were talking about the health risks of 7 cigarette smoking. 8 9 can i have the next slide, please? same is true of addiction. references to smoking being addictive back to the early 1900s and this is a 1963 article that i mentioned just as one example of a published statement about smoking being through -- smokers being true addicts. then i said to dr. kyriakoudes, well, do you have a statement, any time up until 1988 where a tobacco person said it is not addictive? and he said, oh, yeah, i have hundreds of those, i have lots of those, lots of those, i've got 30 million documents back where i come from. well, did you bring one? what did he say? i did not have time to show it. eight hours on the stand, i did not have time to show it to you. why did they do that in about two or three minutes? because ms. lennox's testimony cannot work one way for them and a different way for us. mr. finch's argument, and mr. pendell's when i sit 175 1 down, their argument is that she did not see any of this 2 information that was out there that was causing ninety percent 3 of americans to say that cigarette smoking was harmful. but 4 apparently, according to them, she did see these statements 5 that her own sister said she was not watching. that does not 6 make any sense. the reality is ms. lennox was not watching 7 any of it. she was not looking at any statements of tobacco 8 company executives and she was not looking at this stuff 9 either that i just showed you. and that is because none of that was important to ms. lennox, she did not pay any attention to any of it. what did she pay attention to? what really mattered for her? what mattered to her was the fact that her family smoked. she did not start smoking because of an ad, she said she started smoking because her whole family smoked. that is where she got her first cigarette. her role models were not celebrities or astronauts or athletes or doctors or any of those things that dr. kyriakoudes talked about with mr. finch. her role models were her parents, not advertising. and dr. kyriakoudes even admitted when i asked him about it that those -- studies show those are the most important factors for why people start smoking, not advertising, whether or not their parents and siblings and friends smoke and that is why ms. lennox started smoking. 176 1 let us be clear: i am not trying to suggest to you 2 that ms. lennox never saw an advertisement. i'm not trying 3 to suggest to you that she never saw any of those statements 4 that they showed or that i showed. it is not that she did not 5 see this information, it is that it was not important to her. 6 she did not rely on it, it did not matter to her. 7 but that is the question on the verdict form. did 8 she rely to her detriment on a statement that rj reynolds's 9 made that was false. so what is the ad that they rely on? mr. finch said it. they say, well, winston, she remembered this winston jingle, she eventually smoked winston cigarettes. that is fraud. that is got to be fraud. she remembered the slogan, she smoked it. that is fraud. that is their argument. that is the entirety of their argument about ms. lennox relying. so where is the fraud? the ad, the statement that they are referring to, is the one that says winston tastes good. they say that ms. lennox tried that first package of win because of an ad that said that it tastes good. okay. why did she smoke the second package of winstons? she told you, because the ad was not false. the ad said winstons taste good. she tasted them, concluded for herself that they did taste good and she wanted to keep smoking them. 177 1 ladies and gentlemen, that is not fraud. a true 2 statement that is being made about a product that she tries 3 and agrees with is not fraud. 4 and the interesting thing is, the overwhelming 5 majority of the winston ads had warning labels. 6 dr. kyriakoudes agreed with me about that. most of them had 7 warning labels. the ones that did not have warning labels, 8 those are the one that dr. kyriakoudes decided you needed to 9 see. you need to see these ads in the minority without the warning labels. i said, why did you do that? he did not have a good answer for that. but that does bring us back to the question of the warnings, whether they are in the ads or in the package? what about this -- what about this allegation that they make that ms. lennox, you know, she could not read, she is not able to understand these warnings. well, let us go back. can i have the next one, please? first of all, what other warnings are we talking about? caution, cigarette smoking may be hazardous to your health. next one, please. warning: the surgeon general has determined that cigarette smoking is dangerous to your health. the next one, please? surgeon general's warning: smoking causes 178 1 emphysema. quitting smoking now greatly reduces serious 2 risks to your health. 3 these are the kinds of warnings that were on 4 virtually every -- actually, every single package of winston 5 cigarettes that she smoked. she started smoking winston 6 cigarettes in the late 1960s. she never smoked a package of 7 winston that did not have one of these warnings on it. 8 those warnings were established by congress and 9 the judge's instruction tells you that we cannot be held liable because they do not like what the warnings say. congress put those warning labels there. now, so at the beginning of the case, mr. pendell tries to make it seems like, well, she could not read, she could not read these warnings, she did not -- yeah, it said that there, but she did not know what any of that meant. and then their own witness, they say we need to bring a witness, their own witness, dr. werner, takes the stand and ms. patterson's first few questions for her, maybe you can clear this up, you reviewed everything, you talked to ms. lennox, is there any problem, you are a trained psychiatrist, you are -- you know, mr. finch would say, my god, governor, the governor is behind ms. werner, okay? dr. werner said, of course she could read those warning labels. of course she could understand those warning labels. 179 1 and you know from the evidence that if there was 2 any point in time when ms. lennox could not on her own 3 understand those warning labels, she could have asked her 4 sister, diania, or any other family member, they would have 5 told her exactly what it meant. 6 but you have to -- there is a credibility issue you 7 have to decide here, because you saw it at the end of that 8 video that we watched. what did ms. lennox really say about 9 the warnings? it goes something like this: i never saw warning labels. but if i did see them, i did not understand what they meant. but if i did understand what they meant, i did not pay any attention to them. you have to make up your own mind about what that means, where is the truth from all of this? i think the truth in all of that and i think if you look at the evidence you will agree with me, the truth is only the very last statement, she did see the warnings, she did know what they meant, just like she knew what warnings on bug spray meant, but she was not interested, she did not pay any attention to them. it is not what was important to her and karen did what karen wanted to do. the fact of the matter is, it was never the case that ms. lennox was not warned about the health risks, it is just that she was not interested in that information. and there is no part of the fraud case that you saw 180 1 during trial or heard about from mr. finch that made one wit 2 of difference to ms. lennox. none of it mattered to her, 3 not the frank statement, not the congressional hearing she 4 changed the channel on, nothing. 5 but asking the question of whether it mattered to 6 ms. lennox is important for one other reason before i 7 leave -- before i leave their fraud claim. all during trial 8 and again today and probably again after i sit down, they have 9 been making this accusation that rj reynolds was marketing to underaged people. my god, they are going after the kids. this is the accusation that they made. and i told you in opening we are going to talk about this. whoever they bring to make this accusation, i'm going to ask them some questions and you are going to see a few things about these allegations that are going to show you that they do not have the evidence to back that up. and what did we hear? can i have -- you have already got it. i first want to tell you at the top of the slide it says, 1962, 1971, and you may have heard me in objections or anything else asking about the timing. why does the timing matter? because these are the only years that the evidence even suggests that ms. lennox smoked as an underaged person. if she started at nine, that would be 1962. she turned 18 in 1971. dr. kyriakoudes agreed with me that you could sell, buy, advertise, market cigarettes to 181 2 18-year-old adults the entire time. so where is the 3 evidence that reynolds or anybody else marketed to 4 ms. lennox as an underaged person? 5 they brought you five surveys: 1958, 1959, '72, 6 '74, '84 'and '58. they are all there. i even gave you 7 exhibit numbers in case anybody cares. every single one of 8 those surveys i asked dr. kyriakoudes, i said, you have come 9 all this way, the jury has heard this was going to be an issue, show the jury the part of this document that says that reynolds was using this survey information to market to underaged people. well, i -- i -- i -- he starts really struggling to come up with an answer. he could not show you that in not even one of those documents. his source for saying that the company, that reynolds, was marketing to underaged people, his only source for that is dr. kyriakoudes himself. remember he told you he is impartial, so you can believe him. then he said, he said, well, these surveys, they are elaborate, they are sophisticated, they are tobacco companies bringing all their market research might to try to understand what makes kids tick so they can market to them. and i said, okay. this is the sum total of the surveys, the actual surveys, that he showed you that are supposed to be this elaborate sophisticated market research program. that is it. 182 2 this one page. 3 and then he quarreled with me. i said, well, it is 4 got three questions. he said, no, it is not three questions, 5 you have got to count the subparts. okay. then when i did 6 that, he said, no, no, you have to look at the bottom of the 7 page. it is asking for, you know, gender and name and age. 8 there was a suggestion that asking for the name means that 9 they are going to like market -- this only went to -- this was only -- they only did 400 of these. is the argument that they were marketing to 400 high school students in -- i guess this one was in, i do not know, sometime in the '50s, outside of florida. that is their market? that is their proof of marketing to kids? i challenged him to show you one passage in any of these five surveys that said they were using the information for that purpose. he could not show you one. then i said, well, where is the market proposal? where is the draft, where is the market plan, where is the document that you say you have? you have got 30 million documents, 85 million pages, where is it? this is a court of evidence. let us see it. he comes in with this 1973 document. well, in 1973 ms. lennox is now 20 years old. okay? and the document is a draft proposal. it is a proposal and it is not even final. and then i said to him, 183 1 well, what about this, it is a draft proposal about a new 2 brand. have not you testified before that that new brand was 3 never implemented? oh, i said that before, but today i'm 4 going to tell you that it was implemented in camel 5 cigarettes. now we are about back to talk about cigarette 6 brands that ms. lennox never smoked. 7 five surveys, one draft proposal that was never 8 adopted or was adopted from a brand she did not smoke, zero 9 marketing plans. not one. zero connection to karen lennox. can i have the next slide, please? but even just in the few documents -- is not it amazing, even in the few documents they chose to bring, even in just those few documents, i was able to point out to you the places where reynolds' actual policy was set forth. that same '73 document we were just talking about, we should not in any way influence nonsmokers to start smoking. 1984 document: rjr's consistent policy is that smoking is a matter of free informed adult choice, which the company does not seek to influence. this report is intended to provide additional learning on younger adult smokers, aged 18 to 24. and that same document answered the question that mr. finch tried to raise, why would anybody survey people who were 16 or 17 years old if it is not to market to them. the answer is in the documents they themselves showed. in 184 1 order to plan our business, you must consider the effects 2 those choices, adult choices, have on the future of the 3 industry. they did not prove youth marketing and they 4 certainly did not prove that it had anything to do with 5 ms. lennox. 6 the only other thing on this whole youth marketing 7 topic i did not mention, and i'll just say this quickly, they 8 showed you the flintstones, remember he came in and showed 9 you the flintstones? but did not tell you that reynolds pulled it is sponsorship before it went on saturday morning. why would not he tell you that? same thing with the beverly hillbillies, they showed you the beverly hillbillies think like this -- now, this is how we are trying to get -- then you find out the minute they showed that people under a certain age are watching beverly hillbillies, reynolds pulled its sponsorship of that too. i said, dr. kyriakoudes, why did not you tell anybody that? i was not asked. that was his answer. at the end of the day, none of it matters, because she did not smoke because of any of this. she smoked because her family smoked. and i'm going to say this one last thing about this whole youth marketing issue, because mr. finch said it today, he said it in jury selection. it is not fair to hold a nine-year-old, say that a nine-year-old is responsible their whole life for a decision they made at 185 2 nine years old. 3 well, that is because ms. lennox's lawyers want you 4 to think that ms. lennox remained a nine-year-old girl her 5 entire life. she did not, she grew up. and while we do not 6 hold underaged people responsible for the choices they make 7 as children, we do hold adults responsible for the adult 8 decisions they make as adults. and that is particularly 9 important here for the following reason -- can i have the next slide please. look at this. the 2010 surgeon general's report is in evidence and it says that you need 12.5 pack years to be at an increased risk for copd. i asked dr. gravelyn about it, he agreed with me that he is never seen somebody with copd caused by smoking where they did not have eight pack years. surgeon general says you need 12 pack years, dr. gravelyn, their paid witness, says you need eight pack years. so i let him do the math. i said, dr. gravelyn, let us look at ms. lennox's underaged smoking, let us calculate the pack years of her underaged smoking. it added up to four pack years. and then i said, well, if she had only smoked four pack years, would she still have gotten copd? the answer was no. then they came back and said, well, let us look at her adult smoking. if you look at 18 years old up until the 2 late '80s or early 1990s, was that enough to get copd? the 186 3 answer is yes. 4 what does that mean? what does that really mean? 5 it means that ms. lennox's copd did not come from her 6 underaged smoking, it came from the choices that she made as 7 an adult. over the age of 18 all the way up until her 8 diagnose and beyond, she was making the same choices. 9 the bottom line is none of these allegations about marketing to youth, company statements, ads, none of that has anything to do with what happened to ms. lennox and that is why your answer on questions 4 and 6 should be no. all right. let us take a look at the next question on the verdict form: please state the percentage of any responsibility that you charge to each party for karen lennox's copd. now, you saw ms. lennox's testimony that in her point of view she has no responsibility. she played no role in her smoking history according to her. maybe her lawyers will tell you that she does accept responsibility, but not for some of the claims. she accepts responsibility for some, but not others. but, what are the choices that really could have actually made a difference to ms. lennox? it is not all that stuff dr. kyriakoudes was talking about. they are these choices: 2 the choice to continue smoking into adulthood. we 3 just looked at it. it was her adult smoking that caused her 187 4 copd. 5 6 the choice not to even try to quit until '97. the choice to quit cold turkey, as opposed to some 7 other way. 8 the choice of when to quit and the choice of how 9 to quit. every single one of those choices could only be made by ms. lennox. not reynolds. and for that reason, we ask you to find that ms. lennox is one hundred percent responsible for those choices that only she could have made. [#deleted recess#] mr. walker: thank you, judge. so we were looking at the eighth question on the verdict form, which is the one about who is responsible for ms. lennox's copd and in what percentage. and you can see there that we think that zero percent should be put down for reynolds, because reynolds did not bear any responsibility for the choices that actually mattered to ms. lennox. those were choices that she had to make for herself. in particular, if you really look at the timing of it all -- can we have the next slide? not that one. if you just imagine the timeline of ms. lennox's smoking, there is the time period from when she started, that is on the left, and it goes all the way over to the 189 1 right to the late 1980s if you accept what we say about 2 manifestation or early 1990s if you believe the plaintiff. 3 in any event, that is the period of time that leads up to 4 her copd diagnose, which we believe was in the late 1980s. 5 and if you are trying to figure out what ms. lennox 6 would have done had something else been said to her, if the 7 companies had done something different that gave her more 8 information, you do not really have to speculate about that, 9 because we can look at the time period after that. can we have the next one? if we pick up where we left off, the late '80s, and we go up to when she quit, now we know what ms. lennox did when someone said to her in the most personal direct powerful terms possible, you need to quit smoking or your smoking could kill you. she did not try and fail, she did not try at all. she did nothing and reynolds is not responsible for the choice to do nothing. now, let us take a look at the next question on the verdict former. this is question no. 9. i will not read the whole thing. this is a question about damages. and you already know from what i've said already i do not think you should get this far into the verdict. it will not come as any surprise to you that we do not believe that this is a case where damages should be awarded. the engle class has many other smokers who have facts that fit dr. kyriakoudes' and 190 1 other people's testimony, this just is not one of them. 2 the next question, however, is one i do want to 3 spend a couple of minutes talking about. that is 4 question 10. ten. and this is the question about punitive 5 damages. and the reason why i want to talk with you a 6 little bit about this one is because punitive damages 7 sometimes is something we hear about, i want to make sure 8 that we all understand the fundamentals and how it applies 9 here. what do you need to know about punitive damages in a nutshell? they can only be awarded for conduct that was a legal cause of ms. lennox's copd. they are not an opportunity for you to express unhappiness with something that you think reynolds did that does not apply to ms. lennox. other people have cases where they can seek their own punitive damages for what may have affected someone else. this case is only about ms. lennox. punitive damages can only be awarded to ms. lennox. you cannot by your verdict, for example, say that this amount of money should go to some health organization. that is just not -- any amount of money that is awarded for punitive damages, and i'm -- you know, i can give you a spoiler alert, i'm going to tell you that there should not be any. but any amount that can be awarded can only go to ms. lennox. and the last one is really, really important. 2 punitive damages by definition are damages that are in 3 addition to the damages that fully compensate ms. lennox. i 191 4 do not know why it says the ms. lennox. but those are 5 damages that they are asking for over and above full 6 compensation. it is basically just extra money. 7 and punitive damages are only available to punish 8 and deter. to punish and deter. well, you heard from the 9 stipulations that most of the people that you heard about in this case, people like dr. teague and dr. heimann, most of those people that you heard about or read about in the documents, they have all passed away. they are not here to be punished and they are no longer doing anything at the company to be deterred. there is no need for that. and you have already heard me go on at some length about how none of what you heard about the company's conduct actually caused any injury to ms. lennox. but i want to make an even further point. a lot of the information you heard about this case does not even rise to the level that should be punished. let me give you some examples of not reprehensible, not punishable conduct. can i have the next slide? so it is not punishable conduct to hold the same scientific view as people in the public health community did. this is not the one. can i have the other one, 192 2 please? 3 this is one of the documents that they showed you 4 from the early 1950s. none of this has anything to do with 5 ms. lennox, of course, this is just when she is being born. 6 but this is their case for punitive damages and this was one 7 of the documents they showed you: the industry is strongly 8 convinced that there is no sound scientific basis for the 9 charges that have been made. they believe that the more sensational accusations in the recent papers were premature and, in some cases, represent publicity issued in the hopes of attracting funds and support for further research. why is that important? because mr. finch, and mr. pendell when i sit down, are telling you this claude teague at reynolds concluded, he decided, that cigarette smoking caused lung cancer. maybe he did. we gave you the evidence that at the time that he wrote what they were relying on, he had just started with the company. he was a brand-new employee, fresh out of school with a new ph.d., he looked up a bunch of library resources that were publicly available and he wrote a report that dr. kyriakoudes could tell you was read by precisely no one. it is only dr. teague's opinion. this is -- and dr. teague was not any kind of executive in 1953, he was an entry level employee at 193 1 reynolds who did not set any policy for the company. 2 the people who were running the company in that 3 same year, 1953, for better or for worse, this is what they 4 believed: they were strongly convinced that there was no 5 sound scientific basis for the charges that had been made at 6 that time. and you did not have to be a tobacco company 7 executive to believe that. 8 can i have the next slide, please? maybe go back 9 one. okay. that same document points out that the national cancer institute of the united states government supported by congressional appropriations also officially refuted to tie up between cigarette smoking and cancer. and when i was talking with dr. kyriakoudes, he agreed with me that at least in the 1950s john heller, the director of the national cancer institute, said that he did not think that it was proven. and so did cuyler hammond at the american cancer society. this in the early 1950s and these are what scientists were saying. the document that i showed you about what the industry strongly believed, that was not some press release that was being put out to the public. that was one of these internal secret documents that they have been talking about this whole trial. when no one else was listening, when they were there in private in this so-called secret meeting, they 194 1 were saying that they did not think that the link had been 2 proven. they did not think there was a scientific basis for 3 it in the early '50s. and other people outside of the 4 company's felt the same way. a company should not be 5 punished for having an opinion. that should not be the 6 basis for punishment, especially when, regardless of what 7 the people in the company were saying to themselves 8 internally questioning this link, by the 1960s. as we 9 looked at earlier, the '60s, '70s and '80s, forget about the scientists, the public believed that cigarette smoking was harmful to health. so much so -- can we have the next slide, please? -- that we -- we talked about this quote with dr. kyriakoudes. this is in 1968, around the time that they say ms. lennox started smoking. you could stand on a rooftop and shout smoking is dangerous at the top of your lungs and you would not be telling anyone anything they did not already know. this daniel horn was from the united states government. this is now 15 years after the first document where internally the companies were saying they questioned the risks. it is not punishable conduct to publish research on cigarette smoking. i showed you the green monitor, i held up that big book, and then i put it down on the desk and it made kind of a thud. that is the one that has 6,000 articles 2 that was sent to the surgeon general before the 1964 surgeon 3 general's report and cited by the surgeon general. 4 i showed you the nap article on nicotine addiction 195 5 from 1963. i talked with dr. kyriakoudes about how 6 dr. rodgman at reynolds was publishing on what was in 7 cigarette smoke. before people knew why there were 8 carcinogens in smoke, you had to invent the technology to 9 figure out what was in smoke, and dr. rodgman at reynolds did that. those things are not deserving of punishment. reynolds should not be punished for some of the things that their employees might have said over the years that 20, 30, or 40 years later some clever lawyers and their paid experts can pull out and cherry pick and show you, well, this person said this, look, this person said that. there is not a person or corporation alive that if you had -- if you had access to everything that person or corporation has ever said that you cannot find something that will make that person or corporation look bad. that is what this case was here. and reynolds should not be punished for not publicizing risks that were already being publicized. so the answer to this question -- can i have the next one? whether by clear and convincing evidence punitive 196 1 damages are warranted, the answer should be no. 2 do we have -- one thing i just -- to point out to 3 you and then i'm actually nearly finished, is the reason 4 that clear and convincing appears in red there is because 5 that is a different higher standard of proof. in civil 6 cases the clear and convincing evidence standard is actually 7 the highest standard of proof there is in civil law. 8 and the judge instructed you and you will see in 9 the instructions that you have that to be clear and convincing evidence the evidence has to be more compelling and persuasive than evidence under the preponderance of the evidence. it is evidence that is precise, explicit, lacking in confusion, and of such weight that it produces a firm belief or conviction without hesitation about the matter in issue. you have got to be able to say that about their proof, that reynolds did something that harmed ms. lennox that is deserving of punishment and they did not meet their burden of proof. the answer to that question should be no. now, at the end of the day, the bottom line key facts here are the same ones that i told you at the beginning of my closing and the ones that i told you about at the beginning of this case. ms. lennox was a willing smoker who smoked regardless of the risks. she smoked because she was not interested in quitting. and then she successfully quit when she finally was ready. she was not 197 1 misled. those are the key facts. those facts, plus 2 everything else that i discussed, are what add up to a 3 defense verdict in this case. 4 now, pretty soon you will begin your deliberations 5 and i've tried the best i know how to summarize the evidence 6 that you have heard and to give the defense perspective on it. 7 when i sit down mr. pendell is going to have a chance to 8 talk to you again. i thought that i was going to be shorter 9 than mr. finch, i do not think it worked out that way, but they are going to have another crack at you to keep going. and i do not get another turn. it will not be like during the trial where they stood up and say something and we have this back and forth. it does not work that way. they have the burden of proof, so they get to go last and i will not get to speak to you again after they do. but just the same, you have heard all of our arguments, you have seen the evidence that we rely on. as mr. pendell is making his arguments, ask yourselves how i might have responded to them based on the evidence that i've talked about. i want to express my appreciation one more time for your patience and for your good humor. as i mentioned, i've explained this the best way that i know how and we are now in your hands and i ask only that you follow the law, use your common sense, pay close attention to the facts and to the facts that matter to ms. lennox. and i ask you to 2 return a verdict in favor of the defendant, rj reynolds 3 tobacco company. thank you very much.