okay. ms. parker, whenever you are ready. 3595 ms. parker: thank you. may it please the court, and mr. lewis and counsel. and, ladies and gentlemen, good afternoon. i'm so thankful to all of you for your service as jurors. i want to join mr. pantazis in thanking you for that. we are beginning our third week, and we all know it is been a sacrifice for you. so thank you on behalf of, not just me, but my whole team and my client as well. now, i try very hard during the trial to be efficient and to be very respectful of your time. and i'm going to try to do that again this afternoon. so if you will bear with me. we have a tv here, and i hope this will mean that you can watch our -- the slides that we want to put up without, you know, having to look the other direction at the wall over there. so i've got this set up, and i think -- i hope everybody can see it pretty well. all right. i want to go back to when i talked to you-all almost two weeks ago in my opening statement. and i told you then that this case was only about one smoker. and what it really ultimately comes down to is whether 3596 mr. lewis deserves money damages. that is what we are here about. so what was the evidence that they put on? well, we heard days and days of testimony that had no connection to mrs. lewis. they brought witnesses here who are professional witnesses. they go around and they talk to all these different juries in florida. you-all heard dr. proctor say he was leaving here to go to tampa to talk to another jury there. they have this traveling slide show of ancient documents. and they put those on to all the juries, even though it is publicly available. the government knows about those documents. they are on our website now. but that is their case. dr. proctor told us he did not even know a thing about mrs. lewis. remember that? i just cannot overemphasize enough the canned nature of the presentation that they have made. but it is your job as the jurors in this case to look at the evidence with respect to mrs. lewis. okay. it is your job to answer those questions on the verdict form. and you saw all those questions go to mrs. lewis and whether mr. lewis is entitled to money, to money damages. 3597 now, there may be other smokers out there who did not know about the health risks of smoking. there may be other smokers out there who saw some of this information. there may be other smokers out there who really persistently and seriously tried to quit smoking but just could not do it. there may be other smokers out there who hated smoking, who were tormented by their smoking, and never could quit because of that. but that is just not mrs. lewis. those people would have a good case, but that is not -- those are not the facts of mrs. lewis. they came in here -- mr. lewis came in here, and he took the stand and you heard him say he claims under oath that mrs. lewis did not know, that she did not know smoking was bad for her until 1996. and that is when she was diagnosed with cancer. and, remember, she was 49 years old then. and she had been smoking for 30 years with a warning on every package of cigarettes that she bought. but that is their position. that is what they are claiming, that she did not know about the health risks of smoking. and they are taking the position that she did not have enough information 3598 from the tobacco companies to know that smoking was bad for her. she was waiting on the tobacco companies to tell her that cigarettes were bad for her. but what was the evidence on that? did reynolds prevent mrs. lewis from knowing that smoking was dangerous? did reynolds prevent her from having the information that she needed to know she should quit? well, we know that mrs. lewis knew from before she ever was smoking a single cigarette that smoking was bad for her. we know her mother told her that. we know her grandmother told her that. and we know that the surgeon general's report was quoted all over the place according to mr. lewis. we know that she never bought cigarettes until she became a married adult, and every package of cigarettes she bought had a warning on it. and then remember her brother-in-law. we saw his testimony. her brother-in-law said, i told her. i told her about the surgeon general's report, and i told her i quit. and then her own brother said -- remember, we saw his videotaped testimony. her own brother said, look it says right on the pack cigarettes are not good for you. 3599 and then some of the most dramatic evidence. she called cigarettes coffin nails and cancer sticks. that is what she called them, coffin nails and cancer sticks. mrs. lewis knew that smoking was bad for her. but she wanted to smoke. and that is fine. we are not criticizing her for that. she had that right. this is america. she had the right to decide that she knew the health risks but she wanted to smoke. it is like that testimony that you-all heard from dr. doughney and then from dr. burns. i asked both of them, and both of them agreed, even in the context of the medicine, even in the context of advice from their -- her own doctor, when it came to whether or not she was going to have that lung biopsy, both dr. burns and dr. doughney agreed it is up to the person. it is up to the patient to decide what they want to do. you do not have to follow advice. she had the right to decide how she wanted to live her life, and that is what she did with her smoking. she knew smoking was bad for her, but she wanted to smoke. and here in america we have the freedom to do that. we have the freedom to engage in risky behaviors like drinking alcohol or riding a 3600 motorcycle or all sorts of different things. our society allows us to choose to smoke. and it is not because our society thinks that cigarettes are safe; it is because our society believes that everyone has been warned and that adults have the right to choose. now, let me go back to mr. lewis. okay? so again, he is the plaintiff here. he is the one who filed this lawsuit. and you heard his lawyer say that you should consider awarding him $9.2 million. he is not asking for damages for mrs. lewis; he is asking for his own damages. okay. this is only about him and his own damages and what did he do in this case? well, i'm sorry to have to say, mr. lewis took the stand and 13 different times he said something here in this courtroom, and i had to go back and show him and show all of you and read to him his testimony that he had given previously under oath that was different than what he was telling you in this courtroom. and the matters that he was giving this different testimony about were exaggerating mrs. lewis's smoking situation. he took the stand, and he said that she tried to quit smoking 3601 back in 1969. and i showed him. i read him the testimony where he had given under oath in his deposition where he said she did not even try to start quitting, she did not make the effort to quit until the 1980s. and then when mr. ogle was asking the questions he said to all of you up on the stand that she quit smoking sometime for as long as one week. okay. it came my time, and i had to show him and to read to you-all the testimony that he gave previously under oath where he said she never quit smoking more than one day. and then, remember, he told that big story about how, oh, she would wake -- mrs. lewis would wake up in the middle of the night and she would pace around the bedroom because she wanted a cigarette. do you remember that? and then i had to show him, i had to read him his testimony he had given under oath prior to the trial where he said he was asleep; he always slept through the night; and he did not know what she did. thirteen different times i had to do that. he said -- he told all of you, when mr. ogle was asking him questions, that he and mrs. lewis had a great relationship. okay. well, let us 3602 see -- and, again, this is not coming from me; this is not coming from reynolds; these are her medical records. this is from 1995, just a year before she was diagnosed with cancer. she told her doctor probable divorce proceedings as a result of her marriage to an abusive alcoholic. and then mr. lewis said that he -- that mrs. lewis had asked him and gail martin to take care of her son robert. but then after mrs. lewis passed away, what did mr. lewis do? he left robert, and he moved in with mrs. lewis's best friend. and he has been living with her for 17 or 18 years now. when mr. ogle was asking him questions, he told us all this about his children, john, and joseph and robert. and when i asked him questions, we found out he had not seen john in over 10 years; he had not seen joseph in over 10 years; and he had not seen robert for almost five years before he brought him down here to sit in the courtroom in this trial. he told you that mrs. lewis was trying to quit smoking. but let us pull up his own handwriting. this is from -- this is a form that he filled out in his own handwriting, where he is 3603 telling philip morris to send cigarettes to mrs. lewis. okay? this is at the time that he claims that she was desperately trying to quit smoking. she was desperately trying to quit smoking, but he is sending for free cigarettes, arranging for that to happen. he bought cigarettes for her after they got married. he influenced her brand choices. that is why she smoked marlboro, because that is what mr. lewis smoked. he is the one who got those winston cigarettes that she got from the nascar races. he did not try to quit smoking when mrs. lewis was trying to quit. when he would -- mrs. lewis would encourage him to smoke. he said that she said he was a better person if he was smoking. again, it shows that he -- mrs. lewis did not want to quit. after mrs. lewis was diagnosed with cancer, he kept smoking, and he is still smoking today. and after mrs. lewis passed away, he knew there was a lawsuit. he knew that there was a primary issue in the lawsuit about the medical -- the medical part of the case, and yet he refused for her to have an autopsy. he had her cremated. and then you heard -- unbelievable. you 3604 heard mr. lewis say he even went into a lawn care business with mrs. lewis's stepfather, who was the one who had abused her for so long. you are going have to ask yourself, under the instructions that judge craig has read to you, why has his story changed? judge craig has given you an instruction about credibility of witnesses, you know. no one likes to question the truthfulness of anyone, you know. it is just not in our nature to do that. but that is your job here. you are going to have to evaluate mr. lewis's credibility under all those circumstances. and his own actions, causing her all that stress, giving her marlboro cigarettes and all caused her to smoke, but yet he is coming into court asking for money for that same thing. now, going back to when i talked to you when we first got started in my opening statement to you, i said there were five different facts i wanted to talk to you about and tell you what i thought the evidence was going to show. i want to go over those with you this afternoon. those same five facts that i talked to you about before, plus one more because we now know about the medical case. so that is what i am going to spend my time 3605 with you this afternoon, is going through those facts, and then applying those to the verdict form questions that you are going to be asked to fill out. so all of this that you have heard this last few weeks, i think it can be boiled down into these six facts. and the first one is that mrs. lewis knew. she knew the risks of smoking. the second fact is that mrs. lewis smoked for reasons that had nothing to do with reynolds. the third one is that mrs. lewis did not make a serious persistent effort to quit. mr. lewis has not proven his medical case. he cannot establish legal cause or reasonable reliance. that is something that is required on the verdict form. and then fact no. 6, on top of everything else, cigarettes are legal. so let us start with the first one, and that is mrs. lewis knew the risks. now, i know you-all have heard this, so i'm not going to go into a lot of detail about it. but, again, just to put this in context, this mr. lewis explaining that mrs. lewis did not know until 1996. i want to summarize what the evidence has been on that. first of all, you know her mother warned her. 3606 her mother warned her and her siblings when they were growing up they should not smoke; it was bad for them. her grandmother warned her. her grandmother had heart problems, and her grandmother told her and her siblings that they should not smoke because of health reasons. her school prohibited smoking. there was something called public service announcements, and we showed some of those to you during the trial. mrs. lewis testified -- and we read her deposition to you. mrs. lewis testified that she remembered seeing those. and then in 1964 the surgeon general's historic report came out, and it was the front page news everywhere. but let me show you the front page newspapers where mrs. lewis was living. she was up in long island at the time. and you can see that surgeon general's report was the front page news in the newspapers there in new york where she was. remember, mr. lewis said that this news about the surgeon general's report was all over the place. he thinks mrs. lewis heard it too. and then remember her brother-in-law. okay. this is her brother-in-law, edward. and i'll show 3607 you. we will put up the film in just a minute. remember, edward said that he knew about the report. he told her about it. he quit smoking because of the report, and he told her about it. if we could play that clip, please clip. (whereupon, a video clip was played in open court as follows:) q. why did you quit in the '60s? a. i woke up one morning and turned on the radio and listened to the surgeon general's report on smoking, and said that is it. that is the end of it. q. were the members of your family, william and robert and the like, aware that that was the impetus for your effort to quit? a. oh, yeah. yeah, i made a point of it. q. did you ever tell rosemary that you had successfully quit smoking (inaudible) -- a. oh, yeah. yeah, i did. (video clip concluded.) ms. parker: now, that surgeon general's report is what led to congress passing that law that required warnings on every package of cigarettes. and that started in 1966. no one disputes that mrs. lewis knew the warnings were on the packages, but she says she did not read them. 3608 let us go over her -- that testimony. here is what she testified to. and this is part of what was read to you-all from her deposition that was taken before she passed away. "for a period of years before 1996, while you were smoking there were warning labels on some of those cigarette packages, right? and did you ever read any of those warnings labels? "answer: no. "and why not? "i do not read anything." so why would they -- if they are claiming that mrs. lewis did not read those warnings that were on every package of cigarettes that she bought, every one of them, why would you think that any earlier information from reynolds would have made a difference to her? let me say that again. she did not even read the warnings that were on the packages. that is what they are claiming. if she did not even read the warnings on the packages, how could something else from reynolds have made a difference to her? and then her own brother -- and this is william. we brought -- you saw his videotaped testimony at trial. and he is the one who said -- 3609 he pointed out those warnings to his sister. to mrs. lewis. he said, look, it says right on the pack that they are bad, that they are not good for you. and she did not say, oh, no, i have never heard that before. oh, that is wrong. oh, you cannot be right. she did not say that. what did he say? she said, yeah, i should quit, which is an admission by her that she knew cigarettes were bad for her. if we could play that clip, please. (whereupon, a video clip was played in open court follows:) q. did you discuss with her the fact that it was there? a. yeah. q. and what was the nature of that conversation? a. something like, look, it says right on the pack that they are not good for you. q. and you recall her having a response to that? a. something like, yeah, i should quit. (video clip concluded.) ms. parker: and then this brother, william, is also the one who told us that mrs. lewis used the words coffin nails, and we also know from the other testimony she also used cancer sticks. so 3610 let us play that little clip. (whereupon, a video clip was played in open court as follows:) q. is not it true that you told her that she should quit smoking because it could be harmful to her health? a. i would say, you should stop that; you should quit smoking; it is another nail in your coffin. q. all right. do you recall when it was that you would say these things to her, or was it just consistent over the years? a. it was fairly consistent. (video clip concluded.) ms. parker: okay. every time that she got any of these warnings, from the packages, from the surgeon general's report, from her family members, from her mother telling her not to smoke, her grandmother telling her not to smoke, every time she got one of those warnings it was a fork in the road for her. she could have made the decision, look, you know what, i need to quit smoking; i need to make a serious persistent effort to try to quit. but she chose the fork in the road knowing that cigarettes were health risks, that she wanted to smoke. 3611 what did their witness, dr. burns, say about awareness? now, here is something you are going to need to think about. dr. burns is the three and a half million dollar man. remember? he has been paid three and a half million dollars to testify in lawsuits like this. he is retired. almost all of the income now comes from going around and testifying -- pardon me -- from testifying to juries just like you-all. before he started testifying for the plaintiffs, before he started having -- making all that money testifying for the plaintiffs, what did he say? this is what i asked him about. first of all in 1975, dr. burns admitted he said that more americans knew that cigarette smoking was dangerous for them than knew the name of the president of the united states. that was in 1975, before he started working for tobacco companies, for plaintiffs suing tobacco companies. and then what did he say in 1981? in 1981, he gave a speech, and he said, 95 percent of people are thoroughly aware of the health dangers, and ninety percent of them realize that their own health could be affected. so let us go back to that. after this just 3612 mountain of information that mrs. lewis knew about the health risks of smoking, they are still claiming that she did not know and she needed more information from reynolds. but mrs. lewis, the real mrs. lewis that you know from the facts of this case, knew, was very well aware of the health risks of smoking, and there was nothing that reynolds did that changed that information. let me go now to the second fact, and, that is, that mrs. lewis smoked for reasons that had nothing to do with reynolds. now, this is still part of this effort they have had to try to repackage mrs. lewis in a way to try to fit into the requirements that they have to show in order to get money damages in this case. and the evidence about mr. lewis's smoking -- and i just want to emphasize again -- is coming from mrs. lewis, her husband, her family members, her medical records. it is not coming from reynolds. it is not coming from me. this is the information that we have from them, from her family, her medical records and all. mr. lewis is arguing that reynolds is responsible for mrs. lewis's smoking. but we know 3613 from mrs. lewis herself why she started to smoke. remember, she said she started to smoke to defy her mother and her stepfather. she told us that -- we were reading her deposition that was taken before she passed away. she said that over and over. she said i was defiant. i was so mad at my mother, and my mother was mad at me, this whole situation about her becoming pregnant back in 1964 when she was a senior in high school and having to give up her child. that is why she started smoking. she told us about the abuse that she had from her stepfather. we are very -- everyone, i'm sure, has sympathy for that situation. but reynolds is not responsible for that. they also talked about peer pressure. just think about this with mrs. lewis. mrs. lewis started smoking and told us it was because of her family situation. her best friend was gail martin. gail martin was exposed to that same thing, that same peer pressure, that same everything that mrs. lewis was exposed to. but gail martin never smoked. so think about that, when they come back and say that mrs. lewis started smoking for other reasons. no one forced 3614 mrs. lewis to smoke; no one forced her to start smoking; no one forced her to continue smoking. she did not even choose the brand of cigarettes that she smoked. remember, her stepfather gave them to her. we know that from her own testimony. if we could just show that. remember, she said here my stepfather. and then she filled out a questionnaire for mr. ogle's law firm. and we have shown that to you off and on during the trial. it is a questionnaire that she filled out for his law firm, at a time when she is trying to get money damages in her case. she filled that out, and we now have it. and what did she say in that lawyer questionnaire? again, it says here, stepfather bought my cigarettes. that is from her own handwriting. that was not because of advertising; that was not because of anything reynolds had done. it is because that is what her stepfather gave her. and mrs. lewis said she liked the taste of salem. this is very important for you-all to remember. she never bought cigarettes until she became a married adult. okay? there is no question about that. and every package of 3615 cigarettes she bought had a warning label. now, i want to stop for a minute and talk to you about mrs. lewis's deposition, because the plaintiffs -- plaintiff has made -- has asked some questions during the trial to, perhaps, seem to indicate that mrs. lewis's deposition was taken at a time when she had had chemotherapy and her memory was not good. i'm sure you-all remember those questions and all. well, what is the evidence on that? her deposition was taken on september 4th, september 4th of 1997. and we have a medical record from dr. doughney. i asked dr. doughney about this when she was here. the very next day dr. doughney said she is doing well. and, remember, mrs. lewis had vivid memories about all this. she filled out the same information on this questionnaire for the lawyer. others corroborated her story. her best friend, gail martin, took the stand and said she remembered mrs. lewis telling her about the stepfather abuse and the situation with her mother back at the time it happened. so there is a lot of evidence that corroborates what mrs. lewis said in her deposition. so do not be distracted by any 3616 thought that mrs. lewis was not correctly remembering the situation because she had had chemotherapy. now, mrs. lewis was smoking for her own reasons, because she is told us because of stress, because she wanted to relax. and we know about her true feelings of smoking because of the smoking and what she did with the marlboro cigarettes. and you-all have heard a lot about that at the trial. and, again, marlboro is made by philip morris, not my client. okay? that is not reynolds. we showed you those actual forms that mrs. lewis filled out in her own handwriting and sent to philip morris. okay? those are the important company documents in this case, not those old documents from way back when that mrs. lewis never saw. the company documents that are important to you-all in answering the questions on the verdict form here are the company documents for philip morris that mr. and mrs. lewis filled out in her own handwriting. you saw on those forms where she told philip morris to send free cigarettes to her husband and to her adult son, john. and that was 3617 back in 1996. i'm sorry. that was back in the 1990s. that was at the same period of time where they now claim she was desperately trying to quit, that she hated cigarettes, that she wanted to quit, that she could not quit because she was addicted. if she really wanted to quit smoking, if she really felt that she could not quit because she was addicted, if she really believed that, why would she tell philip morris to send her cigarettes to her son? it is because mrs. lewis wanted to smoke. she enjoyed smoking, and she thought that adults like her adult son, like her husband had the right to choose to do that. we know her true thoughts about smoking because of these forms that were filled out when there was no lawsuit. there was no lawsuit, no reason for her to say anything other than what was the truth. you heard that mrs. lewis collected those marlboro packages so she could send off, as part of that marlboro miles program, to get free merchandise. that is why we brought you all of that marlboro merchandise over there to show you, the cooler and the backpack and rain gear and the 3618 jacket and all of that. that is what they admit she filled out forms and sent off and got all of that. okay? that is not somebody who hates smoking; that is not a tortured smoker; that is not somebody who is trying desperately to quit. look at this picture of mr. and mrs. lewis. she is just happy smoking a cigarette with mr. lewis. you heard how mrs. lewis would use smoking to deal with the stress in her life, the stress from having the abusive stepfather, and the situation with her mother and with the child put up for adoption, her back injury. remember, she was totally disabled, totally disabled because of that back injury. it had nothing to do with smoking, but that was a source of pain, chronic pain and stress in her life, and then the stress from mr. lewis, because he was an abusive alcoholic. he had gotten three duis. and mr. lewis admitted that he was abusive to her. he said that mrs. lewis said, stop drinking or we are through. he said mrs. lewis said, it is either your drinking or us. he impacted her smoking. but now he is coming to court asking for money because of that. mrs. lewis would say, let us go relax and have 3619 a cigarette. that is what she thought about her smoking. reynolds is just not responsible for the choices that she made. and they are just trying to repackage her now in a way that is different from the real mrs. lewis that we know of, who filled out those forms to philip morris to get free cigarettes, have free cigarettes sent to her family. let us go to the third fact, and that is that mrs. lewis did not make a serious or persistent effort to quit smoking. here is a key admission from mr. lewis about this. mr. lewis said, she would say it, but she would never do it. that is so important. actions speak louder than words. that is important because, in this case, under the instructions that you have heard from judge craig -- if we could pull that up. these are the instructions that judge craig read to you, and you-all are going to have this back in your jury room with you. mr. lewis has to prove to you, not just that mrs. lewis was addicted, but that her addiction was substantial enough -- see the word "substantially" -- substantial enough that it was a "but for" legal cause of her injuries. 3620 so what does that mean? did mrs. lewis have an addiction that was strong enough to justify an award of money damages under those standards? so what does evidence show about that? did the evidence show that mrs. lewis was somebody who desperately tried to quit smoking, who tried all these different types of ways to quit smoking for a long period of time, but she had no choice? she became an addict. she just had to keep on smoking until she got cancer. or was the evidence that mrs. lewis could control her smoking? she could control her smoking. she knew the risks of smoking, and she wanted to smoke because she enjoyed smoking for her own personal reasons, and she could have quit if she had really made an effort. now, you are not being asked in this case to decide the general issue about whether or not cigarettes can be addictive for some people, because they can be. and those other people are not in this case. it is been known for hundreds of years that cigarettes can be addictive. that is why we showed you this note. mr. fiorta put this up when he was cross-examining dr. proctor. this is an official state of florida department of 3621 health publication from 1906 that talks about the cigarette is the very worst form of tobacco addiction. the state of florida was not waiting on reynolds; the state of florida already knew it back in 1906. but your job as jurors is to answer the questions on the verdict form about whether mr. lewis deserves and is entitled to money damages. the fact is that there are over 60 million -- 60 million -- former smokers alive today in the united states. those are official federal government statistics. 3,000 people quit smoking every day. how does mrs. lewis compare to those people? were mrs. lewis's cigarettes more addictive than the cigarettes that these 60 million people smoked? no. you did not hear any evidence of that. she smoked just plain old cigarettes, regular old cigarettes like you buy at the store. there was nothing about her cigarettes that was any different than cigarettes these other people smoked. was her brain affected in some way different than those 60 million people who quit smoking? no, there is no evidence of that. 3622 did she see different advertising than the advertising that was seen by these 60 million people who quit smoking? there is no evidence of that. did she hear any kind of different statements from tobacco companies than the 60 million people who quit? no, there is no evidence of that. did she smoke more or longer than the people who quit? no. was she any different from her family members, her own family members, who quit smoking? no evidence of that. the difference is that mrs. lewis's husband, mr. lewis, has come to court and is asking you to award money damages. that is the difference. now, i want to stop for a minute and talk about that medical record that you have heard about that said "tobacco use disorder." here is what is important for you to know. there is not a single medical report, not a one, that uses the word addiction to describe mrs. lewis. and, remember, she was seeing a psychiatrist for all those years. she was seeing a psychiatrist, and we brought and have shown you some of those records from her psychiatrist. there is nothing in her psychiatrist's records that she even talked to her 3623 psychiatrist about help to try to quit smoking. it is just not in there. mrs. lewis did not fit the profile of someone who was an addict. she was not somebody who hated smoking. she smoked to relax. she enjoyed the taste. she smoked because she wanted to get all that marlboro gear over there. she filled out those forms asking for free cigarettes. you saw the photograph of her. she did not hate smoking. she is not someone who sincerely tried many different things to try to quit. remember, she never even tried to quit at all. she started smoking in the 1960s. she never even tried to quit when i cross-examined mr. lewis, never even tried to quit in the 1980s. she is not someone who was unable to quit because she was an addict who lost all of her free will and had no choice but just to keep on smoking. she is not someone who was tormented by her smoking. there is no evidence of that. again, that person might have a good case, but that is not mrs. lewis. and smoking does not take away personal responsibility of the smoker. even dr. burns, when i cross-examined him, even dr. burns agreed the smoker has control of her own 3624 behavior. addiction does not mean that you cannot quit. addiction does not relieve a smoker of responsibility for her own behavior. it is not our job in this case to second guess mrs. lewis and to second guess the choices she made about how she wanted to live her life. now, i want to be real clear about this. we are not blaming, we are not criticizing mrs. lewis. she absolutely had a right to smoke. she made the choice to smoke. she absolutely could do that here in america. but mr. lewis should not come to court and ask for money damages because of that. and, again, i just want to remind you-all again that both dr. burns and dr. doughney said -- they both agreed -- even when it comes to medical issues, the patient, the person, has the right to decide for themselves if they want medical treatment or not. they get to decide how they want to live their lives. and that is what mrs. lewis did here. it is the responsibility of the smoker to make the decision to try to quit. you have to want to try to quit for yourself. it never works if it is somebody else. remember, dr. burns said -- and i want to read this quote to you. he said, smokers have to 3625 decide to stop putting cigarettes in their mouth. a smoker has to make that decision. mr. lewis could not make that decision for her. her children could not make that decision for her. gail martin could not make that decision for her. her parents could not make that decision for her. her doctors could not make that decision for her. philip morris could not make that decision for her. she had to make -- reynolds could not make that decision for her. she had to make the decision for herself. she was in charge of her decision to quit smoking, nobody else was. it was her responsibility. now, you have heard a lot about nicotine during the trial, and i just want to summarize what the evidence was about that. remember, nicotine is put into tobacco by mother nature. it exists naturally in the tobacco plant growing out in the field. it is not something that is added. it is like caffeine is in coffee beans. nicotine leaves the body after two to three days, and it does not permanently change your brain. nicotine does not prevent smokers from understanding the health risks of smoking. it does not prevent smokers from quitting. and even dr. burns 3626 admitted any smoker can quit, whether they are addicted or not. the facts show that mrs. lewis could have quit if she had really made a sincere serious persistent effort to do it. now, remember, she did not even try to quit until the 1980s, and that was over 30 years of smoking, where she never quit more than one day. she never quit more than one day. did mrs. lewis seriously intend to quit smoking when she never threw away her cigarettes; she never threw away her ashtrays; she never went to a stop-smoking program; she never tried hypnosis, or anything like that; she never asked her psychiatrist that she was meeting with because of her problems with mr. lewis, she never asked him for help; she never tried to quit smoking with someone else; she never tried to quit smoking with mr. lewis. mr. lewis did not help her try to quit smoking. she tried the gum two times. remember two pieces of gum? that was in the 1990s. and then she tried the nicotine patch in the 1990s, but she kept on smoking when the directions tell you not to do that. and then she encouraged mr. lewis to smoke. remember? you are a better 3627 person when you are smoking. does that sound like a woman who is serious about quitting? does that sound like a woman who was -- who had been making serious, persistent efforts to quit smoking? mrs. lewis was in control of her smoking. heavily addicted smokers smoke a lot. some of them smoke more than two packs per day. we know here -- if we could pull up her medical record. this is dr. doughney's medical record. remember, we showed that to you when dr. doughney was here? it said she smoked one half pack per day, a history of smoking for 20 years. and then what did she say on that questionnaire she filled out for mr. ogle when she started her lawsuit? it says here -- it said, marlboro was one pack a week during that period of time, and more was one pack every other day. that is one half pack a day. the truth is that mrs. lewis would smoke varying amounts. sometimes she would smoke a half a pack a day, sometimes she would smoke a pack a day. sometimes it would be less than that. she smoked depending on what was going on in her life. remember, it was like when she was at work, she would smoke one amount. when she was not at work, 3628 she could smoke more. if she was smoking because of addiction, she would smoke the same amount all the time. she would crave nicotine. she would want to continue smoking more and more. she would not be going back and forth between smoking, you know, a little bit this week and more the next week and back to a little bit. that is just not the case with somebody who is heavily addicted. now, remember she did not smoke at all when she was coaching her son's little league, so she would go for three or four hours at a time and not even smoke. and she did not smoke at work. she was not allowed to. remember, in particular, she worked at kolmar laboratories, and she could not smoke there. she was able to work without smoking. mr. lewis is required under judge craig's instructions to you -- you will see this on the verdict form. mr. lewis has to prove that mrs. lewis was addicted to cigarettes and -- and -- and that the legal cause of her injuries was the addiction. now, that is a key phrase that you are going to hear about, "legal cause." and that is why you have been hearing all this evidence 3629 about her awareness and her choices to quit and all. all of that goes to this issue of legal cause. if we could pull up the verdict form. this is the first question. i put these three different colors in here so i could try to use that to explain it. this is the first question on the verdict form. the plaintiff has the burden of proof here. the plaintiff has to prove every single part of every question. all right? so, here, the plaintiff has to prove -- it is in red there -- that she was addicted to smoking cigarettes containing nicotine. mr. lewis also has to prove, if she was addicted -- it says "and." and was her addiction a legal cause. that is something you are going to have to decide. and then the other part of it is in green there, that mrs. lewis had lung cancer. your answer to those questions should be no. and let me just say this: you do not all have to decide for the same reason. okay? so some of you may think, well, they did not prove that she had actual lung cancer; others may say, well, they did not prove she was addicted; and others may say, 3630 well, i think she was addicted, but they have not proved that her addiction was a legal cause. you do not have to decide on the reason; you just all have to come to the same kind of bottom line number -- bottom line answer. and the answer to this question should be no. mrs. lewis's choices to smoke were the legal cause of her injury. no. let us go to fact no. 4. and this is the medical case that we started talking about. now, the main issue with respect to the medical case is burden of proof. mr. lewis has the burden of proof, and there are two parts to that: there is burden and then there is proof. okay? mr. lewis has the burden. all right? reynolds has no burden whatsoever. so if somebody says, hey, reynolds did not prove this; reynolds did not prove that. no, no. you need to speak up and say, reynolds does not have to prove anything. the other -- so that is the burden. the other part is proof. this is a court of law. okay? we are in a court of law and judge craig has given you instructions from the court. they have to bring you proof that is sufficient in a court of law. so what has the evidence been about the medical case? first of all, mrs. lewis never had 3631 a lung biopsy. three different doctors -- if we could pull that up. three different doctors told her that she should have a biopsy of her lung to find out whether she had lung cancer. and she refused all three times. june 20th, that was dr. wahba. september 17th, dr. edmonson. september 30, dr. ryals. all three times, no, no, no; the patient refused. the only time that her doctors went in and took cells from her lung was during that bronchoscopy. remember, they talked about the scope procedure going down, and they took some tissue, and they were able to test it. and that came back negative. here is that medical record. it is really important. she refused a lung biopsy repeatedly and the only time they had any cells from her lung came back negative for cancer. but they have to prove to you -- they have to prove to you that she had cancer that started in her lung. you heard dr. burns and dr. doughney admit that cancer that starts somewhere else in the body and spreads to your lung is not lung cancer. to be lung cancer, it -- actually, those first cells that become cancerous just have to be 3632 in your lung. so if you have cancer that starts somewhere else and spreads to your lung, it is still -- it is prostate cancer or liver cancer, wherever it was that started. they have to prove that she had cancer cells that started in her lung. the only cancer -- the only cancer cells that they ever got from mrs. lewis came from her lymph node, and that is not her lung. and then mr. lewis, knowing that there was a lawsuit pending, said no to an autopsy. remember, he had mrs. lewis cremated. now, we are not criticizing that; that is their right. but there is no tissue here; there is no proof. they cannot bring it to court because mr. lewis refused to have those biopsies. mr. lewis refused to have that autopsy. that means there is nothing for reynolds to test. there is no tissue for reynolds to go back and test to see for ourselves and what is our position on that. there was never any pathology from her lung that was positive for cancer. and who did they bring you? they brought you dr. burns. dr. burns admitted he was not a pathologist. dr. burns admitted he had never 3633 looked at any pathology from mrs. lewis. they brought you dr. doughney. dr. doughney admitted she is not a pathologist. she never looked at any pathology from mrs. lewis. and, in fact, she had that record. remember, we put this up that said mrs. lewis had metastatic breast carcinoma, breast cancer. mrs. lewis's pathologist did not rule out that her cancer could have started somewhere else and spread to her lung. that is not lung cancer. and remember this record. mrs. lewis had a mass on her liver, and her doctor said she needed to have an ultrasound and have it checked out. she never had the ultrasound, and she never had a biopsy of her liver. that is not proof. and, again, they do not have anything to bring to court. and reynolds has not been able -- there is nothing for reynolds to look at or to test or to run tests on. remember, i asked dr. burns and asked dr. doughney also. they never ran any tests on mrs. lewis to see what caused her cancer. so let us talk about that. and that is what caused her cancer. there is no medical record that says what caused her cancer, not a one. her death 3634 certificate also does not say what caused her cancer. now, we know -- some people, obviously, get lung cancer from smoking. but smoking is not the only cause of lung cancer. dr. burns said 10 to twenty percent of lung cancers are not caused by smoking. now, of course, dr. burns always comes to court, and he always says, whoever it is he is testifying about, had lung cancer caused by smoking. nobody conducted tests here, no dna tests, nothing like that. both dr. burns and dr. doughney admitted that mrs. lewis was young for a lung cancer patient. remember, they said the average age of a lung cancer patient was age 70. when she first presented with symptoms, she was age 49. and then we know from her medical records she filled out in her own handwriting that she had occupational exposures to chemicals. now, we do not know where she was exposed to those chemicals. maybe it was the lawn service where she worked. maybe it was kolmar laboratories. we just do not know. this is all we know. this is what she filled out. again, that is not reynolds coming up and saying this; this is mrs. lewis herself. 3635 but we do not have more information about it because we do not have that lung tissue, you know. we do not have any lung tissue to go out and test to determine what caused it, you know, run tests on it. we do not have that because mrs. lewis decided not to have the biopsy, and mr. lewis decided not to have the autopsy. so you are going to have to decide under those circumstances whether mr. lewis has met his burden of proof. we say he has not. he has not proven -- he has not proven that her lung cancer started in her lung. he does not have any tissue to support that, because of their own decisions. and he has not proven what caused that cancer. again, there is no tissue to support it. so let us move on to the -- that was the first question on the verdict form that asked about lung cancer. and the next question on the verdict form asked about the types of lung cancer. and that question is on there because there are different types of lung cancer. and for legal reasons, you need to fill out this question to determine what type that she had. okay. i want to go through these one by one. and mr. pantazis and i agree -- there are four of 3636 them listed. mr. pantazis and i agree about three of them. the first one i want to talk about is small cell carcinoma. okay. she was diagnosed by her pathologist here as nonsmall cell. if we could pull that up. nonsmall cell. and her death certificate, if we could pull that. it also says nonsmall cell. okay. so the first one should be easy. she did not have small cell. she had nonsmall cell. so mark that out. mr. pantazis agreed with that. he spoke to you in his closing remarks. so the next one i want to talk about is squamous cell. there is absolutely zero evidence in this case that she had squamous cell carcinoma. there is nothing in the medical records. nobody even talked about it. so we can mark that out. and mr. pantazis agrees to that, i believe. and then the next one i want to talk about is large cell carcinoma. there is one record -- if we could pull that up. there is one medical record that says, nonsmall cell, possibly large cell carcinoma. it uses the word "possibly." that is not enough. possibly is not enough to be proof. and mr. pantazis even said, when he was speaking to 3637 you with his closing, that she did not have this kind, so we can mark out large cell. so, really, the evidence -- the question is going to be, what was the evidence about if she had an adenocarcinoma? and here i'm going to ask you to follow the testimony of dr. burns, who said mrs. lewis had nonsmall cell lung cancer that was thought to be most likely compatible with adenocarcinoma. she was not diagnosed specifically with adenocarcinoma, so this would be a nonsmall cell. so even dr. burns said, look, they could not say it was an adenocarcinoma. all they could say is that it was a nonsmall cell. and they stopped right there, perhaps because they did not have enough tissue, because she kept refusing to have a biopsy and, of course, no tissue from the autopsy. so the answer to this question on the verdict form should be no, because her lung cancer, if you find that she had lung cancer -- this is question 2. question 1 they have to prove it. but if you go on down to question 2 and answer it, it should be no. so now let me talk about fact no. 5. so i'm going over -- we have got six facts i want to talk 3638 to you about, and we are up to no. 5 and, that is, that mr. lewis cannot establish legal cause or reasonable reliance. now, those are two things that are required by the instructions that judge craig has read to you. and they are -- you are going to be asked specifically on the verdict form about those two terms. it is not enough for mr. lewis to come in and show only that mrs. lewis got an illness from smoking, or that she was addicted, and that is because this is not no fault. okay? this is not no fault. the law requires more. it requires the legal cause, and it requires reasonable reliance. if we could pull up the verdict form there. okay. this is questions 3 and 4. reasonably rely and then legal cause. and then question 4, reasonably rely and legal cause. so what does that mean? well, during the trial mr. lewis's lawyers spent most of their time talking about tobacco companies in general or talking about philip morris, but do not let that throw you off the facts about mrs. lewis. okay? these questions are about mrs. lewis. remember, dr. proctor said there were 80 3639 million pages of documents from the tobacco company. 80 million pages. and they picked out some, and they have come to court and they have shown you little snippets here and there. they were taken out of context, truthfully, just to rile you up so you will get mad and award money damages against reynolds. that is what is going on. but if you look at that, remember, mr. pantazis had the list of all the plaintiff's exhibits. only 20 -- 2-0 -- only 20 documents on that list came from reynolds. dr. proctor is the one who talked about this. remember, he is the $3,000,000 man. this dr. burns is a three and a half million man. dr. proctor has only made $3,000,000. this is another professional witness, going around talking to one set of jurors to another in different courtrooms. he has testified in over 70 trials in the last few years. and this was his 18th trial just this year. he said he knew zero about mrs. lewis. let us put pull that up. i do not know anything about her biography at all. okay? he did not come in here and say a thing about mrs. lewis. in the end, none of that that dr. proctor talked about has any connection 3640 to mrs. lewis. but they are trying to have it both ways. okay? so on the one hand they are saying, i did not read the warnings on the pack. i do not read anything. can we pull that back up? it is the same one i showed you before. i'm sorry. that one, yes. this is what mrs. lewis said. i did not read the warnings; i do not read anything. okay? so when it is something that, you know, we are saying she ought to have known, the warnings. they are like, no, i did not read it. but now with all this -- with all these old documents they are showing, they are trying to get you to believe that mrs. lewis read all of those, that she knew about those. and it makes no sense. either she read it -- and if she read it, she knew the warnings, and she knew about the surgeon general's report. she knew all of that information about the health risks and was bad for her. either she read it or she did not. and if she did not, she did not see all that stuff that they showed you. i want to go through some of the documents that they have shown you at trial and then this morning. and i'm going to do this real quickly, 3641 but i want to go through some of them just to demonstrate to you why you cannot just take the document on its face as something that is relevant to this case. i'm going to start with this one that says "open debate." remember, you saw that? open debate. okay. that was in 1984. there was no debate whether it came to mrs. lewis, because she knew from all those sources. remember, coffin nails, cancer sticks. there was no debate going on in her household, and there is no evidence that that open debate ran in higden [phonetic], florida, which is where she was living in 1984. you have not heard a single fact, indicating that mrs. lewis saw that. then this ftc report -- okay. this is one that came in through dr. burns. this is something that mr. pantazis has used several times. and so that was in 1981. so what was going on in 1981? this is before dr. burns started becoming a professional witness for the plaintiff. and that is when dr. burns said 95 percent of the people are thoroughly aware about the health changes, and ninety percent of them realize it affected their health. 3642 again, this is a canned case that is not connected to mr. lewis. let us look at this document from dr. rodgman. mr. pantazis talked about it this morning. this is the document that they keep going to saying, reynolds knew back in 1959 that there were cancer-causing agents in cigarette smoke. okay? they keep going back to that. we talked about it this morning, and that it was a secret, that we did not tell anybody. that same month -- that same month, november of 1959, there was a reader's digest article that says the exact same thing. that was not a secret. we were not keeping this a secret. it was well known in the public. and then that frank statement we keep hearing about, mrs. lewis was age 7. can anybody really believe that when she was seven years old she was reading the newspaper, reading about the frank statement? it came out one time, january of 1954. no link, no legal cause. and then remember -- and mr. pantazis talked a little bit this morning about, well, we do not know what documents, because some of the documents have been destroyed. and dr. proctor talked about 3643 something he called the mouse house. do you-all remember that? he said, oh, they fired all the scientists and all. every one of those notebooks, every one of those scientists' notebooks are on our website. we brought them. we showed it to you that day. they are right there. okay? right there. and when this trial is over -- not now, not now. but when this trial is over and you have been completely discharged, finish totally by the judge, you yourself can go look on our website and see all of this. then he showed the deposition by a mr. heimann. remember that? that was the very first witness. mr. heimann worked for a company that never made cigarettes smoked by mrs. lewis. again, no legal cause. and then we heard, again, this morning about these documents that mentioned youth. i want to talk about those for a minute. first of all, this document that he showed you was from 1927. that was 19 years before mrs. lewis was ever born, 19 years before she was born. again, no legal cause. they showed you documents about youth at a time when mrs. lewis was well into adulthood. 3644 let us show some of those. 1973, mrs. lewis was an adult. the rest of that document says, we should not in any way influence nonsmokers to start. 1980, the purpose of this analysis, etc., is not designed to be used as a tool for developing marketing strategy. she was an adult. none of those documents have anything to do with her. and then the philip morris documents, if we could show that. one after another, after another. if you could just run through these. these are all from philip morris, philip morris, philip morris, philip morris. those are not from reynolds. i also want to talk about this document from reynolds. it was from reynolds, from dr. teague in 1972. and this is the document that mr. pantazis has used over and over that said nicotine was the reason for smoking. remember that sine qua non? okay. 1972, 22 years earlier the same thing was in reader's digest: nicotine is the essential ingredient of tobacco; it is what makes tobacco tobacco and not just another weed. also, the surgeon general said -- if you 3645 could pull that up. the surgeon general in 1988 said as early as the 1920s and 1930s some investigators were concluding that nicotine was responsible for the compulsive use of the products. this was not a secret. this was not something that was just in a reynolds document and no one knew about it. the state of florida knew it as early as 1906. we have shown you reader's digest. we are now showing you the surgeon general that says as early as the '20s and '30s. then another document from dr. teague that they keep showing you is this 1953. they knew in 1953; they kept it a secret. no. that document, if you look at it and you go back to the jury room, there is a bibliography attached. the bibliography is four pages. it has 78 public sources cited. the information in that reynolds document about smoking, the relationship between smoking and cancer, comes from these public sources that are cited right there, that anybody could look at, not just reynolds. and then they showed you a press release that came from virginia beach, 1961. there is no evidence that mrs. lewis ever has even been in 3646 virginia beach, much less lived there, much less in 1961. again, i'm showing you all of this because this means no legal cause. and then the winston cup. remember, we heard that from dr. proctor. we were given free cigarettes. dr. proctor talked about that. what was the evidence as to mrs. lewis? remember, she was carded. remember? mr. lewis admitted they went to the races, and she was carded. they wanted to make sure she was an adult. she had to give them a pack of cigarettes to get a free carton, because you had to be -- you already had to be a smoker to participate. so you had to give them a -- give them a pack of cigarettes. you would get a carton back. she got a carton of winston cigarettes, and she did not smoke it. she gave it to mr. lewis. she was not influenced by getting those free cigarettes from nascar. she did not -- it did not cause her to smoke. she did not smoke them. she gave them to mr. lewis. again, no legal cause. and then i want to talk about advertising. again, we have heard all about advertising, everybody was exposed to advertising. they showed you some cigarette ads and all of that. and they 3647 were trying to make a big deal out of the fact that reynolds legally advertises, legally advertises its products. let me show you the ads that they have in evidence. remember, all these that you were shown? santa claus and all of that, flintstones and all? what ads you did see for the cigarettes that she smoked, more and salem? not a one. not a one. okay. and when you-all go back into the jury room and you are looking at all of this about how we influenced her and this, that and the other, look through all that. there is not a single ad for more cigarettes that they have put in evidence. there is not a single ad for salem that they have put in evidence. there is no evidence, none, about that. and mrs. lewis did not start smoking because she saw an ad and ran out and said, hey, i want to smoke that cigarette. remember, we have already talked about how she started smoking because of her family situation. and she smoked marlboro because that is what mr. lewis smoked. again, those are made by philip morris, not us. i want to go back to that photo. remember 3648 this photo that we have looked at before? remember, i pulled it out at trial and showed that to mr. lewis? this is the cigarette that she smoked. this is a more cigarette. and remember her brother-in-law called it a cigarillo. more cigarettes, you can see there in the photographs are -- they are like cigarillos. they are long, they are round, they are not -- they are skinny. okay. they do not look like regular cigarettes. no advertising about that that they brought to show. none. mr. lewis is trying to rewrite history for this trial. think about this too. think about this. they keep saying, well, this -- how much money was spent on advertising? everybody saw the ads. we spent all this money on advertising. just think about this. think about all the people who have seen cigarette ads and never started smoking because of them, including mrs. lewis's best friend gail. mrs. lewis's best friend grew up with her, saw that same -- exposed to those same ads, never started smoking. just think about that. think about all the millions and millions of people who have seen those same 3649 cigarette ads and did not start smoking. it is another attempt to repackage mrs. lewis so that they can try to get money damages. so when you think about those documents or you think about those videos that they played for you, ask yourself, where is the link to mrs. lewis? where is the legal cause evidence? and if there is anything that she actually read, she actually saw or she actually heard, that would be fair game. but there is none of that in this case. none, zero, none. she claims she did not read anything. there is -- if we could pull up the next demonstrative there. actually there is zero -- mr. lewis agreed -- there is zero evidence. she never heard, she never saw, she never relied on any kind of statements from the tobacco company. i asked him that and he agreed. she never said anything a tobacco company did caused her to start smoking. she said they -- both mr. lewis and she said they never heard of tirc, never heard of ctr, never heard of ti. mr. lewis testified that mrs. lewis never said she relied on anything from reynolds. and mrs. lewis 3650 never said she thought reynolds had withheld information from her. their whole case is based on this unbelievable idea that mrs. lewis was only influenced by these old, ancient documents that they have cherry picked from 80 million pages, and everything else in her life, her mother telling her not to smoke, her grandmother telling her not to smoke, her brother calling them cancer sticks, her calling them coffin nails, the warnings on every package of cigarettes that she bought, that all of that just did not affect her. she was only waiting to hear from the tobacco company; she was only relying on those tobacco company documents from all those years ago. that is their case. well, what were people listening to back then? this is why i asked dr. burns about this roper poll. remember, i asked dr. burns, i put this on the screen and i said, hey, do you remember roper surveys, are like gallup poll? he said yes, it is the same thing. this is from 1970. sixty-two percent of people -- it says most reliable sources of information on smoking and health. sixty-two 3651 percent of people, american cancer society. okay. forty-seven percent, ama. it goes on down. three percent to the tobacco companies. okay? so that means -- if we could pull up the next one. that means 62 percent of the people were listening to dr. graham, dr. hammond, the american cancer society, and only three percent of the people were listening to all this that they keep showing you. and mrs. lewis knew from her own family, she had her own sources, she had her own sources about health risks of smoking. she was not waiting on reynolds to tell her something else. the bottom line is there is zero evidence mrs. lewis ever saw or heard any statements from reynolds. there is zero evidence that anything from reynolds made any impact on her smoking decisions. they cannot prove legal cause. that brings us to fact no. 6, which is the last one. and that is that cigarettes are legal. you know, there is nothing that you-all have heard in this case that is not already known to the government, to the federal government, to the surgeon general, to the state of florida. all, 3652 they have all those documents. they know all about it. and the statistics that the federal government keeps about the number of people who are affected by smoking, the number of people who pass away from smoking, that is an official federal government statistic. they keep up with it just like they would keep up with the number of people killed in motorcycle accidents or whatever. that is all known to our government. that is not something that you-all are hearing about for the first time here in this courtroom. but our society, knowing all that, knowing all that, our society has decided that cigarettes should be a legal product. and they were legal to advertise and sell the entire time that mrs. lewis smoked. again, all those documents are publicly available on the internet now. mr. lewis has to prove his case under the instructions that judge craig gave you. reynolds cannot be held liable merely for manufacturing, selling or advertising cigarettes, because that is legal. now that was the sixth fact that we went 3653 over. those six facts give you the information that you need to know to fill out the verdict form. i'm going to stop for a minute and talk about those findings from that other jury for a minute that mr. pantazis read to you this morning. okay. this was that jury down in miami that came up with -- that came -- that made those findings. okay? first of all, judge craig has already instructed you that those findings do not mean that we are liable to anybody. they do not mean we are liable to mr. lewis or anyone else. mr. fiorta: your honor, i object. that is an incorrect statement. ms. parker: it is in the charge. mr. pantazis: your honor, that is an incorrect statement. the court: overruled for now. ms. parker: you will have the jury instructions that judge craig -- judge craig told you the ones that he gave you, you are going to have that back there. so look it up for yourself when you go back to the jury room and see what it says back there. okay? 3654 now, those findings do not even come into play unless you first find that mrs. lewis qualifies, that mr. lewis's claim here qualifies. you are the only jury to decide anything about mr. lewis's claim for damages. you are the only jury hearing anything about mrs. lewis, about her smoking, about her medical issue, anything like that. okay? so let us go back to the verdict form then and pull up -- again, this is that first question. and i want to just emphasize again, there are three different requirements here that plaintiff has to prove. and some of you may say they did not prove that she was addicted, some of you may say they did not prove her addiction was the legal cause, and some of you may say they did not prove that she had lung cancer that actually started in her lungs. you do not need to agree on the reasons, but the answer to this question should be no. remember, mr. lewis was the main source of stress in his wife's life. she went to a doctor because of that. yet now he is coming here asking for money damages because of that. let us go to the second question. and we 3655 talked about this. it is not an adenocarcinoma, because dr. burns even said they had not diagnosed it as such. it was not a large cell. it was not a small cell. it was not a squamous cell. so the answer to this is no. they did not prove that. they have the burden to prove all of this, again. questions 1 and 2 and every question, they have to prove every bit of it. the questions, we talked about legal cause, and i want to just stop for a minute and tell you about that. legal cause is a legal term that judge craig has told you about. it is not just plain cause the way, you know, we might use it if we were talking outside in the hall. legal cause is something that is defined in these jury instructions that judge craig has told you about. what it means is that there has to be a link, there has to be a tie, there has to be a connection between whatever it is and mrs. lewis. okay? it cannot be guesswork. it cannot be speculation. they have to prove legal cause. so that brings us to the next two questions. i'm going to start with question 3. and this is where we say legal cause is on there again, but this is where the phrase "reasonably rely" comes 3656 in. okay. for this question, mr. lewis has to prove that mrs. lewis reasonably relied. okay? here, there is no reliance by mrs. lewis. okay? there is nothing tying any of this to mrs. lewis. there is no evidence that mrs. lewis saw any of it, she read any of it, had any impact on her whatsoever. but they have to prove more than she just relied. they have to prove that she reasonably relied. they have to prove that mrs. lewis lacked information that would have made a reasonable person take action. and we know that if there was some reliance here -- and there is not -- it would not have been reasonable because mrs. lewis already knew about the health risks of smoking. every package of cigarettes that she bought had a warning on it. she called them cancer sticks and coffin nails. so the answers to 3 and 4 should be "no." and that -- you should stop right there. okay? that is reynolds -- that is what i'm requesting you to do, just stop. just stop as soon as you answer question 1, stop right there. and if you get to question 2, answer that "no," stop right there. you should not even get to these 3657 3 and 4. but if you do, you should answer those "no." but part of my job is i've got to talk to you about all the other parts of the verdict form as well, even though i want to make this real clear, our position is you should not even get there. so the next question is question 5. and that has to do with -- if you can pull that up -- the percentage of responsibility. mrs. lewis smoked with her eyes wide open about the health risks. she was a willing smoker. mr. lewis has admitted that mrs. lewis bears some fault in her smoking. the only person who could avoid, take steps and avoid her injury was mrs. lewis. she is the one that had to make a decision to quit smoking. she is the one that had to make serious persistent efforts to quit. and she did not do it. mrs. lewis chose to smoke, and she chose not to make a serious effort to quit. and because of that, mrs. lewis should be one hundred percent responsible for the decisions she made about how she wanted to live her life. we totally respect her choice to smoke and her choice not to make a serious effort to quit. but with the right to choose to smoke comes the 3658 responsibility that comes with it. and she had responsibility for her life. she had responsibility for those decisions that she made, and that means putting one hundred percent for mrs. lewis. that was question 5. let us go to question 6. and, again, you should not even get there. i do not want to talk about this at all, but i have to, because it is part of my job. and that is the issue of damages. so question no. 6 is where it asks dollars. okay? and you heard mr. pantazis ask you to consider a figure in the range of $9.2 million. well, mr. lewis has requested damages only for himself. let me make sure that is real clear. any and all damages he is asking for go just to him. it does not go to his children. the only damages that are in this case are mr. lewis's own damages, what he is claiming for himself for the loss of mrs. lewis's companionship. that $9.2 million is just pulled out of thin air. and that is not fair, based on the facts of this case. this is a lady who called cigarettes cancer sticks and coffin nails, and every package of cigarettes she bought had a warning label on them. this is not a case where the plaintiff deserves 3659 money damages. it is just not. there may be cases out there where the person did not know. there may be cases out there where the smoker was just very heavily addicted. there may be cases out there where they had pathology from the lung that we are able to bring to court and look at and test and see really what caused the cancer and where it started. there may be cases where the person smoked before warnings went on the packages. there may be smokers like that, but that is not -- those people might have a good case, but that is not the situation here. that is not what you are faced with in this case. mr. lewis does not deserve money damages. he contributed to the very thing he is now here suing about. remember, his wife reported to her doctor about the abuse. he is living with her best friend, and he is been happily with a new companion for 17 or 18 years. and because of all of that, we respectfully ask you to return a verdict of no damages. now, besides that range of $9.2 million they are asking for, they are actually asking for more money than that. and that gets to the next question on the verdict form. what they are 3660 asking is on top of, on top of the compensatory damages of $9.2 million, they want something called punitive damages. all right? now, you will hear, you will see when you get back to the verdict form from the instructions, so the rest of the case the questions are the greater weight of the evidence. that is the standard: greater weight of the evidence. you will see that. but with punitive damages, it is the highest standard in civil cases. it is something called clear and convincing. they have to prove to you that they are entitled to punitive damages under a clear and convincing standard. it has to be clear and you have to be convinced. and, again, judge craig has instructions for you on that. your answer. you should not event get to this. okay? you should not get to the dollar amount. you should not get to the $9.2 million. and just, respectfully, we are asking, you should not even get to this question no. 7. but i've got to address it with you. the answer to that question should be no as well. there is no tie, there is no connection between any of the stuff they talk about and mrs. lewis. mrs. lewis was not someone who was in 3661 the dark and did not know that smoking was bad for her because of something a tobacco company did. she did not. she knew full well the whole time she smoked. the people in those documents have long since gone. claude teague is gone, jim johnston is gone, tirc is gone, ctr is gone, ti is gone. they have been gone since 1998. and dr. proctor testified, when he was asked questions, dr. proctor testified that reynolds is now subject to fda regulation. now, i said this in my opening statement when i talked to you a couple weeks ago, and i want to say it again, and that is i'm not coming here, i have not come here to say everything reynolds has ever done in its 140 years has been perfect. that would be impossible. that is not the case. i'm not even saying that. but what you have to decide is whether there is any legal cause, whether there is any connection between all of this stuff that they keep showing you that had nothing to do with mrs. lewis. they have got to prove a connection to her. you are the only people, as the jury here, 3662 who gets to decide whether mr. lewis deserves money damages, when mrs. lewis fully and completely knew about the risks of smoking. and i would like to just respectfully say, it would be wrong to award damages, to award money to mr. lewis when he came in here and deliberately tried to change his testimony from what he had said under oath before trial. he drove his wife to go seek counseling. and remember, she was thinking about getting a divorce. mr. pantazis: your honor, that is just not in the evidence, and that -- that record has nothing to do with that. i've sat quiet when she said it the first time. she said it twice now, and it is not correct. the court: come on up. (at the bench.) ms. parker: the record says alcohol abuse and divorce from her husband. mr. pantazis: she said -- i'll tell when you are ready, your honor. she said that this drove ms. lewis to go seek treatment for that. she was seeking treatment because of a worker comp injury. those records were part of a worker comp file. that was a total 3663 mischaracterization of what the evidence is. ms. parker: that is not correct, your honor. the records that i have put up are the ones from her psychiatrist's counsel where she want in and said alcohol -- all i mean, multiple records, it is not just the one about abusive. the court: what was the statement that indicated why she went to the counselor in the first place? mr. pantazis: it is because of worker comp. the court: but that is not even in evidence. mr. pantazis: yeah, it is. those records show where they went back to. you remember, you were the one who asked who the people they were when we talked about -- ms. parker: i did not say where they came from. mr. pantazis: yeah. but it shows that this is a total mischaracterization of evidence. the court: just -- just the part of -- ms. parker: i did not say where it came from. mr. pantazis: that he drove her to counseling. that is not accurate. ms. parker: she went to the doctor and told the doctor about him. 3664 the court: that is fine. i'm going to go ahead and i'm going to strike what you said, and you can rephrase it. and make sure that you do not indicate that he is the one that drove her into counseling. ms. parker: i'm going to say she had counseling because of the problems she had with him. mr. pantazis: that is not true. the court: that is not in the evidence either, is it? mr. pantazis: no. that is not true. ms. parker: yes, it is. we have a record. the court: you have a record of what she said to the counselor. ms. parker: i will say it that way. i will say it that way. the court: all right. (in open court.) ms. parker: your honor, may i rephrase that? the court: all right. ms. parker, just rephrase it. ms. parker: mr. lewis went -- i'm sorry. mrs. lewis went to her counselor and told her counselor about the problems that she was having 3665 with her husband. she told her counselor about his alcohol abuse. she told her counselor that she was thinking about getting a divorce. and that was a year, that was within a year of when she was diagnosed with cancer. that record is in evidence, and you can see it for yourself when you go back to the jury room. mrs. lewis knew before she ever started smoking that cigarettes were dangerous. and again, i know this is about the -- seems like this is about the tenth time i've said this this afternoon, but i just want to say it again. every pack of cigarettes that she purchased had warnings on it. i just cannot tell you how important that is. remember, mr. lewis said about her efforts to quit? she would say it but she would never do it. and yet now they are coming to court and saying she did not know anything until 1996 when she was diagnosed with lung cancer. that is not someone who deserves money damages. in this case -- i just want to summarize now. in this case, the facts are our witnesses. the stubborn, hard facts -- because you cannot get away from them -- are our witnesses in this case. it does not matter how many witnesses people brought, 3666 it does not matter who called the witness, it does not matter whether the evidence came in on direct versus cross-examination. you-all, we tried to be efficient with your time, and you-all have all of the information that you need to know about mr. lewis to answer -- and mrs. lewis's smoking to answer the questions on the verdict form. now, as you go back, i know mr. pantazis will talk to you again, so after you listen to the evidence, as you go back to the jury room here and start deliberating, your verdict has to be unanimous. but i want to ask that each one of you respect your own individual judgments, your own individual convictions. and please, please, do not just give in and award money here. this is just not a case that deserves it. it just is not. i'm going to leave you with one further thought, and then i'm going to sit down. the plaintiff has the burden of proof here. and it is not enough just to put on the slide show of documents that go from jury to jury, courtroom to courtroom, with no connection to mrs. lewis. anybody can be made to look bad. you can do that. what is the issue here is, is there any connection 3667 to mrs. lewis? and there is just not one. so i want to ask you, again, just respectfully on behalf of reynolds to consider the evidence, look at these facts and return a verdict in favor of reynolds. so thank you so much for your time this afternoon listening to me, and i appreciate the attention that you have given to me this afternoon. we appreciate the attention that you have given to mr. fiorta and mr. fuhrman during the trial as well. so thank you very much. your honor, that concludes my remarks at this time.