mr. pantazis: we are, your honor. may it please the court. good morning, ladies and gentlemen. almost at the end of the journey. i appreciate and i know all the lawyers and the parties appreciate your attention and your diligence in helping the parties resolve this matter. we began -- i guess this is the third week of 3520 our participation with you. and we know it is been tough on you and your families as well. on behalf of all of the parties, thank you for your participation. i have -- i guess the first board -- i'm going to tell you, i'm a little bit old school on technology, so you may see me use boards and screens. so if i'm a little clumsy, i apologize. but my job today is not to convince you, but to kind of go through some of the evidence that we have and show you what we think it says and how it may help you in your job. now, part of that, there is a lot of documents. we have, i think -- some have been removed -- but somewhere between 60 and 64 documents that we put in, plus r.j. reynolds tobacco company has put in documents. you have heard witnesses. so i'm going to talking talk a little bit this morning about the various claims and documents. and i have put the -- the exhibit number -- this is plaintiff's 29. "p" stands for the plaintiff. i have even put the page, that if you find something throughout my presentation that you want to note where it is at so when you go back 3521 into the jury room to look at it, i encourage you to do that. i'm not trying to pick out one piece here or there. i'm trying to show what the whole picture is and give you references so you may go back and look. now, there is not going to be a test on this. i am going to go through other documents. and when i pull information out, i will reference those exhibit numbers and pages, again, for you to make note of and go back and review for yourself. ladies and gentlemen, like i said, this has been a little bit of a long haul, and i appreciate your patience. being the son of an immigrant, one of the things that we learn very quickly is that -- ms. parker: your honor, i have to object. we talked about the personal references. mr. pantazis: i'm not going through any personal references beyond that, your honor. the court: all right. no personal references. mr. pantazis: we learned very quickly that the greatest part about this country is that people make the decisions, not some bureaucrat, 3522 not some king, but the people. and when the founders of our judicial system set up this system that we call the civil process where two parties have a dispute, they created a system where the people are the ones who make the finding of the fact, which is very unusual. you will not find it anywhere else in the world. and that people is you, the jury. you are charged with the ultimate decision making as to what the facts say in this case. and they did something else. they used a term called "jury verdict." well, "verdict" is latin, which in part means to seek or to find the truth. and that is really what your job is. to look at all these documents, the witnesses, to apply them to the law that the judge will give you and has given you and will give you in a handout back to the jury, and to seek and find what is true, comparing it to the law. there is a third tool, though, that the judge indicated this morning that is very important. and i want to point it out to you. and that is your life experiences or common sense. because sometimes you are going to have to see, how does this relate? does it make sense to me? and 3523 you are free to do so. you are free to use your common sense in evaluating and applying these facts to the law as the judge instructed you. now, we are going to -- you are going to have seven questions. i believe it is seven. if i misstate that, i will see it in a minute. you will have seven questions to answer in the jury room. i want to talk and go through those and show you what the evidence shows to support our position as to how those questions might be answered. but ultimately it is your decision in every one of these questions, not mine, not the lawyers for reynolds. and in these questions, as the court indicated, we talk about allocation. one part talks about accepting fault and an allocation of risk, of fault, and responsibility. that only applies -- excuse me. that does not apply to intentional conduct that is being alleged against r.j. reynolds. josh, will you put up no. 20? i'm sorry. i do not have this on a board, so i'm going to have to ask -- but this is the first question that you will be getting. "was rosemary lewis addicted to smoking 3524 cigarettes containing nicotine that were manufactured and sold by r.j. reynolds tobacco company, and, if so, was her addiction a legal cause of lung cancer in mrs. lewis?" that is the first question you must answer. and that is -- you heard the judge talk about -- there was a question that needed to be answered before mrs. lewis would be deemed a class member in what you heard was the engle class that the florida supreme court created those findings with. well, before those findings apply to mrs. lewis, you have to answer that question affirmatively. so what evidence do we have that helps in answering that question? number 3. well, we know from the testimony that mrs. lewis smoked salems in her early years, '61 to '74, and mores from '74 to '98. both are r.j. reynolds brand cigarettes. so one of the questions -- one of the parts of the questions was cigarettes manufactured or sold by r.j. reynolds tobacco company. there is absolutely no evidence to dispute that. number 4. oh, see, it is not -- the high tech gets 3525 worse. which one is it? is it this one? mr. gale: this one. mr. pantazis: i will put this one up over here, if i could. so what evidence is in the record that mrs. lewis was addicted to nicotine? well, she smoked every day for 35 years. she smoked between a half a pack to two packs a day. there is some testimony that it got up to one, one and a half. but if you average that out at one pack a day, that is 255,500 cigarettes during her lifetime. she chain smoked -- that was part of the testimony -- one right after another. she smoked first thing in the morning. and you heard dr. burns testify that the reason that is important is because the nicotine leaves the body at night. so the addict in the morning craves the nicotine so that even before she cooked breakfast, took care of the kids, she began smoking. she smoked the last thing before going to bed. she smoked at work. now, they made a big deal she worked at some places that she could not smoke. that did not mean she did not smoke at every break. why is that 3526 significant? he said, that shows how addicted she was. she was not getting enough of the nicotine from the patch, so her body craved more, so she had to accelerate it with a cigarette. and she was also diagnosed -- and there has been some dispute about this, but there is a record -- josh, could we have that? she was diagnosed with a tobacco use disorder by dr. wahba wahba. now, somebody tried to say that was just simply a filling in a form for insurance purposes. all i know is dr. wahba wahba whose name on the medical record shows that he is the one who prescribed and identified her as tobacco use disorder. these are the basic facts in which rosemary lewis smoked and how addicted she was. most of these -- you know, there is one other factor that is not up here. she started smoking between the ages of 16 and 18. this was one -- some testimony at 16; there is others at 17; there is some 18. there is no question that she started smoking sometime between that period of time. and as a young person -- you heard 3527 testimony -- when a young person, particularly an adolescent, begins smoking, the addiction grip is much stronger. i will tell you what i'm going to do. i will put it in front of here. this is high-tech stuff. so -- one of the things that is important in analyzing addiction is when she tried to quit, what was her success rate? she tried cold turkey -- you heard that -- right after her first child was born. a few cigarettes, a few days, could not do it. she tried weaning off of cigarettes one at that time. could not do it. she had nicotine gum. could not do it. she -- they prescribed, as we indicated, habitrol in '92, and then nicoderm in '96. mrs. lewis was an addicted smoker sometime after she became a teenager and a regular smoker, and she stayed addicted until the day she died. she wanted -- she smoked in the hospital waiting rooms. she wanted a cigarette every day of her life, and it was a tremendous, tremendous pull on her. seven, please. i apologize for the bad screen. 3528 so you heard from dr. burns. now, i do not want to go through a lot of his credentials, but needless to say, dr. burns has worked on more surgeon generals than anybody i know of. since 1974, he is worked either as a writer, an editor, or a peer-reviewer for the surgeon general's reports. and the last one was 2014. he is treated patients specifically with nicotine addiction. he has taught classes on nicotine addiction and how you diagnose it. he has -- he is written chapters on nicotine addiction in textbooks. that is what the written chapters in harrison's on nicotine addiction and cecil on cigarette smoking. he is written over 165 articles on cigarettes, their effects, and nicotine addiction. does he have a belief that cigarettes are bad? yes, he does. you also heard him say that he would -- he is never testified in court on behalf of tobacco -- excuse me. he is never testified in court that someone was not addicted. but he also said that is because some of the cases never got to court because they were not addicted and he would not testify. dr. burns does have a bias, but his bias is 3529 because he is so knowledgeable. he is seen these documents; he has seen people be gripped by nicotine and the addiction. dr. burns' testimony is he used an established definition, the nida definition of addiction. addiction is defined as a chronic -- meaning multiple. it is not one day. it is every day -- relapsing brain disease that is a physical change to your brain -- and he showed you the receptors of how that plays into it -- that is characterized by compulsive drug seeking and use. that means chain smoking, first thing in the morning, smoking whenever and wherever you can. and that you do it because the drug changes the brain. you remember him testifying that the brain receptors get -- this is a term i'm going to use. i do not know if he used it. they get heightened in their sensitivity, and they want the nicotine in order to satisfy it. now, if you stop smoking, he said, that heighten does go away. but the association that that creates with other brain receptors does not, and it is always there, and that craving is always there. 3530 so what did he say about mrs. lewis? what did he say about rosemary? what was his testimony about whether she was addicted? number 9, please. he said rosemary lewis was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine. he was strong, unequivocal. and he had reviewed all of the pertinent facts. he said rosemary lewis died from lung cancer that was caused by that addiction to cigarettes. and this is something we are going to talk about later on. he said, rosemary lewis's wanting to get a second opinion did not change the outcome of her death. rosemary lewis already had lung cancer, malignant when her tumor was first discovered, and a few months delay was not a factor. now, who did the tobacco companies put up? can i put up no. 10? dr. jack abramson. well, i put some notes down on what i think he testified to. he was recruited by the tobacco companies to testify on their behalf. he was fed research papers by the tobacco companies. 3531 after trials, he would -- he testified on behalf of the tobacco companies, he would review his performance by video with others. he is never taught any classes or instructed any classes on nicotine addiction, nicotine addiction diagnosis. he never published anything or wrote anything about nicotine or nicotine diagnoses. the next one is very telling. he is never treated one patient solely for nicotine addiction. and what that means, he may have a patient that comes into his office about other things and he will also treat them for nicotine, but it is not the reason they came to him. and then he said something very interesting. he did agree with us that the surgeon general's report for the one period of time that is closest to rosemary's death stated that eighty percent of all smokers are addicted. eighty percent of all smokers are addicted. if mrs. lewis is not addicted, i would like to see those other eighty percent, because everything in her life was about cigarettes, craving them, driving her. 3532 now, i also think that dr. abramson ignored certain things. from the record, he ignored that she began before 18. he just said 18. there is evidence that she began as early as 16. he ignored that she tried to stop smoking and could not, and when she did try, she could not sleep. he ignored that while she was on the patch, she had nightmares because of the addiction. he did not consider anything about rosemary's lack of concentration when she tried to crochet and tried to quit. she could not concentrate. he did not consider any of that. he ignored the fact that rosemary lewis smoked the first thing in the morning and tried to smoke the last at night. he ignored that she smoked in cars, at work breaks, at hospital lobbies. he ignored the fact that she was a chain smoker. and most importantly, he ignored that she smoked in her lifetime at least 255,000 cigarettes. so what did r.j. reynolds know about 3533 cigarettes smoking and nicotine? pull up 10. mr. gale: eleven. mr. pantazis: excuse me. eleven. well, again -- and if i could, josh, do you have that pointer? while you look for that, i will go ahead. the first thing i want to point out to you on the record is these are coming from plaintiff's exhibit 22, page 2. and this is an rjr document -- thank you. i do not know which -- which one? oh, yeah, that is nice. okay. that is where i said page 22, rjr document, 1972. in a sense, the tobacco industry may be thought of as a specialized, highly ritualized and stylized segment of the pharmaceutical industry. tobacco products uniquely contain and deliver nicotine, a potential drug with a variety of physiological effects. i cannot even speak today. the second one. nicotine is known to be habit-forming. they knew this in '72. they actually knew it before, but their documents clearly point it out 3534 in '72. number 12. now, did they get upset because they were selling a product that was addicting people and making them crave it morning, noon, and night? no. here is what they said. "happily for the tobacco industry, nicotine is both habituating and unique in its variety of physiological actions." now, that is, again, plaintiff's 22, page 3. so they were not upset. they are happy about it, because that is how they sell cigarettes. the more cigarettes sold, the more profits. here is another quote from that same document. and i'm not going to read the whole thing. you should read plaintiff's exhibit 22. on page 4 they say: "and factors which induce a presmoker or nonsmoker to become a habituated smoker." so they want -- let me read the whole thing. "before preceding too far in the direction of design of dosage forms for nicotine, it may be well to consider another aspect of our business; that is, the factors which induce a presmoker or nonsmoker to become a habituated smoker." 3535 so they are designing a cigarette to keep someone habituated and smoking. and again, on page 4, "habituation becomes apparent and needed." now, the interesting thing about this, you see where they say some of the reasons that people start to smoke is to defy, to be daring. did you hear any evidence about mrs. lewis wanted to defy her parents, her mom, angry because she had to put her child up for adoption? it is ironic r.j. reynolds knew that was a smoker that they wanted to target. and they did target. and she became addicted and smoked their products for all of her life. unfortunately, her are life ended at age 51 because of their actions. number 13. this is that same document. and this -- again, how does nicotine and addiction work in mrs. lewis? the same thing they knew. they deliberately played down the role of nicotine. "hence, the nonsmoker has little or no knowledge of what satisfaction it may offer him." now, they played it down, because they knew of the public backlash. again, in that same document, they recognize 3536 the key role of nicotine in consumer satisfaction, and design and promote our products with that in mind. so not only do they have a product that is addictive that they know about, and they know that people that react to defiance, like kids and mrs. lewis. they are going to spend the money and research to design and promote their products for that in mind. number 14. this is -- this happens to be plaintiff's exhibit no. 41, the first quote. and it is not an rjr document. i think it is a philip morris document. "studies of psychology of a smoker in search of information can increase corporate profits." so they knew. these tobacco companies knew exactly why they wanted these smokers hooked on nicotine. and then this is a brown & williamson document, plaintiff's exhibit 40, which is rjr, as the judge just instructed you. 1978. "very few consumers are aware of the effects of nicotine, its addictive nature and that nicotine is a poison." 3537 would not you think that somebody would want to know that if they were going to put that in their body? and that is -- that is an rjr document, brown & williamson rjr. the next one is plaintiff's exhibit 14. it is a 1982 reynolds document. and this is an amazing quote out of this one. "however, we cannot ever be comfortable selling a product which most of our customers would stop using if they could. that is to say, if the gate -- exit gate from our market should suddenly open, we could be out of business almost overnight." and then it goes on and says, "if that occurs, our options include going out of business or finding a way to eliminate the desire of the smoker to stop smoking." so guess which one they did? they tried all kinds of different techniques to make and find a way to eliminate the smoker to want to stop. number 5. now, everything that i have showed you to this point has been the secret documents of the tobacco companies. this is what they said publicly about that. i'm not going to read all of 3538 these. they call the claims irresponsible to say that it is addictive as similar to other drugs. they come in here and say, we do not add or manipulate nicotine to addiction smokers, which we know they do -- or their documents said they did. "the implication that we somehow do something sinister to addict smokers and keep them hooked, we do not." these are rjr documents, or these are rjr statements. "the allegation that smoking cigarettes is addictive is part of a growing and disturbing trend that has destroyed the meaning of the term and characterized virtually enjoyment activity as addictive." so they are saying, ah, it is just like watching tv, playing video games, drinking coffee, eating sweets. that is what they were telling the public about addiction. they did not stop there. the united states congress called them before the united states congress. each of the major ceos of all the tobacco companies had to raise their hand and swear to tell the truth, just like witnesses here. 3539 and they took system and they asked them one question: do you believe cigarettes with nicotine are addictive? and here is their answer. and while that is coming you, r.j. reynolds' ceo, i believe, is either first or second on this list. (whereupon, a video clip was played in open court as follows:) waxman: if you wold raise your right hand. do you swear that the testimony you are about to give is the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth? please consider yourself to be under oath. tobacco executive: i believe nicotine is not addictive, yes. wyden: mr. johnston. tobacco executive: congressman, cigarettes and nicotine clearly do not meet the classic definitions of addiction. there is no toxic -- tobacco executive: i do not believe that nicotine from our products are addictive. tobacco executive: i believe nicotine is not addictive. tobacco executive: i believe that nicotine 3540 is not addictive. tobacco executive: i believe that nicotine is not addictive. tobacco executive: and i too believe that nicotine is not addictive. (the video clip concluded.) mr. pantazis: so all that information i showed you that you -- in this trial about these secret documents of r.j. reynolds and other tobacco companies where they talk glowingly and happily their that products are addictive and how they are going to design a cigarette to keep them addicted, and if they do not they are going to be out of business. they get up in '94, i believe that conference was -- that hearing was. '94. remember, mrs. lewis was diagnosed with lung cancer in '96 and died in '98. they were still denying as late as 1994 that their products were addictive, even knowing what their records held. well, this did not escape the surgeon general. and surgeon general koop, he took this matter on. and this is what he had to say that you heard. (whereupon, a video clip was played in open court as follows:) 3541 dan rather: surgeon general c. everett koop has issued two major reports on smoking: one on the dangers of secondhand smoke, the other on nicotine addiction. the tobacco industry disputes both reports as more political than scientific. c. everett koop: we have been told so frequently by the cigarette industry that smoking is a matter of free choice. you start when you want, and you quit when you want. but anybody who has ever smoked knows that is not true. dan rather: what does the record, the long-time record, say is the most dangerous age to get hooked on tobacco? c. everett koop: indications are very clear that the people who are most heavily addicted to nicotine and have the greatest trouble quitting are those who begin smoking, and they were 14 to 16. i think the studies in all over the world in every country and every culture, the younger you start, the greater the addiction and the more difficult it is to quit. dan rather: now, you said that you considered tobacco as addictive as cocaine or heroin. is not that an overstatement? c. everett koop: no. i think the evidence 3542 is very clear if you understand what we are talking about. addiction is a specific physiologic problem, and the manner in which you become addicted to nicotine is exactly the same manner in which you become addicted to cocaine or heroin. and even after you have quit and you think you are clean, that there is a tremendous tendency to relapse. there is no such thing as a safe cigarette; there is no such thing as a quality death. (video clip concluded.) mr. pantazis: i want to go back to the first question. josh, will you put that up? this is the first question that we were talking about that you must answer: was rosemary lewis addicted to smoking cigarettes containing nicotine that were manufactured and sold by r.j. reynolds tobacco company, and, if so, was her addiction a legal cause of the lung cancer in mrs. lewis? the answer overwhelmingly is nicotine is addictive. mrs. lewis was addicted. she bought and smoked cigarettes manufactured and sold by r.j. reynolds. and she developed lung cancer as a 3543 result of that and she died. the answer to this question is yes. but we are going to go further on the lung cancer. so in order to -- the second part of that question was lung cancer. josh, will you put up 21, the modified 21, if you could? this is a little illustration to show how nicotine addiction links to lung cancer, smoking cigarettes, and then death. it directly produces or contributes -- and that is the legal -- that is the legal standard. it directly produces or contributes substantially to the loss or to the death. you do not smoke cigarettes unless you have got nicotine and you are addicted. and when you smoke cigarettes over time, as dr. burns said, you bathe your lungs with that smoke. you destroy and develop tumors -- or cells that become tumors and ultimately, as in mrs. lewis's case, it causes her death. now, what kind of lung cancer did mrs. lewis have? well, you heard -- number 23, please. dr. doughney was mrs. lewis's oncologist. and that is some of her qualifications. she is 3544 board certified. she treated her until she died in '98. and you have heard -- and quite candidly, you have heard the touching description of how ms. lewis -- ms. parker: your honor, excuse me. i'm sorry. we are going to need to approach on this, i think. the court: all right. come on up. (at the bench) ms. parker: i apologize. i did not catch this earlier. dr. doughney did not talk about addiction. remember we had that motion about the daubert hearing and all of that? she did not say a thing about addiction, but they have got it on her slide that she did. that is not right. mr. pantazis: let me will take it out. the court: all right. mr. pantazis: can i have half a second? the court: go ahead. ms. parker: thank you, your honor. (in open court) mr. pantazis: josh, let me know when you are ready. mr. gale: i'm ready. mr. pantazis: oh, not that one. 3545 twenty-three, please. okay. this is dr. doughney. you saw her testimony earlier. i guess she testified last week, friday -- two weeks ago friday, maybe. she was the treating oncologist. she was not brought here as somebody that was interested in testifying in court. she came because she treated rosemary lewis. and she had evidence and facts about what she had, what kind of cancer she had, how she was treated, and what was the causes of that cancer. and dr. doughney testified that rosemary lewis died from lung cancer caused by -- died from lung cancer caused by her cigarettes. she also testified -- and this is important -- just like dr. burns, the seeking of a second opinion by rosemary lewis did not change the outcome. rosemary lewis's lung cancer was already malignant when she had -- when her tumor was first discovered. now, what kind of cancer? so let us go back -- let us go back to slide 20. and i'm going to through these because sometimes when you get questions back in the jury room, you wonder, how do you answer? you know, 3546 how do you get from here to there? and i'm giving you what we perceive as the evidence that helps you answer those. so back to 1, she clearly was addicted and her addiction was the legal cause of her lung cancer. so the answer to no. 1 is yes. the answer to no. 1 is yes. and once that answer is yes, then she is a member of the class. ms. parker: objection, your honor. two questions on this verdict form. the court: that is right. mr. pantazis: okay. we will go further. i'll come back to that part. so the second question -- so the first question answer is yes. the next question you must answer -- josh, will you put up the second, no. 22? -- is, was rosemary lewis's lung cancer an adenocarcinoma, large cell carcinoma, small cell carcinoma, or squamous cell carcinoma? we think the answer to that as well is yes. it is yes. why? well, let us take a look first at slide 24. this is the pathology report that goes back to october 4th, 1996, from halifax medical center. and it says, "these findings are 3547 consistent with a metastatic, poorly differentiated non-small cell carcinoma. before that, though, it says some of the -- i guess it is morphologic features are suggestive of a poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma. so it is consistent with adenocarcinoma as well as a non-small cell carcinoma. number 25. this is another medical record, and it clearly says non-small cell carcinoma as well as. twenty-six. metastatic lung carcinoma. and then this one, of course, they are talking about it had spread to the brain. twenty-seven. these are all medical records that you will have. and they are part of the last exhibit that was marked -- i think it was 64. your honor, was the last exhibit 64 or 63? the clerk: sixty-three. mr. pantazis: sixty-three. these are all part of exhibit 63 if you want to see them. again, small cell lung cancer. twenty-seven. 3548 mr. gale: that is 27. mr. pantazis: i'm sorry. what did her death certificate say, no. 28? metastatic non-small cell lung cancer. so she had adenocarcinoma, non-small cell adenocarcinoma, lung cancer. so what did dr. burns testify -- what evidence do you have of what is an adenocarcinoma and what is non-small cell carcinoma? twenty-nine, please. this is clips from the testimony of dr. burns. he said there are four major types of lung cancer that are all -- that are caused by smoking. they are responsible for the vast majority of lung cancers that occur. they's small cell lung cancer. then there is three categories that are non -- called non-small cell lung cancer. and that is large cell, adenocarcinoma, and squamous cell carcinoma. adenocarcinoma -- this is the key -- of the lung is a non-small cell carcinoma. so she had in her medical records either adeno or non-small cell. and dr. burns says adenocarcinoma is a non-small cell carcinoma of the lung. 3549 she had a non-small cell lung cancer that, examined under the microscope, appeared to look predominantly like an adenocarcinoma. this is the only medical testimony between dr. burns and dr. doughney that you heard at all about the type of cancer she had. did i do something else? the court: no. somebody's phone was going off. mr. pantazis: oh, okay. i thought i did something else. i apologize. there is no doubt -- there should be no doubt that mrs. rosemary lewis's lung cancer was an adenocarcinoma that is covered under this definition. can you put up 22 again? so if we go back to the second question, was rosemary lewis's lung cancer an adenocarcinoma or a large cell carcinoma, small cell carcinoma, or a squamous cell carcinoma, the answer is only one question -- one way. yes. and when you answer this time -- i think i'm correct. when you answer those questions yes, then the findings of the engle case provided to us through approval of the supreme court come into play. 3550 can you go to 18? i will tell you what, josh, let us hold off on that. before we go there, let us -- 31, please. so mrs. lewis had adenocarcinoma, non-small cell carcinoma, lung cancer. what did the tobacco companies, particularly rjr and others, co-conspirators, know about lung cancer? so we go back -- let us look at these documents, these documents that did not become available until 2000, two years after mrs. lewis's death. that is when all these documents came out. first one -- and it is picked because of the date. this is 1953. this is almost ten years before mrs. lewis started smoking. she was six years old, seven years old. and what did they know? "studies of the clinical data tend to confirm the relationship between heavy and prolonged tobacco smoking and the incidence of cancer of the lung." they knew as far as back as 1953 that their products caused lung cancer, when she was six years old. the second one -- by the way, that is plaintiff's exhibit 27. plaintiff's exhibit 28, page 1, this is an 3551 rjr document, 1959. now we are talking about three to four years before she started smoking. in 1954, the first reported presence of carcinogenic cancer-producing -- and i'm going to skip that -- since then, approximately 60 similar compounds have been isolated from the smoke of cigarettes. they knew that 60 similar compounds in 1959 in their cigarettes produced or caused cancer, four years before she smoked her first cigarette. this is plaintiff's 28. "nonetheless, there is a distinct possibility that these substances would have carcinogenic effect on the human respiratory system." did that cause them to stop selling it or to go public? no. thirty-two. this is plaintiff's exhibit no. 5, and it is a brown & williamson/rjr document. they are talking about the surgeon general's report. and then they say something that is just really hard to believe. "but cigarettes, we assume the surgeon general to say, despite the beneficial effects of nicotine, have certain unattractive side effects. they cause or predispose to lung cancer." that is amazing. 3552 now, that is -- that is a 1963 document. they knew other things were bad, not only for lung cancer. these documents -- they knew -- and this is a philip morris document -- in 19 -- this is pm 39. they knew in 1969 that they had studies -- studied the effect of smoking in pregnancies, which support previous conclusions that smoking mothers produce smaller babies. they then also in that document say, "the position of the medical people is that smaller babies suffer detrimental effects all through their lives." now, you would think that is something you would want the public to know about the health effects, but they denied it. instead of going public and saying, our cigarettes could or do cause cancer, they started a different approach. they started the campaign of doubt, controversy, psychological crutch. and why? to keep selling cigarettes so that people who are smoking will not believe the health warnings, the health effects. they spent $250 billion on marketing to keep people smoking during that period of time over the 50 years. next slide. 3553 so what were they telling the public about health? these are just a sample. i did not -- look, i did not pull all of them. i just pulled a sample of the documents so you can get a flavor. you will have all of the documents back there if you want to go look at any of them. this is paul hahn, who is president of the american tobacco company -- again, a company that rjr today is responsible for -- took issue today about what he called loose talk on the subject of smoking in relationship to lung cancer. that is 1953. well, we already showed you previously what they knew in 1953. but what does he tell the public? it is loose talk, that it is not real. 1954, here is where they come in and talk about other possible causes. so in order to get them off of cigarettes, they said, "medical research in recent years indicates many possible lung cancers." of course, none of them are cigarettes. 1954, this is a -- the tirc and ctr. and you remember that was part of that conspiracy and enterprise that dr. proctor talked about. "we accept an interest in people's health as a basic 3554 responsibility paramount to every other consideration in our business." this was the frank statement that so much testimony has been about. they ran that full page saying, we know that people's health is our basic responsibility, paramount to any other consideration, meaning we are not going to sell cigarettes if they are dangerous and we are not going to sell it because we can make more profit. well, that is not what they did. they knew it was dangerous. they continued to sell them because of the profits, another total -- i cannot use the word "lie," so total inaccuracy and an intentional inaccuracy. so taking it forward, here is another document, '54. none of the evidence is conclusive. unwarranted conclusion. much more research is necessary. tobacco relatively unimportant as far as cancer. evidence not convincing enough. next slide. this is what they -- they papered and did. you will see a document that calls that a barrage of advertising, of tv, of newspapers and everything, to sell that there is doubt, that 3555 there is no reason to believe all this bad stuff. there is doubt. and they did it in the '50s, the '60s, the '70s, the '80s, and the '90s. this is their consulting group. you remember hill & knowlton, 1961. they called it the health scare techniques. they said, "we must learn to distinguish real facts about tobacco from unjustified emotional campaigns based on health scare techniques." they came out with -- this is a ti -- this is one of their conspiracy organizations that they all joined in and participated in. it is plaintiff's 15. "lung specialists cite 28 reasons for doubting cigarette/lung cancer links. cigarette industry insists there is no proof that tar or nicotine were hazardous to health. "cigarette smoke stands accused of causing lung cancer. has cigarette smoke ever produced this cancer in animals? no." this is a ti document, which, again, rjr was part of. "has anyone ever been able to prove any ingredients found in cigarettes cause -- cigarette smoke is a cause of lung cancer? no. "is smoking a health hazard? that question 3556 is still an open one." that is 1968. i'm going to stop -- your honor, in about five minutes, can i take break when we are switching over? the court: that will be fine. mr. pantazis: i want to go, though, before we take a break, and i want to bring these back up for you to see the relationship of what has -- what r.j. reynolds has done and how it affects mrs. lewis. would you do 18 for me first? i indicated to you previously if you answered those first two questions yes, question 1 and question 2, then you apply -- excuse me -- mr. gale: sorry. mr. pantazis: that is technology. if you answer these two questions yes, then you apply these findings. smoking causes lung cancer. nicotine is a cigarette -- in cigarettes is addictive. the defendants placed these cigarettes on the market that were defective and unreasonably dangerous. the defendants concealed, omitted material facts not otherwise known or available. 3557 josh? mr. gale: sorry. mr. pantazis: let us do it again. the defendants concealed or omitted material information not otherwise known or available, knowing that the material was false or misleading and failed to disclose a material fact concerning the effects -- health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes or both. these are findings that you apply. they are not decisions you have to make. if you answer those first two questions yes, as i think you clearly do, these findings you apply. is there a second page? mr. gale: yeah. mr. pantazis: the defendants agreed to conceal or omit information regarding the health effects of cigarettes or their addictive nature with the intent that smokers and the public would rely on this information to their detriment. and then the last one is a finding that the defendants are or were negligent. that is a finding that the supreme court through engle has ratified. and if you answer those two questions yes, which i think you will, you must apply those 3558 findings. your honor, we would like to take a break. the court: okay. all right. now, ladies and gentlemen, let me remind you about not talking about the case yet, even amongst yourselves. we are still not at that stage yet. so be careful during the breaks that we take at this point. until you go back to deliberate, you still do not talk about the case. okay? all right. let us just take ten minutes and then we will be back. i have got -- i have got 10:57. so make it 11:10. (the jury retired from the courtroom at 10:56 a.m.) the court: all right. everybody can be seated. mr. pantazis: hour and ten minutes? i did not start until -- the court: all right. we are in recess until 11:10. (a recess was taken at 10:57 a.m.) (court called to order at 11:10 a.m.) the court: please be seated. all right. are we ready? mr. pantazis: yes, the record was correct, 3559 that i had only spent an hour, not an hour and 15. the court: all right. do we have all eight? the bailiff: yes, sir. the court: all right. bring them in. (the jury returned to the courtroom at 11:11 a.m.) the court: all right. please be seated. mr. pantazis: may i begin, your honor? the court: whenever you are ready. mr. pantazis: thank you. mr. gale, put 36 and 40 -- well, 36, first, your honor. i have been told by mr. gale that i am the one who has been pushing these slides because of pushing the wrong button. the court: okay. mr. pantazis: so i apologize. this is the third question. and we are going to talk about the third question and fourth question together. did rosemary lewis reasonably rely to her detriment on the concealment or the omission of material information not otherwise known or available concerning the health risks or addictive nature of cigarette smoking or both by r.j. reynolds tobacco company. and if so, was the -- 3560 was such reliance a legal cause of her death? well, we believe the answer to that is yes. now would you put up the next one, slide, josh? mr. gale: forty-three. mr. pantazis: forty-three. we are going to talk about 43, and we are going to talk about question 3 and 4 together and show what is the difference. question 4, did rosemary lewis reasonably rely to her detriment on statements or omissions by any party to the agreement made in furtherance of the agreement to conceal material information about the health risks or addictive nature of cigarette smoking, or both, and, if so, was such reliance a legal cause of mrs. lewis's death? we believe the answer to that is also yes. now, i put this on the back, because it got torn down, and i want to make sure that we talk about it. you remember dr. proctor drew this document on the board, and so i want to make sure that it -- we have it. and i do not know if it can be seen. i'm going to move it up a little bit. question 3 is about r.j. reynolds' conduct of 3561 concealing or -- i'm just read it. it is about -- on the concealment or omission of material fact. question 3 is about r.j. reynolds. and we have already showed you many, many exhibits of where r.j. reynolds knew about things and when they went public about denying it, the false controversy, a psychological crutch. this question 4 -- and that is why that question -- the answer is yes, because of the pollution of information that they put out there to tamp down the health risks. if somebody -- if people knew things were harmful for them, they gave them a crutch to say, well, there is this other study; it is an open question; maybe it is not as bad. even if they did not verbalize it, it is in their mind, it is in the whole arena of noise. and they -- it was so massive, their whole marketing approach for those 40 years or 50 years was $250 billion. the fourth question takes that same type of information and moves it to any other party. and this is the conspiracy, if you remember dr. proctor talking about. and that is why we put ti documents, hill & knowlton documents. pm 3562 was -- philip morris was part of this, and so was r.j. reynolds. and they had -- this is the conspiracy that the findings by the supreme court approved of in engle that you were to apply if you answered the first two questions yes. this is the conspiracy they are talking about. so if any one of these people put out information they are -- each conspirator is liable for it, and that is what the findings say. and that is why this answer to this question is yes, because when one of them knew it, the others knew it. when one of them acted, the others acted. ms. parker: the objection is legally incorrect. the court: overruled. mr. pantazis: number 37. i'm going to move this back just a little bit. this is some more doubt. i showed you many of them, but these are different ones. this is where they were trying to -- this is hill & knowlton. this is their big ad campaign group that i indicated to you is part of that conspiracy. "to create awareness of doubt and 3563 uncertainties about cigarette charges." that is 1959. that is three, maybe four years before rosemary smoked her first cigarette. what would have happened if they were more honest? what would have happened if they -- if they had pulled their hazardous cigarettes. plaintiff's 11, they have got to reestablish -- this is ti. you remember ti is that public relations -- that is the public information group, tobacco institute. what would happen? so they said they have got to reestablish the cigarette controversy. there are two facets to this: to set the record straight in terms of medical facts and then call it the propaganda approach, big brother; meaning, do not listen to the government; that is big brother, you know. we do not want to listen to the government. these cigarettes will not harm you. that is plaintiff's exhibit 11. next slide. in '68, this is an interesting one. this is ti, again. again, part of r.j. reynolds is part ti, and ti is part of the conspiracy. "our basic position in the cigarette controversy is subject to the charge and may be subject to a finding that 3564 if we are making false" -- "that we are making false or misleading statements to promote cigarette sales." well, that would be great. why did not they tell that to the public? that is 1968. they knew they were making false statements, and they said it in their internal documents. these documents, again, did not become public until 2000. this is brown & williamson, rjr, 1969: "doubt is our product, since it is the best means of competing with the body of facts that exist in the minds of the general public." so they are out there selling doubt everywhere, television, radio, print ads, billboards, sporting events. they debated, and they create the question. well, it is an open question. it is not really been proven. why? because the addicted smoker wants to believe that he or she can continue to smoke, and that is what mrs. lewis did. this doubt is -- the creation of what they called the psychological crutch. look at 1972, ti: "creating doubt about health charges without actually denying them." that is a technique. we are going to say it is not so but not really. 3565 that is somebody -- the only people that would believe that is somebody that is addicted. next slide, please. this is another hill & knowlton: the most important type of story which cast doubt on the smoke -- excuse me, casts doubt on the cause and effect of -- effect the theory of disease and smoking. so, in other words, they wanted to have -- the stories they wanted to promote is those that cast doubt. plaintiff's 25 this is another hill & knowlton, '68: thus, the headline should strongly call out and point controversy, contradictions, other factors, unknowns. why? why would they say that? they say that so that addicted smoker says, well, you know, maybe not; maybe it is okay, so i'm going to continue to smoke. or, i'm not going to try as hard. and what happens when somebody disagreed with them? number 40. hill & knowlton, their consultants, again. they have a choice as previously indicated: smearing and belittling them. that is how they approached the health people. try to overwhelm 3566 them with mass publications of the opposite viewpoints of the other specialties. there is not a missing word. i think that is a typesetting problem. that is a 1953 document, way before mrs. lewis started smoking, that they could have prevented. what is the mass publication? $250 billion worth of marketing. should we deal with the people that say cigarettes cause cancer or addicting? no, we are going to smear them and belittle them. that is exhibit 29, page 6. exhibit 30, now, somebody in 1969 evidently -- and this was an rjr document: we do not foresee of any difficulty, in the event a decision is reached, to remove certain reports from our research files. once it becomes clear that such action is necessary for the successful defense of our present and future suits, we will promptly remove all reports from our files. so we do not even know if all the documents we have are everything, because we know they had a plan to remove them. these are not my words; these are not lawyer words. everything i have tried to show you is from their documents or their co-conspirator 3567 documents. so what did the government, the trade commission, who reported back to congress in 1967, how successful this has been? this is -- the trade commission studied it, researched, conducted interviews, want to know, why are people continuing to smoke if there is health hazards and warnings out there? the commission believes that the warning label on cigarette packages has not succeeded in overcoming the prevailing attitude toward cigarette smoke created and maintained by the cigarette companies through their advertisements -- advertisements, particularly the barrage of commercials on tv, the television, which portray smoking as a harmless, enjoyable, social activity, is not habit-forming, and involves no hazard to health. this is an impartial group who did the research that looked at that 250 -- or part of that $250 billion marketing, and said, what effect did it have? we have got warnings out there. people are saying they are dangerous. why are these people smoking? because they are addicted and they have this crutch that they put out, the 3568 psychological crutch of doubt and question it. and, you know, the interesting thing is people cannot even identify where they heard or saw anything. they just know it. it is in the pollution in the environment because it was so massive. the next one, 42. this is the surgeon general. and this is through dr. burns's testimony. but this is the surgeon general's actual quote in 2014: the tobacco epidemic was initiated and has been sustained by the aggressive strategies of the tobacco industry, which has deliberately misled the public on the risk of smoking cigarettes. and that is a study, not just in 2014, but that is studying the history, which included throughout the history of mrs. lewis's life. so the answer to 4 and 3 is yes. can we pull up 44? i want to skip for a moment and talk about question 7. now, you do have a 5 and 6, and i'm going to talk about them. but question 7 is kind of by itself. it is under the circumstances of this case. state whether by clear and convincing 3569 evidence punitive damages are warranted against rjr, reynolds tobacco company. we think the answer to this question is yes. you do not award punitives in this part of the case. you simply identify whether the punitives are warranted. but in order to award punitives, you have to first find compensatory damages. if you find no compensatory damages, you cannot award punitive damages. why are punitives warranted? slide 45. mr. gale: the board. mr. pantazis: last one? this is the -- this is what they did to create $250 billion worth of marketing to create these statements by the surgeon general and by the federal trade commission, that they created this doubt. that is claimed. so what else did they do that warrants punitives. forty-six. they did something that, quite candidly, is shocking to most courts anywhere, and that is they marketed and solicited and wanted children. this is rjr in 1973. we must get our share of the 3570 youth market that is plaintiff's 54. look at page 9: at 18 one is immortal, talking about a child at 18. our company needs to take advantage of the opportunity to market to new youth brands of cigarettes. next slide. those are rjr documents. this is where -- and this is a 1959, again, three, maybe four years before mrs. lewis started smoking. they were researching and analyzing how many freshmen and sophomore in high school actually smoked so they could identify and target markets. next slide. these are -- that is plaintiff's 33 if you want to look at it. plaintiff's 34 has a title, teenage smokers 14 to 17, new adult market -- new adult smokers and quitters. rjr is continuing to lose share among teenage smokers. now, they put a statement in there, that we are not really marketing, that we are not doing this to market to them. well, there is another document later on, plaintiff's exhibit 35, that says the following: hopefully, our various planned activities will be implemented this fall 3571 and will aid in some way to reducing or correcting these trends. and the trend is the loss of the 14- to 17-year-old, tobacco. so in 1980, they are still doing this. and what were they telling the public about their marketing and selling and researching for youth brands to sell to children? josh, 49. this lady was -- (whereupon, a video clip was played in open court as follows:) ann browder: the cigarette manufacturers are not interested in obtaining new business from teenagers in our society. john stossel: but how can you stay in business if you cannot hook the kids? ann browder: we have been in business very well, thank you, for some time now, without attempting to hook kids. we do everything possible to discourage teenage smoking. (video clip concluded.) mr. pantazis: the punitive conduct does not stop there. fifty. they also specifically knew that they could generate an additional nicotine kick for the 3572 addicted smoker, a kick that would make the nicotine more enjoyable for that addicted smoker. and how did they do that? ms. parker: excuse me, i need to object -- i'm sorry -- and move to strike, your honor. cigarette design is not an intentional tort. it is not covered in this part of the case. the court: did you say "design"? mr. pantazis: i did not. if i did, i withdraw that question. the court: all right. if "design" was said that is stricken. ms. parker: this chart is about design. mr. pantazis: well, this chart is about their conduct, your honor. the court: all right. overruled. mr. pantazis: please put it back up. what is important about this is they knew that the public wanted more nicotine, and they gave them more nicotine. they wanted more nicotine to stay addicted and compete, and that salem was one of those cigarettes. and that is the cigarette primarily that mrs. lewis smoked throughout her life, although later she started smoking more. next question, 51. i'm not going to go 3573 through all of them. all these documents are back there. these are all pieces of evidence. we have listed the numbers here if you want to identify them. this is kind of the most crazy thing in the world. they were researching, mr. teague from rjr, 1953. well, let us put some sort of color change in the filter so people will think that it is catching more. in fact, it did nothing. it has little or no effect that -- but it would be a sales advantage, are obvious. this is their words. this is the kind of conduct they were doing. this is how they thought of their customers, as an illusion of filtration. the only ones that use you the word "illusion" are magicians, not companies responsible -- that say they were responsible for the health of their customers. ms. parker: your honor, i think that he is talking about punitive damages, and i would just like to ask that it be clarified that this is philip morris in the one he put up there. mr. pantazis: your honor, i do not -- the court: okay. if it is -- mr. pantazis: the top one is rjr, the bottom one, 31, is philip morris. 3574 so let us go back, if we could, to 53. and these are questions that you will need to answer, you will have to make a determination of assigning a percentage of any responsibility for mrs. lewis and assigning a percentage of responsibility, if any, to rjr tobacco company. mrs. lewis, through her husband, has admitted that some of the responsibility is hers. she has taken the stand and said, yeah, i have admitted that; she started smoking; she tried to quit, she could not quit. so she bears some of that responsibility. rjr has taken the position they owe no responsibility. so how do you fill this out? well, this is a choice. this is totally in your decision-making. but based on the evidence, rosemary lewis is no more liable than twenty percent. r.j. reynolds is liable for eighty percent, based on the evidence. a minimum, eighty percent. so that is the way we would respectfully suggest you look at answering that question. question 6 is the most difficult question of all to answer. fifty-four. what is the total amount, which is 100 percent, because as the court said, his honor will 3575 apply any percentage to this amount and allocate it after that. you are to make a determination of the hundred percent of the damages and fill it in to this form. what is the total amount of any damages sustained by james lewis for the loss of his spousal, companionship, protection, his mental pain and suffering as a result of rosemary's death? well, folks, there is no lawyers anywhere that can give you what other jurors have done or any kind of -- please leave that up. did i do that? okay. okay. that is fine. you can leave that up. there is nothing, no forms, no information that lawyers can give you about what other courts or other jurors have done. this is a decision you make based on the evidence, based on the law, and based on your common sense. but james, bob lewis, loved his wife very much. he was -- they had a marriage from '66 until the day she died. he was by her side throughout those periods of time. was he a perfect husband? was he a perfect man? no. none of us are. did he love her? absolutely. you heard the testimony that he would pick 3576 her up and take her to -- pick her up and wash her and clean her during the time. they shared the raising of three children, and one of them had serious health events. that puts a lot of stress on the family. they had their troubles, but they stuck it together. there was only one wife for bob lewis, and that is rosemary, one love. it is true. he has moved on trying to find other relationships per rosemary to take care of his child and to take care of gale's child. at the request of rosemary he moved on. but every day -- his life expectancy as of the date of her death was 22 years. every day he misses her, and he will not have the -- his soulmate. he will not have his one true love with him. he is going to try to get by. and i believe, you know, that he is a strong man and he will get by. but how much is it worth to take in these days and time somebody you have spent 30-something years with, raised three children, had ups and downs, and just like that they are gone? what is the value of that? i cannot tell you. i do not know for sure. i can give you ranges, but that is a decision you must make. 3577 one of the things that is -- that was compelling, i thought, in the testimony was when rosemary was about to go through chemo and lose her hair. it kind of really did a snapshot of their relationship throughout their life. she said, bob, you will have cut an inch or two of my hair every night, so that when i lose my hair it will not be so traumatic. and he did so. he did so with tears and crying. every night he would cut a little bit more of rosemary's hair. now, if that was not tender and loving, if that is not somebody who is trying to find a way to get through this horror, i do not know. so what is one hundred percent of the damages? you can put $9,200,000, and some people would say, that is not enough. some people might say that might be too much. you have to make that decision, you know. as i was sitting here thinking and i'm reshuffling papers, it really dawned on me that rosemary lewis was the perfect customer. or maybe said another way, the perfect victim of r.j. reynolds. josh, would you put up 57? she began smoking age 16 to 18. what did r.j. reynolds want? they wanted to get their 3578 share of the youth market. she came from a dysfunctional family, horrible childhood no person should ever have to endure. but that was the perfect person they wanted, to cause the young who wanted to be defined, so that was a target. she was a target customer of theirs. she suffered from stress because of all the problems of raising children, particularly children with health needs, even the stress of marriage and economics. so how does that -- how did they -- why is that important? they knew that they could sell their cigarettes as an effective -- a drug effective in releasing the stress mechanisms. she smoked salem cigarettes where the ph was manipulated to give a higher nicotine kick. she was addicted to cigarettes, so they created a doubt that it was not really harmful. again, you have seen that quote: doubt is our product. she was the perfect customer that they wanted. they wanted her to start smoking when she was a child and continue smoking throughout her life. and, unfortunately, that is exactly what happened, except rosemary's life was cut short at the age of 51. 3579 ladies and gentlemen, i'm going to go through -- tammy, will you put that up for me? i'm going to go through one more time quickly, what we suggest are the answers to these forms. was rosemary lewis addicted to smoking cigarettes containing nicotine that were manufactured and sold by r.j. reynolds tobacco company? and, if so, was her addiction the legal cause of her lung cancer in mrs. lewis? the answer is yes. was rosemary lewis's lung cancer an adenocarcinoma, large cell carcinoma, or small cell carcinoma, or squamous cell carcinoma? the answer is yes. did rosemary lewis reasonably rely to her detriment on statements or omissions by the party to which -- please pull that down. i think three -- the third one is not on there the top one. pull it down. thank you. ms. todd: sorry. mr. pantazis: that is okay, tammy. did rosemary lewis reasonably rely to her detriment on the concealment or omission of material information not otherwise known or available concerning the health risk or addictive 3580 nature of cigarette smoking or both by r.j. reynolds tobacco company, and, if so, was such reliance a legal cause of mrs. lewis's death? the answer is yes. did rosemary lewis reasonably rely to her detriment on a statement or omissions by any party to any agreement made in furtherance of this agreement to conceal material information about health risks or addictive nature of cigarette smoking, or both? if so, was such reliance a legal cause of mrs. lewis's death? the answer is yes. please state the percentages of any responsibility for mrs. lewis's lung cancer and death that you -- that you charge to rosemary lewis. no more, in our opinion, than twenty percent. r.j. reynolds should be at least eighty percent, for a total of one hundred percent. the next question, no. 6, i am not going to write a number in. i believe that is your decision to make, and i am not going to write a number on the total damages sustained by james lewis. i talked to you about it. but that is a decision you must get back there and make that decision. 3581 but i will go over no. 7. under the circumstances of this case, state whether by clear and convincing evidence punitive damages are warranted against r.j. reynolds company? i do not know of a case that could not be clearer -- ms. parker: objection as to the personal comments. mr. pantazis: i'll strike that, your honor. i apologize. in our opinion, we suggest -- ms. parker: your honor. mr. pantazis: -- we suggest that the answer -- the answer to no. 7 is yes. there are a lot of cases filed in courts. none has the conduct been so obvious of what r.j. reynolds has done as they have done in this case. what they knew, what they told people, how they have spent billions of dollars to tell people and keep them smoking all for one reason -- sell more cigarettes, make more money. and they did that for the smoking public in america since '53 at least. one of those people was rosemary lewis, and it cost her her life. thank you, ladies and gentlemen. your honor, that is what i have for this 3582 portion. the court: all right. ladies and gentlemen, what we are going to do is we will break for an early lunch. and i think i'll have you come back at one o'clock. but the rules still apply. do not talk about the case. it is still not that time. and let me give you just a little bit of a heads-up. when we come back from lunch at one o'clock, we are going to finish the closing arguments and then you will get instructions. depending upon the time, we may or may not get to a midafternoon break. and the reason i say that is this. when i send you back to deliberate, i make you take all your cell phones or any other electronic devices and keep them out with the deputy. okay? so that you cannot take a cell phone or anything else back. so once you get back there, you are not going to have the opportunity to call anybody to let them know where you are at. so i say that because you are going to be at lunch. if anybody needs to know where you are at for the rest of the afternoon, lunchtime is the time to tell them, 3583 because you are not going to get -- you may not get the opportunity to do that later in the afternoon. okay? so i just wanted to let you know that. or if you wanted to keep any of your devices down in your car rather than -- rather than having them up here, lunchtime is probably the time to do that. okay? all right. just once again, do not talk about the case, even amongst yourselves. it is very important. and i'll see you back here at one o'clock. mr. pantazis: thank you, your honor. may it please the court. almost done. almost done. i have to confess to you, i sat here and listened to r.j. reynolds counsel, and i guess we are just in two different cases, because the facts that ms. parker talked about are not the facts that this case is about. this case is not about mrs. lewis knowing that there were health 3669 effects and health issues with smoking. she testified about those. and if that was this case, this judge would have thrown this case out before it got here. ms. parker: okay, your honor. objection. that is improper argument. the court: just strike the last part. mr. pantazis: that is not what this case is about. this case is about their effort while she -- before she started smoking, while she started smoking, throughout her entire life to create a counter argument to the health issues. it is not that she did not know that they were -- they gave her this crutch, and it is all throughout the documents. and, you know, i have to tell you, the documents they talk about, we have listed them here. i think ms. parker said there were only 21. well, i mean, 19 or 21. there are 21 rjr documents up there, there are 15 from either ti or tirc, which is the conspiracy, and there are only four from pm. that is just part of this game of misdirection that r.j. reynolds is doing. they did it in the past. and -- ms. parker: objection, your honor, under 3670 tullo. the court: all right. overruled. mr. pantazis: it is certainly what they did and what i heard today. let me tell you, they had -- what i heard is two things: attack the lewises and then a group of tricks and misdirection plays. let me give you an example. pathology/autopsy. i do not know how many people die every day from diseases. but unless there is a legal reason caused by a murder or a suspicious death, you do not do autopsies. they just throw that in there to make it sound like something sinister. people do not commit autopsies on their loved ones. and if the autopsy was so important -- this is part of that misdirection game they play -- mrs. lewis had a lawsuit pending at that time against reynolds. they could have requested the autopsy. they did not. ms. parker: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. mr. pantazis: misdirection. what else did they do on this trick-and-confuse? they say all these documents are available on the internet. we did not hide anything. come and 3671 look at the internet. wait until you get through this. you know what the problem with that is? they did not put any of that stuff up until after 2000. why is that important? mrs. lewis was dead by 1998. it is, again, an effort to tell you we do not do anything wrong. it is another shell game. and the worst part: this is not lung cancer? josh, will you put up the medicals, 3. i'm not going to go far into this, but this is clearly lung cancer. adenocarcinoma. these are the medical records. this is the pathology that she is talking about. just because the cell came from the lymph node does not mean that it is not lung cancer. as a matter of fact, dr. burns said that is where you are supposed to take it from. josh, will you also put up the death certificate? while that is coming, there is absolutely no medical evidence that she died of anything besides adenocarcinoma or small cell -- nonsmall cell carcinoma. this is the death certificate. this is an 3672 official document. if they wanted to challenge that, they could have. they did not. if they wanted to bring in a physician to challenge whether or not -- ms. parker: objection, pretrial ruling. mr. pantazis: your honor, we have -- we can talk about witnesses they did not bring. the court: rephrase your argument. mr. pantazis: they could have challenged this. there was absolutely no evidence, because it is -- there is nothing to challenge. she died from lung cancer. but this is another one of those misdirection games. ms. parker: objection, your honor, under tullo. this is continuing. the court: overruled. mr. pantazis: breast cancer. do you remember that? she said, there is a medical record that says breast cancer. what she did not say and did not put up is that dr. doughney said most of my patients have breast cancer, and i made a mistake. this is what dr. doughney said. and it is about mrs. lewis, and it says -- it says up there, diagnosis, metastatic breast carcinoma. what is that about? 3673 i was wrong. i misspoke. and then she said okay -- the question is okay. probably about forty percent of my practice, and she went on to say, was a breast cancer. it was a mis-note. and she made a point of that. she wanted you to look at that. why? why do they not want you to look at the facts? why do they want to use these kinds of tricks? that is part of your common sense. they are trying to get you away from the fact that they represent a company who knew the death and destruction and addictive powers of smoking, kept it secret. they kept it secret. and then they spent $250 billion to put the doubt message out there. that is the other part of the trick. they want you to -- ms. parker: objection, your honor. objection. i have to object to the continuing use of the word "trick." the court: all right. do not use "trick" anymore. mr. pantazis: misdirection. they used $250 billion to put the doubt out in the public. 3674 and why is that doubt important? if you are addicted, as mrs. lewis was, then you use whatever you can, even if it is not reasonable to believe, that it is okay to smoke. and that is in their documents. that is not something i manufactured. that is not mr. lewis manufactured it. that is their words. and that is why we put these up. we wanted you to go back and look at these documents. they keep using words like "repackaging." i have never seen anybody do more repackaging than ms. parker. ms. parker: objection to the personal comment. the court: all right. rephrase it. do not make it personal. mr. pantazis: i'm not trying to be personal with ms. parker. i have never seen anybody repackage a case like r.j. reynolds. ms. parker: your honor, the "i have never seen" reference. the court: overruled. mr. pantazis: it is just -- and then that is the misdirection part of her -- of the argument for r.j. reynolds. 3675 the other part of the argument is the attack on the lewises. they attacked bob for now he is living with gail. you heard the story. they both had children that needed help at some point in time. and yes, they have found each other in trying to move forward. but the common bond between them is rosemary lewis. it does not mean that bob does not love, and to this day, rosemary lewis. but they wanted -- she wanted to make that something, or reynolds wanted to make something of that, like it is something wrong with that. to be attacked on the love of his wife? you know, you can cherry-pick and you can make some stuff. bob lewis was an alcoholic. bob lewis had problems. this did not mean bob lewis did not love his wife tremendously. and it does not mean he did not hurt every day he saw her dying piece by piece, and it does not mean that he does not miss her every day. josh, will you show -- pull up that -- this is a record that is in 1997, june 22, 1997. do you see what this says? plaintiff's husband. she says he is very supportive. does that sound like -- and this is during the hell of lung cancer. this is during the time 3676 when she is dying. he is there every day with her. but they do not show you that. that is part of that misdirection. and then the other -- thank you, josh. then they say, well, he abandoned his son after rosemary died. robert. robert is in a full-time relationship with a woman. ms. parker: objection, your honor. i did not say that. mr. pantazis: there is, your honor. bob testified about that. the court: overruled. mr. pantazis: and he even adopted her child. this is -- ms. parker: same objection. mr. pantazis: he did not abandon -- the court: overruled. mr. pantazis: he did not abandon robert. robert is trying to move on with his life. as a matter of fact, early on, he moved right next door to him. this is just, again, some of this attack. now, where do we get this attack from? josh, will you put up -- it is not coincidence, i do not think, that you 3677 see this kind of plan. ms. parker: objection, under tullo. we need to approach. the court: come on up. (at the bench) ms. parker: your honor, this has gone over the line of tullo. the court: i think based on the defense's closing, i'm going to say it is fair comment at this point. you need to get "i" out of your vocabulary. mr. pantazis: i know. the court: the last thing you said was "i do not think." mr. pantazis: i'm trying. i do not mean to say that. the court: keep that out. ms. parker: can we have a continuing objection under tullo? the court: yes. (in open court) mr. pantazis: so this attack, where does it come from? is it something i have seen before? josh, do you want to put this up? smearing and belittling them. this is their 3678 consultant on how they were going to attack back in '53. to me, it is the same thing they are doing today. different people, different company -- ms. parker: objection to the reference. the court: all right. strike "to me." mr. pantazis: sorry. this is what they are doing today. same thing. you know, the other thing about this smearing and belittling. you saw all this big merchandise they put up here, and they made a big deal that she, rosemary, submitted coupons or requests for cigarettes so she could get coupons. you heard the testimony. she did that so she could get the merchandise. they did not smoke the cigarettes. they wanted the merchandise. now, why did they want the merchandise? just because some people do not live in ivory towers does not mean -- ms. parker: objection, your honor. pretrial ruling. the court: all right. strike the last phrase. mr. pantazis: just because some people, that 3679 merchandise, is a big deal to them, jackets, coolers, camping gear, they do not deserve to be belittled. that has nothing to do with this case. so why did they bring it? ask yourself, why did they bring it? if they did not do anything wrong, why did they bring stuff like that in? ms. parker: objection, your honor. that is inconsistent with the burden of proof issue. the court: all right. sustained as to that argument. mr. pantazis: why did they bring it? ms. parker: same objection. the court: all right. sustained. mr. pantazis: i will move on. you know, the other thing they talked about with mrs. lewis is addiction. eighty percent of americans during her lifetime that smoked were addicted. that is a fact. that is what -- that is what the surgeon general said. they want you to believe she is in the twenty percent. it is true, just because you are addicted does not mean you cannot quit. and we did not say mrs. lewis should have no responsibility for that. mrs. lewis accepts responsibility for her inability to quit. that is why she accepted twenty percent liability. 3680 the "they" who addicted her continued with this doubt message out there to the point where the barrage says that nobody does anything about the warnings or anything else by the ftc because of the 250 billion. this is what the ftc said. i showed you this before, but it is important. the commission believes that the warning labels on cigarette packages was not successful -- excuse me. -- in overcoming the prevalent attitude towards smoking created and maintained by the cigarette companies through their advertisement, and particularly the barrage of commercials on tv. they created an atmosphere that said, okay, the health risk is out there, there is a warning out there, but you do not need to worry about that. i listed a multitude of their doubt messages. and -- ms. parker: objection, your honor. preemption. the court: overruled. mr. pantazis: and that permeates the entire environment. and if you are addicted, that is what you hang on to. 3681 now, you remember what this man said. he was one of the first ones that we -- that you heard his testimony. mr. heimann, 1986. he said, we do not believe the warnings are justified. we do not believe our products are injurious to health. the surgeon general is dead wrong in concluding that cigarettes causes lung cancer. this is what they were telling, '86. you know, they want to blame the customer who is addicted. they want to blame the customer who they bombarded with $250 billion worth of advertising. they want to blame the customer who dies from smoking their products and did what they wanted to do. there is only one person before this case began that ever put money in the issue, and that is reynolds. reynolds made these choices. these documents are just replete. they were making the choices of how much information, the doubt, the manipulation and the addiction of nicotine to keep people addicted. why? to sell cigarettes. why? to increase profits. that is not my words. that is theirs. that is in those documents. the only person who first put money into this equation is 3682 reynolds. and now mrs. lewis is dead. and she had died a very painful and horrible death. and yes -- ms. parker: objection, your honor, as to her damages. mr. pantazis: that mr. lewis -- the court: all right. mr. pantazis: -- observed. that is mr. lewis's damages, is what he had to -- what he witnessed of his wife's death and the loss of his wife. so she dies this death. they do not want to take any responsibility. they, lewis, admits that there were things that she maybe should have done, could have done, but not one hundred percent. that is why twenty percent is appropriate for her responsibility. they want to take the position that the customer is always wrong. but they are the ones who made it about the money first. they are appalled with the number of $9.2 million dollars. well, ladies and gentlemen, this is 22 years of being without your loved one. this is watching her die piece by piece by piece. that is not an easy thing to see. that is not an easy thing to endure. 3683 let me tell you, the only reason that this issue is before you today is not because of what mrs. lewis did, it is because of what they did. josh, will you pull up the slide of dr. burns, three percent. mrs. lewis tried to quit. but this is dr. burns' slide, based on the data that the surgeon general has. forty-eight million smokers. seventy percent want to quit. seventeen million try to quit, but only three percent are successful each year. and that is why the percentages of eighty percent addicted versus 20. mrs. lewis was -- was not in that three percent. she was in the 97 percent. but that does not mean that she is not entitled to recover or her husband is not entitled to recover. 440,000 people each year die from cigarette diseases. ms. parker: objection, your honor. preemption and relevance, state farm and williams. mr. pantazis: she brought it up, your honor. the court: overruled. mr. pantazis: mrs. lewis was one of them. you know, they brought up a youth document 3684 and said, well -- and reynolds said, well, they did not -- do you want to turn the elmo on, will? and they said, we do not -- we really are not doing this to market to youth. i did not want to go into this, but they brought it up, so i have got to show it to you. this document was within that same month, a little later, than that other document. it is an rjr document. and they talk about the report on teenage smoking between 14 and 17 and how they are losing shares. and then at the bottom, if you will notice, it says, hopefully, our various planned activities that we will be implementing in the fall will aid in some way in reducing or correcting these trends. if they were not interested in youth cigarettes, youth customers, 14 to 17, then why are they concerned about reversing those trends? it is one those misdirection times again. put up a document that says one thing. they have got another document that totally contradicts that during that same time period. they also talked about substantial cause. do you want to put that one up? 3685 this is the instruction on legal cause. in order to be regarded as a legal cause of mrs. lewis's lung cancer, addiction need not be the only cause. addiction may be a legal cause of her lung cancer even though it operates in combination with the acts of others, some natural causes, or some other causes, if the addiction contributes substantially to producing mrs. lewis's lung cancer. ms. parker: your honor, i object to that being shown without the rest of it. mr. pantazis: your honor -- the court: all right. overruled. go ahead. mr. pantazis: the point i'm trying to make is mrs. lewis -- there could be other causes for the lung cancer as long as the addiction played a substantial role as defined by this and the full -- the full instruction, you know. just because mrs. lewis contributed or there may be other factors does not mean, under the law, that addiction did not play a substantial part in the legal cause. just please read the instructions, because they, lawyers, are not supposed to be giving you instructions. they only come from the bench. and 3686 i'm not trying to. but that issue was raised with you by reynolds, and i wanted to make sure you understood. it does not have to be the only cause. it just has to be a substantial cause. turn the elmo on for me. three and 4. we believe this is not about the affirmative information she learned; it is about the information, that counter message that they put out and changed the environment. that is called the doubt and the psychological crutch. that is for no. 3 and no. 4. but i also want to let you know this. something that i do not know if i heard it correctly, so i'm going to assume that i did not. if you decide that no. 3 -- we think the answer to both of those is yes, but if you decide the answers to no. 3 and 4 are "no," that does not mean that you stop. you continue going and assess the responsibility and the compensatory damages. you continue with the -- with the form. this is just for part of the verdict, not the full verdict. so i want to make sure you are very clear that, if for some reason -- we do not think you will -- but if for some reason you find no. 3 is a 3687 "no" and no. 4 is a "no," that does not mean that you cannot award compensatory damages and assess the responsibility as it shows on there. that is just a clarification of what -- what was on there. ladies and gentlemen, my time is almost up, and i know most of you are happy with that. i do not know -- excuse me. i have been instructed by the judge to not use the word "i," because that is inappropriate in front of the jury. it is very hard listening to reynolds' position in this case. but when you listen to it, it sounds a lot like the politicians we hear today. they will not tell it like it is. they want to blame others. they want to point to others. they even degrade others to avoid responsibility for what they have clearly done. they think they can avoid accountability by trying to get the focus on others, pointing out things that, quite candidly, pale in comparison to what they themselves have done for decades, not only to mrs. lewis, but to everyone else. they do not think you will see it that way. they do not think you will see what they are doing. they think they can do whatever they have done for 3688 so many years before -- ms. parker: objection, your honor, under tullo. mr. pantazis: -- and hide the truth. the court: overruled. mr. pantazis: and hide behind -- and hide the truth. they do not think the voters -- well, in this case, the jury in volusia county -- will hold them responsible. but i'm asking you to hold them responsible. hold them for mrs. lewis damage -- excuse me -- mr. lewis's damages for the death of his wife, the loss of companionship, the pain and suffering that he has suffered. hold them responsible for the punitive nature of misconduct, the reprehensible conduct of how they marketed their products and how they manipulated these deadly products to the public, including mrs. lewis. hold them responsible for just their conduct and callousness to the health and well-being of their customers as has been described. ms. parker: objection, under state farm and williams. general comment. the court: all right. you have to rephrase that. 3689 mr. pantazis: i'm going to sit down. do not smile too big. but -- but i do want you to know that i do appreciate your time and your effort, and i appreciate you listening to me. and i ask for your forgiveness too, because i have stood up here and i have cross-examined witnesses and i have made objections, and i'm sure i've made some people angry. i did not -- we do not -- we lawyers do not -- ms. parker: your honor, objection. improper argument. mr. pantazis: we lawyers? the court: well, wrap it up. mr. pantazis: okay. we lawyers do not do that to be bad or hurt. we do it because we believe in our cases. so thank you for your attention. thank you for -- on behalf of the lewis family. thank you for being here and giving our case your utmost.