mr. whittemore: good afternoon. i'm not going to say: now for the rest of the story, again. we started out almost three weeks ago, and the first thing i want to do is thank you for your attention, time and patience on behalf of myself and our team, our lawyers that have been working together with our paralegals. but most importantly, on behalf of mr. and mrs. lock. i told you in the beginning of this case that this was an important case for them, and i think now you know why that is the case. i also, at the beginning of the opening statement told you that this is a case about a 50-year-old conspiracy of lies, conceal, concealment, disinformation and the creation of doubt. i'll stand by the statement because the evidence you heard over the last three weeks has confirmed exactly what i told you would happen. the purpose of today is not to go back and reprove everything; it is not to go back and prove what i told you was correct, but it is basically to summarize the things that happened to mr. and mrs. lock, and the things that were done by r.j. reynolds tobacco company and philip morris. and what i'm going to do today is summarize some of the things that you have heard. i'm not going to go through everything because it would take us another three weeks to do that and i know you do not want to do that. i also notice that all of you have taken notes, the court has told you you can rely upon your notes. one of the beautiful things about a jury system is that each one of us, when we are listening to something will miss it, but when you have the collection of six people in a jury box somebody else is going to pick up something else that may have been missed. the collective wisdom of the jury is something that works and it is something that we in this courtroom are very proud of. so what have you heard in the case? you have heard about 50-year conspiracy, and i want to go through some of that. i told you that started back in 1953 when the rumors came out that cancer was caused by cigarette smoking. it was more than a rumor, and what you heard now is that a lot of this began with a mouse painting experience by wynder and graham where they painted tars on the back of mice and there was a determination it caused cancer. well, the industry heard about that. r.j. reynolds tobacco company, philip morris, and the rest of the major manufacturers and sellers of the tobacco products and cigarettes in this country, they heard about it and they panicked. claude teague, in 1953, compiled a consortium, a paper, where he examined 78 scientific journals that had talked about cancer, the relationship of cancer to smoking, and he presented that report to r.j. reynolds. claude teague was a research scientist with reynolds. you heard about him, you heard several monographs from claude teague. you heard about the 1953 report, you heard about the 1973 report, and there are a number of other reports that were put into evidence that you are going to have the opportunity, when we finish with our comments, to take back into the jury room. and what i want to show you is there is a whole bunch. one of the things — and this is not even all of them. the rest of them are over there by the clerk. so we are going to try to highlight some of them. what i will try to do is give you a couple exhibit numbers because these are all introduced into evidence by exhibit numbers. i'm not going to cover them all. you heard mr. acosta talk about them, you heard dr. cummings talk about them. i'm just going to give you a couple highlights. but what you are going to find out, first of all, is claude teague did this survey of cancer research, and it is plaintiffs' exhibit 1643. february 1953, the survey of cancer research. i'm only going to go through a couple pages at this point. the whole document will be there, and if anybody feels from the defense i left something out — we are not cherry picking — we are pointing out important information because there is no way i can finish today if i went through everything. page 5. can you all read that? at the bottom: the recent rate of increase of cancer from the respiratory system rather closely parallels the recent introduction and rate of increase of cigarette consumption, and this together with the fact that until very recently, the vast majority of cigarette smokers have been men, has raised a very considerable question. there appears to be a growing suspicion or even acceptance among medical men and cancer researchers that the parallel increase in cigarette consumption and incidence of cancer of the respiratory system are more than a coincidence. this alone is enough to put r.j. reynolds and the industry on notice that there is an issue. let me go to page 6. because of the possible connection between tobacco smoking and cancer of the respiratory system, it is well for manufacturers of tobacco products to be aware of past and present cancer research. you heard about ti, you heard about the tobacco institute, you heard about ctr, you heard about the tirc, and you heard dr. cummings tell you that this was set up reportedly to tell the world what they are going to do. they were going to look into the dangers of cigarette smoking. but what dr. cummings told you, it was a sham, it was a farce, it was a pr project. and instead of actually letting the world know and letting the people in this country know about the dangers of smoking and what reynolds knew and what philip morris knew, what the other manufacturers knew, they set out a scheme to confuse, to create doubt, to create disinformation in the american public so they would not really believe that cigarettes were dangerous. i'm going to go right to the summary and take a small section out of this. in the conclusions, studies of clinical data tend to confirm the relationship between heavy and prolonged tobacco smoking in incidence of cancer of the lung. that is the conclusion of claude teague in 1953, almost 70 years ago — 60 years ago now. so what did reynolds do about it? what did philip morris about it? what did the rest of the industry do about it? they convened all of the chief executive officers of those companies in the plaza hotel in december, 1953. and they embarked upon a plan, a scheme, a sham to create doubt and concealment with their customers. how did they do it? they got together, they hired one of the most reputable, one of the best known, and the best pr firms in the country, hill & knowlton. hill & knowlton met with the tobacco industry the next day, december 15th. and by january 4th, less than a couple weeks later, after working feverishly over the christmas holidays, the industry put out the frank statement. this was an industry response. and as you heard from dr. cummings, this was put out in almost every major newspaper in the country. the industry response for the wynder and graham studies, the recommendation of hill & knowlton and the decision of the ceos of the r.j. reynolds tobacco company and philip morris and the other manufacturers, among other things — and this is exhibit 1 in your exhibits, so you will get a chance to read it indepth. this statement is being issued because we believe the people are entitled to know where we stand on this matter and what we intend to do about it. an absolute lie. that is not what they did about it. sponsors, the american tobacco company, brown & williamson tobacco company, philip morris & compan r.j. reynolds tobacco company. and as you have heard, this resulted in — i'll leave that up for now — this resulted in the formation later of the tobacco institute, the center for tobacco research, tirc, all these entities, all of whom were working together to accomplish the same purpose, and that is to dispel the information that was beginning to come out to the public and that those companies knew that cigarette smoking caused cancer. they continued with that scheme and with that position until 2000 — until october of 2000, when they admitted for the first time as an industry that, yes, cigarette smoking causes cancer. that is the 50 years i was talking about. 50 years. and you heard document after document that was developed over the last few years. secret documents, confidential documents, documents in the files of philip morris, in the files of reynolds, in the files of american tobacco, in the files of brown & williamson, in the files of the other manufacturers that said: yes, there is a connection and we have got to do something about it. the internal documents said that we have got to hide these documents, we have got to create a public relations plan to dispel the truth so the public continues to smoke our cigarettes. there were comments by lawyers that they were to bury the information. that very word was used in some of the documents that you saw. is that what they said they would do? is that what they told the american public that they were going to do? this is being issued because we believe the people are entitled to know where we stand on this matter and what we intend to do about it. they did not do it. let me show you one of the things that came out. this was exhibit pmu 2759. this is one of the ads, the life magazine ad. i'll put this up so you can see it. i'll just read this. it is december 21st, 1953, right in the middle of the plan — i'm sorry. right in the middle of the plan over the christmas holidays, what are we going to do about it? life magazine was one of those magazines that carried articles about cigarettes for years. one of the magazines people read. it is a picture of dr. evert graham — sorry about the glare — a picture of the mice. on the last page, what was the american tobacco company's response? the american tobacco company hastened to point out that tests on mice do not prove that tobacco can cause lung cancer in man. the beginning of the conspiracy. the beginning of the lies, the deceit, the casting of doubt. as i mentioned, the response of the industry continued to be the same until 2000. until 2000, when the confidential and the private documents that had been in the files of these companies finally became public. the companies had no choice at that point to say: yeah, i got caught with my hands in the cookie jar. we admit now that cigarettes cause cancer. we all know that today. the difficult part of a trial like this is taking, especially younger people, back to the '50s, the '60s, the '70s, when most of the people in this country smoked. most of the men, many of the women, when nobody thought it was bad. it was a socially acceptable thing to do. dr. cummings talked to us about the sociability. mr. lock told us about his history. in the '50s, when mr. lock started to smoke, everybody smoked. smoked in businesses, in offices, in movies, in airplanes, in cars, in public places, smoking was allowed. there were ashtrays everywhere. restaurants. houses had ashtrays for guests and for the people that lived there. one of the things you heard in cross-examination by the testimony — i believe it was dr. kaplan, the defense witness, and he said: well, people smoked for a lot of reasons, but one of the main reasons is because of the parents. okay. kids want to be like their parents. everybody knows that. there is nothing wrong with that. kids want to emulate their parents. so what does an eight-year old do and what does his 12-year old brother do? they want to be just like dad, they want to be just like adults. all the adults are smoking. it is cool. all the ads are: if you want to be cool, if you want to be manly — or if you are a woman, if you want to be glamorous, if you want to do the kinds of things that glamorous people do, like yachting, like car racing, like going to the beach with parties, if you are a kid, you want to do that. that is what kids want to do. so why do kids want to do that and what happens — what is the connection between that and the industry? well, why do you think the parents smoked? why do you think the parents smoked? because everybody else smoked, all of their friends, all their family members. why do all of their friends and why do all of their family members smoke? it is because of the $250 billion that dr. cummings told us about that was spent by the tobacco industry between 1940 and 2005. $250 billion, that is with a b. now, i tried to do some — my calculator does not even go up that high. if you are talking about 250 — got it. so why do you think people smoke? why do you think people smoke? we listen to robert heimann. robert heimann is a phd. he was the head of his company, this tobacco company, american tobacco company, and he was specifically asked in his deposition that is one of the few tobacco company people you heard in detail, he was asked in his deposition if advertising worked. you could almost hear a chuckle when he said: yeah, it works. we expect it to work, we expect people to rely upon it. we expect people to respond to it. the tobacco industry, including american tobacco, including r.j. reynolds, including philip morris, would never have spent $250 billion in advertising over 50 years if it did not work. that is why people smoke. they made it acceptable, they made it social, they told the public that this is not bad for you. do you remember the ad more doctors smoke camels than any other cigarette? there was a big group of ads that were put up there, and one of them was a doctor in a white coat: more doctors smoke camels than any other cigarette. what kind of an impression is that intended to make? it worked. it worked. it worked for 50 years. now, we heard from dr. cummings — and i'm going to talk a little bit about some of the witnesses because that is part of what we do in closing statement. what did they say? well, dr. cummings told us about the history. he told us about what the industry knew, what the internal documents said, and he also told us what the public was told. i'm not going to go back through that. those are all in the documents. you know the drill. the drill was the industry knew it was bad, they knew it caused cancer, they knew it was addictive. and every time something came out like a surgeon general's report, like a reader's digest article, like an article on newspaper, their response was: get the ti cranking, get the ctr cranking, get the tirc cranking, and put out something else. put out a white paper. now, sometimes they knew that those reports were coming out before they came out. so did they wait to respond? no, they preempted it; they came out early. and they put out things in the media to mask, to create doubt about what was going to be coming out. and you saw those — you saw many of them. i'm going to talk about a couple of them, but you saw them all. every time something came out that appeared to be a threat to the industry, a threat to rj. reynolds, a threat to philip morris, their pr machine cranked up and put something else out. so what did it do to people that really were not sure who to believe? it created doubt. it created a means by which they could rationalize what they were doing, they could justify what they were doing. it is human nature, and they knew that. they knew that. let me show you a document that was put out by joseph f. cullman. remember him? philip morris? this was january 29th, 1964, plaintiffs exhibit 1375. 1375. january 29th, 1964, right about the time of the surgeon general's report. you heard about that, and you are going to hear about it again. so what did mr. cullman say? the public relations program: we must in the near future provide some answers which will give smokers a psychological crutch — a psychological crutch — and a self-rationale to continue smoking. that is what i'm talking about. that says it all. that says everything about the industry pr campaign for 50 years. that is disgusting. that is the reprehensible kind of conduct for which we are going to ask for punitive damages to be awarded, but we will come back to that later. i told you also that you do not have to believe michael cummings because he is going to have the documents to prove it, and he did. they have been put into evidence. you have seen most of them. it seemed like a long time going through three days of documents, but think about how long it would take to go through 16 million documents that he accumulated in his facility. we picked some — we could not play them all, could not show them all. and there is nothing wrong with that. we picked out ones that will show you what the companies were doing. it was very clear what they were doing. i also told you that philip morris and reynolds would not deny it — they would not dispute what we are telling you, and they did not because they cannot. you did not hear one person on that witness stand deny, dispute, or contradict what the documents said because they cannot. there are a couple reasons they cannot. number one is because it is the truth, but, number two, it is because as we mentioned early on in this case — this case is a continuation of a case that started in 1994, may 5th, called the engle case. it was a yearlong trial which a number of things were found. and what the court read to you a few minutes ago is jury instructions that say that if mr. lock is determined by you to be a class member, which he should be, then he is entitled to the findings that resulted in that trial. and those findings are binding on all of us. i would like to go through some of them. so who is the engle class member? class members are cigarette smokers who on or before november 21st, 1996, suffered from a disease or medical condition caused by an addiction to smoking cigarettes containing nicotine. that is what i told you in the opening statement. i'm telling you the same thing. the court is telling you that now in the jury instructions that you have been given. cigarette smokers — obviously, mr. lock was a cigarette smoker at this point, who on or before november 21st, 1996, suffered from a disease or medical condition, copd. it is not disputed that he had copd by 1995 — it was diagnosed by dr. avery, and we showed you the medical records, which you have already seen, to confirm that — caused by an addiction to smoking cigarettes containing nicotine. caused by an addiction to smoking cigarettes containing nicotine. now you know why there was so many days spent on the concept of addiction. we have to prove greater weight of the evidence, not beyond the proof of the reasonable doubt, but a greater weight of the evidence, a more persuasive evidence, that he was addicted and that that was a cause of his disease, of his copd. that is what we got to prove. so you heard a lot about addiction. but let us go through some of the things that we know as a result of this. i'm going to talk about addiction. the things that happened in that trial are, first, smoking cigarettes causes chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, copd — that is what mr. lock has; that is what he was diagnosed in may of 1995 — small cell lung cancer, a tragic thing is now he is got that; peripheral vascular disease, he is got that; coronary heart disease, he is got that; he is got aortic aneurism, he is got that. smoking cigarettes causes these diseases; that is the law. that is what is been determined. that is not an issue. nicotine in cigarettes is addictive; that is a fact. that is not an issue, it is addictive. every one of the cigarettes that was smoked by mr. lock that was manufactured by those companies contained nicotine. dr. cummings talked about it, dr. goldman talked about it. that is not disputed. that is not an issue. third — and this gets to the findings that establish legal precedence that are binding on you, the defendants — these two defendants — placed cigarettes on the market that were defective and they were unreasonably dangerous. absent of these findings, we would have to prove that. we do not have to prove that in this case, it is been proven. it is already been determined by this other jury. fourth, the defendants concealed — concealed or omitted — material information. material information means something, it makes a difference. they concealed or omitted material information not otherwise known or available knowing — they concealed it, they omitted it, and they knew it — that the material was false or misleading or they failed to disclose a material fact, a fact that somebody should have known concerning or proving the health effects and/or the addictive nature of smoking cigarettes. that is a fact. you do not have to decide that. it was confirmed by everything you heard in this trial, but it is already been proven and you do not have to make that determination because it is already been made. think about these findings and you will think about reprehensibility later. concealment, omission, knowledge, false, disclosed, health effects. health effects, that is cancer-causing addiction. they denied addiction. i cannot help but think about the video that we played of the seven ceos of major tobacco companies in this country, including r.j. reynolds and philip morris, standing in front of congress raising their right hand in 1994 and just flat-out lying. is that reprehensible? you the jury will have to decide. number five, the defendants agreed with other cigarette manufactures, the other major companies — philip morris agreed with reynolds, american tobacco company, brown & williamson, the other manufacturers to conceal the frank statement. that is what we are talking about, the — the frank statement and everything that happened after that — ctr, tirc, ti — or omit information regarding the health effects of cigarette smoking or the addictive nature of smoking cigarettes with the intention, with the intention that smokers and members of the public would rely upon them to their detriment. that is what happened to mr. lock. that is what happened to 440,000 people a year that die in this country from smoking cigarettes. 440,000 people, the size of a city every year from smoking cigarettes. it is not disputed. six, the defendants sold or supplied cigarettes that were defective, so a little different legally but it is the same thing we talked about before. seven, the defendants sold or supplied cigarettes that at the time of sale or supply did not conform to representations of fact made by the defendants. they did not conform with what they were telling people, the public, mr. lock and others. the defendants were negligent. it is already been decided. you do not have to figure out why, you do not have to figure out how, it is been decided, you need to accept those findings. they were. now i want to talk about these companies. we talked about this before, but i want to make sure we all understand what we are talking about philip morris is not at issue, it is the same company, philip morris is a defendant, they have always manufactured marlboros, you have heard about marlboros. the reynolds thing is a little tricky. it is not disputed that r.j. reynolds is legally responsible for the actions or inactions of brown & williamson and american tobacco, and that is important because you heard that some of these other companies manufactured some of the cigarettes that mr. lock smoked. but the legal effect is — and this is not disputed — is that whatever responsibility that brown & williamson had and american tobacco had is assumed by and is the responsibility of r.j. reynolds in this case. so regardless of whether it is brown & williamson or american tobacco, r.j. reynolds is the proper defendant. that is not at issue. a couple other things i want to talk about is the brands. because each defendant is entitled to defend their case. each defendant is a separate defendant. they did get together and agree — so there is a conspiracy element in the instructions, but you are going to see in the verdict form that they are treated separately. r.j. reynolds manufactured, or is responsible for, camel and doral that mr. lock smoked. brown & williamson, lucky strikes, the cigarettes he smoked in the service primarily. the american tobacco, the pall mall cigarettes. r.j. reynolds are responsible for those brands that mr. lock smoked: camel, doral, luckies, lsmfp, pall mall. and as we mentioned, philip morris and marlboro. so we know what the brands were. what i would like to do is talk a little bit now about — i had this long timeline the other day, three big long boards — i'm not going to do that again. you heard the testimony. you heard what the history was through the family and friends. let us look and see what the evidence showed. he was bom in 1940, mr. lock. 1948, he snuck a cigarette with his brother from his dad. he wanted to be like his dad. it was a camel. he began to smoke luckies, pall malls, marlboros, doral. 1948, he started — he began to be a regular smoker. a couple years after that, right around 1950, 1951. then you hear a lot about — you already heard a lot about labels. you had a caution label that came out in 1966. that is not disputed. we agree with that. the warning came out in '70. rotating warnings came out in '85. and one of the things that came up in our voir dire was a question about whether it would be of interest when somebody started smoking. and the implication, that is obvious, did they start smoking before the warnings, how long did they smoke before the warnings came out? well, this is the answer. 1966. 18 years after he smoked his first cigarette. 16 years after he became a regular smoker. now, this was not a warning, this was a caution. yeah, caution labels are required on cigarette packs, and you are going to see pictures of that, i'm sure. you have already seen them. the warnings got stronger. but the question that was asked is when did you start, when did the warnings come out. and in this case, what we got is a 16 to 18-year period of smoking before any warning ever came out. when did the industry know about the problems? when did claude teague's memo come out? 1953. when did they convene at the plaza hotel? when did the frank statement come out? this did not happen until a long time — by then he was addicted. he was addicted by every plaintiff witness that you heard. what happened to mr. lock? just as a summary, 1995, he was diagnosed with copd. 1998, stenosis of the femoral artery. 1999, abdominal aortic aneurism. 2003, carotid artery disease. 2007, the copd had become severe. that record is also in evidence. and tragically in 2012, only a couple months ago, he was diagnosed with small cell lung cancer, a disease that is only caused - only caused by cigarette smoking. so that is what happened. that is what happened to him. it is 47 years before that first cigarette and copd diagnosis. while we are talking about it, we are going to come back to this, we talked about the copd diagnosis. this is in the medical records. this is dr. avery's diagnostic exam. you remember that on june 28th he went in, he had an exam. dr. avery suspected but he was not confirmed, he had moderate obstruction, told richard he had moderate emphysema. july 12th confirmation by spirometry, and also you notice it was also at that point in time he had chest x-rays. chest x-rays showed copd, so it was not just the spirometry, it was chest x-ray, it was the history, it was all the different things that that doctor needed to make that diagnosis. that diagnosis was made in 1995. that is all findings for engle. let me go back and sort of — i'm getting ahead of myself a little bit. we talked about the findings, talked about the corporate brands. so the question comes up: what is all this got to do with richard lock? that is what the defense said. why are we going through this whole thing? what did mr. lock have to do with all this? well, i just showed you what mr. lock had to do with all this. mr. lock was one of the people, one of the people who was exposed to the advertising, who was exposed to everything else, along with all his peer groups — and you are going to hear a little bit about reliance. there is a very important part in that reliance instruction because mr. lock said i do not know what i would have heard if i had heard it, but what he did do is he tried to emulate his parents, he tried to be just like his dad. and that is why i went through the discussion a minute ago about why people smoke. well, dr. kaplan got part of it right, they do smoke partly because of their family. the question really is: well, why does the family smoke? well, the family smokes because the $250 billion of advertising and the lies and concealments of the industry about whether cigarette smoking is dangerous. so this is a thing that builds on itself. now, does mr. lock know as a psychiatrist, a psychologist, sociologist why he started smoking? all he knows is it was a cool thing to do and his dad smoked and his big brother smoked, and they would steal cigarettes from the parents. i would submit it is a fairly common type of thing that happened with 8-year olds and 12-year olds when their parents smoked. but the real question is why do the parents smoke? and that is the thing that dr. kaplan never talked about. we will get to addiction in a minute. that first cigarette, though — obviously nobody is addicted before they taste their first cigarette, so why do they smoke? what does it have to do with mr. lock? so let us look at history of mr. lock smoking. you recall mr. lock had to make a list because he had trouble — he did not want to admit it was because of the chemo. he said because i'm 72, but he had been going through chemo for two weeks, three weeks. but what he did do, he had sat down and he made notes and he handed the notes to the defense lawyer when he asked them for him he said: here, nothing happened. this is what he said. in the mid to late 50s, he was smoking lucky strikes. brown & williamson. reynolds. in the '60s, he smoked pall mall. mid '60s to early 2000s, he smoked marlboro, philip morris product. you remember his son talking today: what does your dad smoke? well, he smoked philip morris, he always smoked marlboros. well, he was not with his dad every minute of the day. but his perspective was, in the global picture, the overall impression, is that is what the dad smoked and it is pretty consistent with his dad's description of what he smoked in the time when his son would have known. it is a lot. it is a large percentage. but he also smoked camels and he smoked his first cigarette in '48, smoked camels in the mid '80s to early '90s. there really was a little bit of time after he smoked his first couple cigarettes until he came a regular smoker, and he was not sure. he said he smoked a lot of stuff. but i think you also heard some evidence from somebody that people tended to remain with the brands they smoked as kids. so circumstantially, did he keep smoking camels for a while when he joined the service? he smoked camels. then in the mid 2000s he smoked dorals. so if you add all these up, there is really not a whole lot of difference when you add this — you got the reynolds and brown & williamson. you got american. if you had these and these and these and these, you are going to come up with about the same thing. so in the cumulative effect of all the smoking, and dr. goldman told us about that, every cigarette adds up to the disease process, every one of them. so how much of the smoking was due to reynolds products or its predecessors, how much was due to philip morris? there really is not a lot of difference. there is really not a lot of difference. that is why we share this the way it is. so what happened with mr. lock? mr. lock smoked as a kid, became a regular smoker, he bought them in vending machines, got them wherever he could because you could buy them anywhere, anywhere, service stations, vending machines, et cetera. 1964, he got married to peggy lock. and you saw peggy, you met peggy, you saw the picture of the buying the roses and the singing and so on and i do not need to tell you about that, that is not going to be something you will forget. peggy did not like smoking, and she flat out told him: i do not like it. you are going to quit your drinking, you are going to quit smoking and you are going to quit cussing. being a good guy, he quit drinking, could not quit cigarettes. that is what the case is all about. a couple years later, he went to vietnam. and the sequence of this is important and i'll tell you why in a few minutes. he went to vietnam, he got hurt. you heard a little bit about what happened. he did not want to tell you about it. dr. kaplan told you about it. dr. kaplan blamed everything on ptsd. well, mr. lock was in vietnam, they were ambushed, he got sent home. he is still got shrapnel in his shoulder, right next to his lung. the time frame is important because in the service, you got your c rations, you got lucky strikes. he came home, he was still smoking, he continued to smoke. he smoked roughly a pack a day for 45 to 50 years, depending on which record you look at. there are a couple things i would like you to look at that really are going to have an impact on your decision about addiction. what i would like to do is talk about — i'm going to put this on the board. this is instruction number two, which is on page 5 of your instructions you have with you. this is going to be the first question that you were asked to answer. the first question is, first of all, definition of class members, which is what i told you a minute ago in slightly different wording. class members of cigarette smokers who on or before november 21st, '96, suffered from a disease or medical condition caused by an addiction to smoking cigarettes containing nicotine. the parties have agreed that richard s. lock suffered from copd before november the 1st, 1996. that is contained in dr. avery's record. there is really no dispute about that. therefore, he is a class member if an addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine was a legal cause. keep in mind the distinction between "a" and "the." was a legal cause because there is another provision we are going to talk about in a minute throughout the course of your deliberations. that is called concurring cause. but we will explain it in a minute. was a legal cause of his chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. it goes on to say that an addiction to cigarette — excuse me, an addiction to smoking cigarettes containing nicotine is a legal cause of a disease or medical condition. and this is the legal cause. and i told you in the beginning, it is not a magic term. it is just a legal term that is defined and it makes sense. and if you look through the logical relationship of causation, you are going to see there is nothing special about it. an addiction to smoking cigarettes containing nicotine is a legal cause of a disease or medical condition if it directly and in natural and continuous sequence produces or contributes substantially to producing such disease or medical condition, so that it can reasonably be said that but for an addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine, such disease or medical condition would not have been suffered. the next paragraph is important because this is the paragraph that is in each one of the legal theories causation instructions, and it is a very important concept. in order to be regarded as a legal cause of a disease or a medical condition, an addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine need not be the only cause. an addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine mav be a legal cause of a disease or a medical condition, even though it operates in combination with the — in combination with the act of another or some natural cause or some other cause, if such other cause occurs at the same time as an addiction to cigarettes and such an addiction to cigarettes contributes substantially to producing a disease or medical condition. so what is all that mean? it does not have to be the legal cause. it can be a legal cause, and it can act in concert with other things. why is that important in this case? it is important in terms of class membership with your question about addiction. it is important on the question about whether cigarette smoking caused his disease. it is important about whether cigarette — the negligence of the companies that has already been proven. was it a legal cause? it is important about reliance. it does not have to be the only thing that happened because all kinds of things combine. and what the law says, what this provision says in regard to the class membership, the smoking causing disease, the negligence and the reliance issue is that it can act in conjunction, in combination with other things. so when you are asked about whether addiction to smoking cigarettes was a legal cause, the question is was he addicted. and even though it may have been in combination with other things, it can still be a legal cause. that is a very important concept. i also told you in the beginning of the case in opening statement that mr. lock accepts some responsibility. now, he is mad. he is angry about the situation he is in. understandably so. but he told you — he told you that, yes, i can accept some responsibility for not trying harder to quit. he can accept that. you, as a jury, have to make a decision about whether he should accept it. but the other part of that acceptance is the acceptance in the instructions you got and what we have admitted is that it is in combination with the acts of the defense. in combination with the acts of the defendants. and what all that means is he can accept some responsibility, but he does not have to accept all of the responsibility. because we are going to ask you to hold the companies at least partially responsible for what happened to him. and you have an opportunity to do that. and you can see on the verdict form, which we are going to go through in a few minutes, that when you answer yes to the first question about whether he is a class member, because that is the only question to start out with. if you answer yes to whether he is a class member, and you answer yes to whether smoking caused his disease, or they are negligent, you then have an opportunity to fill in the blanks, and you have an opportunity to put in the percentages of fault that should be apportioned to r.j. reynolds for its acts and its predecessors and philip morris and also mr. lock. and the only instruction you are given on that is that the total has to be one hundred percent. and what i told you in the beginning is we accept — mr. lock will accept, which he did, some responsibility for not trying harder to quit, or more often to quit, in combination with the fault of those two defendants. we are still going to ask you to do that. now i want to talk about addiction. let us see what the witnesses say. dr. goldman was our expert pulmonologist, well respected in tampa, he is head of his department. he is testified for plaintiffs for us a lot of times because he is willing to step up and talk about it. he said mr. lock was addicted, and his addiction to cigarettes was a legal cause, or at least a cause, medical cause of the copd, the small cell lung cancer and the other diseases that we mentioned. his opinion was, yes, his addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine caused those diseases. he also talked about the mechanism of receptors. he talked about the mechanism of copd, what it was, what happens to people and how, as time goes by, somebody may quit, their lung capacity never goes back to that normal person; it just does not continue to keep going down as far. once the damage is done, it is done. it is irreplaceable. you cannot fix it, you cannot cure it. it does not go back to that of a nonsmoker. you heard from dr. cummings, in addition to all of the things you heard about with regard to the acts of the defendants, he talked about addiction. here is a guy that has spent his life trying to help people quit smoking. he spent his life examining documents of the industry. he is run a cessation clinic. we are very fortunate to be able to have dr. cummings come and testify. our clients are fortunate, and you as a jury are fortunate to have somebody with his capabilities, his background, his experience, to be able to come and explain to us what happened behind the scenes in these industries with philip morris, reynolds, american tobacco company, brown & williamson. but he is also got hands-on clinical experience because he runs these clinics. he was in new york for a long time, he recently moved to join the medical university in south carolina in psychiatry, behavioral science department. he is still doing the same work. he knows about addiction, he knows about how you measure addiction, he knows about how you define addiction. but he told you there are a number of different definitions of addiction. you have definitions by the companies. you can have definitions by the surgeon general. you can have definition by the heavy smoker index he used is one of them. he said you can have a can he have in addition by the dsm-iv. he talked about a number of definitions of addiction and the ways you measure addiction. but one thing he said under every single one of those criteria, every single one of those different methods, mr. lock was addicted and his addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine caused copd and his other diseases. he was not a one-dimensional guy. he was a guy that had the experience of having reviewed the surgeon general's report. he is at that level in the profession and actually authored certain articles of the surgeon general's reports. so what does the defendant do? the defendant parades in dr. kaplan. dr. kaplan seemed like a nice guy. he is a psychiatrist. he is a psychiatrist who uses only one method, dsm-iv. he did not even look at the other methods, he did not consider the other definitions. he said: well, there is other definitions, i do not need it. he testified: well, mr. lock was not addicted. dr. kaplan does not agree with the surgeon general. he wants to use his own definition. he did not even agree with the number of statements that mr. acosta read to him from the dsm-iv handbook. he disagreed with those. he said: well, you know, i used to disagree and now i agree. well, who knows why that is, but at one time he did not even agree with that. but he does not, he still does not agree with the surgeon general's definition of addiction. so he comes up with mr. lock is not addicted and he smokes because of ptsd. well, when he first started talking, he seemed to make some sense, but the more he talked, the less sense he made. it became very clear that he was a mouthpiece. so how do we know that? i'm going to tell you one thing, and it is: when did mr. lock start smoking? eight years old, 1948. regular smoker, 1950. when did he get married? 1964. when did he start trying to stop? 1964. when did he go to vietnam and come back? over two years later. he had been smoking 18 years, had not been able to quit, and he had not yet been to vietnam. did you ever hear dr. kaplan explain how in the world ptsd caused his addiction and his inability to stop before he even went to vietnam? you did not. so i'm sitting back there and i heard the same testimony you heard, and i'm sitting there listening, i'm thinking to myself: okay. how in the world is a jury going to decide which hired expert should i believe? that is a question we have in a lot of cases. the plaintiffs hire experts, the defense hires experts and everybody throws up your hands and you say: i do not know what to do. so they start looking at other things, common sense. well, fortunately in this case you have something else to look at. regardless who you believe, regardless of whether dr. kaplan measured up to dr. cummings and dr. goldman, does he have the same criteria? does he have the same credentials? does he have the same background? does he have the same credibility? those are all things that the court is instructing you that you can consider an expert. you can accept it, you can reject it, or you can take it for whatever you think it is worth. so compare those experts. which one rises to a higher level? but once you do that, then let us go to the next step. what did dr. sholi say, mr. lock's treating doctor? what did dr. aranibar say? what did dr. avery say? these were not hired guns; these were treating doctors, these are guys that make a living taking care of patients that have the same types of diseases, the same kind of addictions that mr. lock has. dr. avery told you he had never testified before, so he does not make his money testifying. he is not proud of the fact that he is now board certified in forensic medicine where he spends somewhere between 35 and fifty percent of his time testifying. dr. avery did not do that, dr. sholi does not do that. dr. sholi was nervous, you could tell by watching his deposition, he was not particularly happy of being there, i do not think. but he did the best he could, he told the truth. and what dr. sholi, dr. aranibar, dr. avery told you in no uncertain terms, mr. lock was addicted. his addictions to cigarettes containing nicotine caused these diseases. it was not just a little bit. i want to go through — i cannot even remember all the things dr. avery said, but i made some notes about what he said. dr. avery said — dr. avery, by the way, has a phi beta kappa, he teaches at columbia university. he documented 20 cigarettes a day for 45 years. he said mr. lock was highly motivated. his attempts are far greater than anyone else he had ever seen in his practice. he was desperate. he was hopeful. he made extraordinary attempts to quit. he describes pushing an iv pole down the hall while he was in the hospital. a couple of you chuckled when you heard that. you can just visualize that. here's a guy with his gown wide open, his iv pole, he is pushing down the hall to go outside and smoke a cigarette. that is addiction. it made an impact on dr. avery. he wanted to get off cigarettes but he seemed unable to get off cigarettes. he clearly struggled. he called him heroic. he called him heroic. now, on cross-examination, there was an attempt to try to discredit dr. avery of what his conclusions were, but what did he say on cross-examination? on cross-examination, he said mr. lock tried every conceivable method to quit. he wanted to quit, he actually used a bell curve example. and i do not know — most of you probably know what a bell curve is, but a bell curve is one of these deals where you measure something like this (indicated) and you have whatever you are measuring and he said, on the quit line, he was way over here, he is way over on the other side of the bell curve. that was his way of saying he was way above normal. he tried much more than anybody else to do that. he said he was addicted, he tried hard to quit. i cannot think of anyone in my career — this is a guy that was, i think, 17 years in private practice and then went to hospice, has been in the hospice industry taking care of sick people since — i cannot think of anyone in my career who did more to try to quit. he testified that mr. lock's copd and his other diseases were caused by his addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine. now, those are what the treating doctors say. they are not getting paid to testify. they do not have a dog in the fight. we do not even have to believe them, though. so let us look at some of the other things we have got. and i'm going to go through these very quickly. we have got medical records, and what we did is we went through the medical records. all the medical records are in evidence. i believe it is 608, whatever the number is. it is the one with the six volumes, now, '64 to '95, there is not much in the way of medical records, but what you heard that mr. lock and some of his family members testified, he had multiple attempts to quit: acupuncture, hypnosis, cut cigarettes, hide cigarettes, cold turkey, hide ashtrays, change routine, switch to light cigarettes. all those things he did to try to quit before 1995. 1995 is when the records really start to be some significance. and i've just highlighted things. if you go through these, you are going to find 81 examples of attempts to quit. 81, in addition to all the things that happened before that. that is the heroic that dr. avery was talking about, tranquilizers, nicotine patch, cessation consultations, zyban, reduction of cigarettes, zyban, cessation, counsel, cessation, counsel, counsel, consultation, cessation, nicotine gum, nicotine patch. it goes from 2000 to 2002. cessation class, nicotine replacement, patches, cessation classes, nicotine replacement, cut down, zyban, zyban, cessation classes. i think dr. cummings said he should have received an advanced degree in cessation school, something along those lines. and these are just examples, '02 to '06. chantix was a new one. more of the same. chantix, chantix, counseling, reduction, try to fight, more counseling, medication, electric cigarettes, nicotine gum, trying small cigars. nothing helped, nothing helped. now, if mr. lock was coming into this courtroom and never tried to smoke — or never tried to quit, we would not be here. we would not be here. he did. he did everything humanly possible to try. and you heard dr. kaplan say: well, fifty percent of the people he treats are addicted. if mr. lock was not addicted, nobody is addicted. dr. avery said nobody that he had ever seen in his practice tried harder to quit, and he still could not. let me talk about one other thing. we do not even have to relv on that. there is more. i forgot about this one, here is another one, i'm not even going to show it to you. it is more of the same. you heard about, from dr. — i believe it was cummings — you heard about diagnostic criteria. it is used by doctors in the records. if you look at the records, not only do you have conclusions about trying to quit, you got actual diagnoses, these are codes. this is the code, tobacco use disorder, also tobacco dependence. 2001 morgan plant, 3051 is tobacco use disorder, tobacco dependence. that is a code, that is in the records. that was a diagnosis by that doctor in that facility. 2002, diagnostic code, tobacco use disorder. 2003, the same. 2010, the same. now, it looks as though 3/11 and the 4/19 are the same, it looks like they are the same. but what you got here is a coding date. there was an additional coding where it looks like the same visit. so they coded it when he went on 3/11, they coded again on 4/19, both of them is the same. then you got another document. you have really eight different things, dr. lamar's, 2010, dr. deaner (phonetic), tobacco use code, 3051, sun coast lung center. we could not do any more. i do not think we can do anymore. mr. lock was addicted, and his addiction was the cause under the definition you have gotten of his copd and every other disease he is gotten. i want to show you a memorandum that talks about what the company did, what they did not do. this is 1980, so we are past '53, we are past the '70s, we are now in 1980. kloepfer, what we call the kloepfer memorandum, september 9th, 1980. it is a ti document, tobacco institute document. again, the organization that is funded by these two defendants and others. in july 1980, talking about mr. cohen — he sent me and i made available throughout ti, tobacco institute, and reported a monograph on cigarette smoking as a dependence process. in its foreword, pollin says smoking is addictive. this is 1980. you remember defendants standing up in congress in 1994 denying it? cigarette smoking is more addictive than using heroin, hooking two-thirds of the people who have ever smoked. that is exhibit 2339. 2339. the worst part of the whole thing is this — and it really talks about what the companies do, how they defend cases, and why you have not seen anybody other than one doctor brought forward by the defense to talk about addiction. the entire matter — mr. weaver: objection, your honor. may we approach? the court: yes. [#deleted sidebar] [#deleted recess#] mr. whittemore: thank you, your honor. i'm going to try to wrap up in about 15 minutes. i did not read this — this was the page of that same exhibit, the kloepfer memo. the entire matter of addiction is the most potent weapon a prosecuting attorney can have in a lung cancer/cigarette case. and we cannot defend continuing smoking as a free choice if the person is addicted. this is america. we have choices. the companies have choices, too. they have a choice not to make a defective product, they have a choice not to be negligent. they have a choice to tell the truth, the whole truth. if they want people to buy their products, then they should tell the consumers everything about the products that they should know. r.j. reynolds, philip morris did not do that. there are two other documents i want to show you and then i'm going to go through the verdict form with you very quickly. the first document is plaintiffs exhibit 8000.0781. this was the document that you saw. it was the r.j. reynolds document, form: brief reply primarily for children. it is a form letter that was sent out or prepared to be sent out to replies to children. despite all the research going on, medical science has not found any conclusive evidence that any element in cigarettes, tobacco, or tobacco smoke causes human disease, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera. a bald-faced lie, and the worst of the worst that can be done is to lie to the most important part of our country, our children. 8000.781. and the last document i'm going to show you is plaintiffs exhibit 219. this is what we call the willow ridge letter, also an r.j. reynolds document, january 11th, 1990. 1990. 47 years after the teague memo and the mouse painting. again, you can read the whole thing at 219. despite all the research going on, the simple and unfortunate fact is that the scientists do not know the cause or causes of chronic diseases reported to be associated with smoking. the answers to the many unanswered controversies surrounding smoking and the fundamental causes of the diseases often statistically associated with smoking, we believe can only be determined through much more scientific research. our company intends, therefore, to continue to support such research in the continuing search for answers. manager, public information, public relations department. 1990. 47 years after the teague memo to children. now, you are going to hear a lot about warnings, you are going to hear a lot about surgeon general's reports, but each time you hear that, i would ask you to think about hugh cullman standing up or sitting down in the harry riesner video that you saw in 1971 that said, as he puffed on his cigarette and sort of went like that, said: we do not believe there is anything injurious to our cigarettes, but if we do, we will take it out. then the ceos of major tobacco companies, including philip morris, rjr, in front of congress, 1994, 1994, under oath, under oath. talk about reprehensibility, talk about things that should not be tolerated in this society, obligations of corporations to tell the truth, it is there. i want to go through with you. i'll point to the verdict form really quickly. this is a form you are going to get at the end of the case, and it is basically a series of questions you are going to be asked to fill out. and once you elect a foreperson, the foreperson will date it, sign it, it will come back to the jury room - the courtroom, it will be read to us and that will be the end, at least for today. the first question: was plaintiff richard s. lock a member of the ensile class? the answer to that is yes. there is nothing else that we can do to prove that he was. he was. the answer: no, the case is over. to be told he is not a part of the engle class action, he is not addicted to cigarettes. go home. we absolve these defendants from any responsibility. but if you answer yes, you go on. the next question: was smoking cigarettes manufactured by the defendant, philip morris, each defendant will be treated separately, a legal cause, and you have seen the definition of legal cause — a legal cause — in conjunction with others, concurrent causes, was the cause of his loss, injury, or damage, his copd, his aortic aneurism, his lung cancer, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera, the answer to that should be yes. the next question will be the same question as it relates to reynolds and its predecessors, the same question. and you go to 4: was the negligence — not was there negligence — was the negligence, because it is already been proven, it is already been proven — was the negligence legal cause? did they fail to exercise reasonable care? did the failure to exercise reasonable care that is already been found cause the damage? did they do everything they could have done? did they exercise reasonable care? the answer is yes to that. that is philip morris, same question for reynolds. now, if you answer no to all these — again, we go home. if you answer yes to any of them, keep going. number 6 is — this is where you get to make a determination. you are not asked whether richard lock was partially at fault. we have admitted that. partially. the opportunity you have here is to look at the amount of smoking that richard lock did of the philip morris cigarettes, the reynolds cigarettes, the american tobacco cigarettes, the brown & williamson cigarettes, and what was the extent to which richard was responsible for his own injuries? i'm not going to put a percentage in that, but i will tell you that there ought to be a percentage up here for these people. richard will leave it up to you and we will leave it up to you to make the decision you should make as a jury after listening to all the evidence about what percentage of fault he shares. and i would ask you only to consider what he did to try to quit and did he exercise reasonable care? could he have done more? yeah. what percentage should he be apportioned. the total has to be one hundred percent. this is a question. the defendants have raised the defense and they said basically mr. lock filed his claim because he should have known, number one, that he had copd before 1990 — this is a defense. the defendants have the burden to prove this. unlike the rest of the case that we have to prove, the defendants have said, regardless of everything else, we are raising a defense, we have to prove our defense. the burden is on the defendants to prove this. so the greater weight of the evidence has to be shown to establish their defense, or they do not establish it. i'm seeing some quizzical looks, so we have the burden for the greater weight of the evidence for the rest of the case, the plaintiffs do. but on a defense that is raised, the defendant has to prove with the greater weight of the evidence their defense. if they do not prove that, then they do not prove that defense. what do they have to prove? they have to prove, number one, that he had copd before may 5th of 1990. there is a 1982 record. you are going to look at it, the defendants are going to show it to you. if they do not show you the whole thing, i'm going to show you the whole thing because it says: no pulmonary disease. look at the whole record because it does not reflect copd. there is been no evidence in this case that he had copd before 1995, that he was diagnosed with that. and if so, did he know or should he have exercised reasonable care should have known both, number one, that he had copd — in other words, did he know it? he had to know it in order to bring the claim, or should have been able to know it if he had to bring the claim, and that there was relationship between this and his smoking. so it is a three-legged stool. they have got to prove one leg, that he had it. two, that he knew or should have known that he had it; and, three, that there was a connection between that and smoking. and we would submit there was no evidence in the records that establishes, one, that he had copd; two, that he knew or should have known that he had copd; or, three, that there was any copd connection between smoking and copd. and, again, before 1990. we are not talking about the 1995 diagnosis; we are talking about before 1990. they have asserted this as a defense they have got to prove. the answer to that is no, based on the evidence. now, if you have answered yes to some of the other questions and you did not answer yes to this, you go home. medical expenses. i have to make sure i get this right. 347,008.43. okay. i brought this up — if i did that wrong, it is in here on exhibit 509. there is a summary of all the bills in here. that is the number. there has been no argument about that number. pain and suffering. okay. you are going to get an instruction about how you come up with that. there is no specific measurement. one of you said — and i do not remember which one of you said in the beginning — and i asked about $10 million you said, i do not think i can do that. well, i'm going to suggest it should not be more than $10 million. it is really your decision. i could come up with all kinds of reasons. you know what has happened to mr. lock? you know what is happened to him? he should have another 14.3 years to live. his doctor says he is got nine months from the day of diagnosis to a year. so he is going to lose 13 years of his life probably, probably. and what is the quality of his life? what has it been since '95? he was doing pretty well until a couple months ago. he got worse and worse. he got severe copd in 2010. it got worse. but he still functions. he is a tough guy. his doctor said he is not going to beat cancer. his copd will continue to get worse. dr. avery said it is like putting your head under water and trying to breathe. he is not going to be able to see his granddaughter get married. he is not going to see his 50th anniversary with his wife. he is going to be in excruciating pain. you all have to measure that. i could give you a number, but i will tell you $10 million is too much. we will respect whatever you decide on something less than that. but what is the loss of that 14 years? the loss of his granddaughter's wedding? the loss of his anniversary? the loss of everything else that he is going to go through? that is a number. and then you add the two. that is for you to decide. i'm tempted to tell you, but i'm not going to do it. what is the amount of damages sustained by peggy? her damages are very specific. you saw the relationship. you saw what kind of lady she is. you know what she is going to go through. you know what she is going through right now. you know, is there a specific measure to services, well, what is it cost to hire a driver? she is never driven before. what is the cost to do all the things that richard has probably done? the kind of guy he is, he probably did everything around the house. she is going to have to hire somebody to do that, if you can put a number in there. but the main thing the comfort, society, and attention that she will lose. that also is for you. did he reasonably rely, to his detriment? read the instruction carefully, read the part that talks about inference. it does not have to be a specific statement. think about why he smoked when he started. the $250 billion that was spent to encourage him and everybody around him to smoke. think about the circumstantial evidence of what they did and what he relied upon, and then think of the marlboro man. think about going to light cigarettes like dr. cummings told you about that being the fraud because people smoke harder, they smoke more cigarettes, they smoke deeper, they smoke differently even though they think it is a light cigarette. think about how he would be able to describe to you a statement they made that they concealed from him. that is why that inference language is in there. think of the inference that was done and whether he relied on the inference with all of his peer group because it is a social activity. you do what people around you do. and the answer to this is he did rely to his detriment on the concealment. they did not make it known to him. they should have. they did not. concealment is already established. did it affect richard? yes. that deals with philip morris, that deals with reynolds, the frank statement, ti, tirc, ctr. in determining the amount of damages — this is important — do not make any reduction because of the fault of any of richard. the reason for that is if you find that plaintiff richard was — if you find any fault on his part, the court, in entering judgment, will make an appropriate reduction. so the court does that. you put whatever percentage you put applicable to richard, the court will reduce the total damages by that percentage. if you reduce it before you put the number down, then it will be reduced twice because the court is still going to reduce whatever number you put down. so you do not reduce it. so it says do not make anv reduction because the court in entering judgment, will make an appropriate reduction in the damages in the event, however, that richard relied — this is to let you know what is going to happen — if there is a reliance found, there will not be a reduction because that is a different type of claim. so what we are doing is explaining to you — and the court is explaining to you that in the typical situation, do not reduce it, but you need to know for your calculation purposes that if reliance is found, there will not be a reduction, it will be one hundred percent of whatever number you say he is entitled to. under the circumstances, punitive damages, i do not have time to talk to you anymore about that. you saw the conduct. you saw the lies. you saw the conspiracy. you saw the disinformation, the deceit and the doubt that existed for 50 years. you saw the ceos of these companies talking to congress under oath and lying to them. you saw what they have done to the children. look at the instructions that you get about how to determine whether or not punitive damages are warranted. and the only thing you have to decide today is, under the circumstances of the case, whether they are warranted, and the answer is yes, yes. these companies are both in the same boat. and if you answer yes to these, then as the court mentioned, when she read the instructions to you and as the instructions say, we will have a very short second phase to determine the amount. that will not be done today. i want to thank you again for your attention. there is a lot more i would like to talk about, but at some point you have to stop and i know you all have the information you need and i again thank you, on behalf of our group and mr. and mrs. lock for your time. thank you. mr. whittemore: thank you, your honor. we are almost there. i'm not going to try to go back over and restate things i've already stated. we did that before. i'm going to try to respond to a couple of the points that were made by the defendants that i think require some identification. the first question mr. cofer asked is: why did richard lock become a smoker? advertising caused everyone to smoke, including his parents, the people he emulated. there are 250 billion reasons why richard lock and all the people around him smoked since the early '40s. that is enough; that answers the question. why did not he quit smoking? let me show you real quickly — and i'm going to try to rush through this because i know we have been here a long time. this is exhibit 2484, which is part of the philip morris website. 2484. this is where you can find information on serious health effects of smoking, quitting smoking, et cetera. i would like to go over to page five in that. this is in response to the comment that was made that i do not know how many hundreds of thousands people quit every year. let me tell you who does not quit. this is addiction - this comes right out of the fda statements on addiction cited by the philip morris on their website. it says, "each year in the united states 15 million people try to quit smoking, but less than three percent have long term success." you did not hear about that. that is on the philip morris' website. mr. cofer mentioned that dr. sholi did not say that mr. lock was addicted. if he did not, your notes are at least as good as mine, but what i can say without equivocation is there is not one treating doctor who said that he was not addicted, not one. there was also not one treating doctor that blamed his addiction on ptsd, not one. the onlv one that did was the forensic psychiatrist that came in here after he was paid by philip morris to tell you that. there was a comment that nicotine was not out — that nicotine got out of his system. well, nicotine was not out of his system when he went through nicotine replacement therapies. why did they use nicotine replacement therapies? why did not they use nicorette gum? why did not they use the patch? it was still there. it was stated that mr. lock had a choice. well, if it was a true choice — if it was a true choice — why did philip morris and r.j. reynolds hide it? it was not a true choice. the companies had choices. they had choices to tell the truth, and they did not. it was stated that philip morris did not hide information. well, what caused them to deny that cigarettes caused cancer until 2000? it was stated in 1906 that people knew that cigarettes caused cancer, cigarettes were addictive. 1906, they put this thing up on the board. why was it that in 1994 the ceos of both of these companies stood up before congress and swore under oath that cigarettes were not addictive? it was stated that in 1964 the surgeon general came out, and the companies should have agreed with the surgeon general. it was stupid not to, but they did not. they denied it, and they orchestrated a campaign of disinformation and to cast doubt on the surgeon general's opinions. and that is really what happened. it is the doubt that was created so that every person that heard everything that may indicate to them that cigarette smoking might be dangerous got something else from the cigarette industries saying do not worry about it. we do not believe it is dangerous. if there is anything in it, we would find it and we would tell you about it. they did not do that. they did not do that, and they spent $250 billion over 45 years convincing the public that they were right. richard lock did not know what to believe; that is why people smoked. that is why they continued to smoke. did people quit after the surgeon general's report went out? no. cigarette smoking actually went up after the cigarette industry responded because it confirmed — the cigarette industry confirmed the rationale that people had to smoke. just like richard lock, everyone else did the same thing. they talked about filters. filters were an illusion of filtration. dr. cummings told you that filters really do not — they do not take out the tars and nicotine. they were created to make people think they were safer cigarettes when they were not. they did not take the tars out. light cigarettes did not create a safer cigarette. light cigarettes gave just as much tar and nicotine to the smoker because he smoked more cigarettes, he smoked deeper, and he smoked it in a different way than the machines had been used to try to establish that they were safer. they were not safer. now, he mentioned that people would not buy cigarettes if they did not have nicotine. i'm not sure what kind of logic that is. is it okay to do things wrong? is it okay to lie? is it okay to put bad things in products? no, it is not. let me show you exhibit 1746. there was a comment about youth and about ph. this is another document in 1973 by our good friend claude teague. this is a research planning memorandum. "some thoughts about new brands of cigarettes for the youth market," exhibit 1746. i'm not going to read the whole document, but it is in evidence. no one is trying to hide everything; that is in exhibit if you want to read the whole thing. it is there, but i'm going to highlight some things because it is important. "some thoughts about new brands of cigarettes for the youth market. perhaps these questions may be best approached by consideration of factors influencing presmokers" — kids — "to try smoking, learn to smoke, and become confirmed smokers." the industry needed replacement smokers; that is why the kids are so important. "happily then it should be possible to aim a cigarette promotion at the beginning smoker, at the same time making it attractive to the confirmed smoker." remember robert heimann? "the purpose of the advertising is to get new smokers and to keep the existing smokers." and now we are talking about kids. now, let us go down to physical effects. here is where the ph is involved. "the rate of absorption of nicotine should be kept low by holding ph down, probably below 6.6." that is not what mr. cofer told you. "thus for the beginning smoker the cigarette smoke should have a moderate level of blended tobacco flavor, but should be as free as possible from strong, unpleasant flavors such as stemmy flavor," et cetera. "tar delivery of 12 to 14 milligrams per cigarette should provide the desired flavor level." so let us talk about the psychological effects. group identification. why do kids smoke? "presmokers learn to smoke to identify with and participate in shared experiences of a group of associates." we all know that, but here it is in black and white from claude teague. "the teens in early 20s of periods of intense psychological stress, restlessness and boredom." typical kids. "self-image enhance. this self-image enhancement effect has traditionally been a strong promotional theme for cigarette brands and should continue to be emphasized." think about the ads that you saw, sports, glamour, attractive people, fun things to do, groups, social events. experimentation. now we are talking about kids. "there is a strong drive in most people, particularly the young, to try new things and experiences." the anti-establishment attitude. so tell kids they should not smoke, the cigarette companies know exactly what that is going to do; it is going to make them smoke. make it adult conduct. "a final psychological factor which also did not fall readily into table one involves smoking health attitudes. the smoking health controversy does not appear important to the group because psychologically at 18 one is immortal." especially an 18-year-old going into the paratroopers. "in this sense the warning label on the package may be a plus. assuming that at some point marketing people will establish a name and image for a new youth brand and assuming that the thoughts on product quality factors expressed above are approximately correct, then research and tpd" — i'm not sure what that is — "should be able to provide the product needed." and then finally, "our company needs to take advantage of the opportunity to market new youth brands of cigarettes." counsel did not like the word disgusting, but i'll use it again. the gallup pole, yeah, people read it. what was not said is people did not believe it. they did not believe it. where was the evidence presented that they actually read what they read? they did not. discussion about mrs. walker, you be the judge. was she telling the truth? it was hard for her to get up here. she did not hear a lot of things in her deposition. mr. cofer: objection. foundation. the court: overruled. mr. whittemore: she read it, and she told you what happened. i need to talk about the july, 1983 record. mr. cofer showed you part of it. i'm going to show you all of it. the reason this is important is because, as i mentioned, there is a place in the verdict form which sets out the defense, and what the defense has to prove for this defense is that mr. lock, number one, had copd before july 5th of 1990, he knew or should have known that he had copd, not something else, copd, before july a 5th of 1990, and he had to know before july 5th of 1990 that copd was caused by smoking. okay. three things, the three-legged stool we talked about. i^et's look at the full record. the first page — this is a military facility, andrews air force base. military examinations are not like a lot of other examinations. mr. cofer: objection. foundation. the court: sustained. mr. whittemore: i'll withdraw it, your honor. the court: thank you. mr. whittemore: reported medical history, richard e. ix>ck, the date, july 12th, 1983. now, this is a statement, this section right here, a statement of examinees; that is mr. i.ock's present health and medications currently used. and it is got it written out here and then signed by mr. lock. "good health and under no medications"; that is his statement. let us look over here to the left and down a little bit further. again, this is the patient form that the patient completes. number 11, "have you ever had or have you now" — we go down, we will look at shortness of breath, which i highlighted, and the answer is, "no." the next page does not really have anything on it that is pertinent. and then let us go to the third page. lung fields clear, on the left side — and this is the examining physician completing this — clinical evaluation. on the left side there is a line going through normal, and you go down to item 28, lungs and chest. so the indication on this report is lungs and chest normal. and then the next page, "no evidence of pulmonary disease." number one, there is no evidence of copd from this record. there is no other evidence in the record that mr. lock had copd before the diagnosis in 1995. number two, there is no evidence that mr. lock thought he had copd, whether he did or he did not. there is no evidence in this record that he thought he had copd. he filled out a questionnaire saying he had no physical problems, he did not have any lung issues, nothing there. number three is there is no indication in this record whatsoever about smoking, nothing. smoking is not mentioned. it does not appear. it does not appear. it is total speculation. it is a defense that has no proof. it has no proof whatsoever, and that is why the answer to that question should be no. defendants have not proved that. we do not have to disprove it, but i think we just did; there is no proof of that. now, i want to tell you one other thing that was discussed in the testimony, and that is in 1984 richard lock explained to you going through a hyperbaric high altitude chamber. he would not have been able to do that if he had copd in 1984; that is another indication that there was no prior copd. so the first evidence in this case of copd is a diagnosis in 1995. now, was there something that nobody knows about maybe the year before, 1994? we do not know that. there was some indication from avery's records that maybe there had been something prescribed, but there is certainly no indication at all that that was before 1990; none. there is absolutely no evidence. the court: mr. whittemore, can we take just a quick comfort break? mr. whittemore: we can. i'm sorry. the court: let us take a quick comfort break, please. (jury out at 6:01 p.m.) the court: mr. whittemore, do you have much longer? mr. whittemore: no, i don’t. the court: there were just some child care issues that had to be taken care of. mr. whittemore: i apologize. the court: you did not know about the child care issues. we are ready when they are finished. and just so the lawyers know, i'm not going to discharge our alternates tonight. i'm going to give the concluding instruction tomorrow. mr. whittemore: thank you. (jury in at 6:05 p.m.) bailiff: your honor, the jury has returned to the jury box and is seated. the court: thank you, mr. whittemore. mr. whittemore: i'm trying to wrap this up. there is just so much to cover. please forgive me. the only thing i want to mention about this '83 record, the last thing dr. aranibar said, he would not make a diagnosis based on just the numbers. he would have to do a clinical evaluation, the same thing i think dr. goldman said. you have to give a clinical evaluation, you have to do x-rays, you have to do interview with the client, so certainly none of that was done. there is just not any evidence in which this diagnosis was made or that mr. lock had any idea it was happening. mr. cofer uses an interesting analogy. he talked about legal cause as being run over by a truck. well, it is probably a good analogy, but it is a good analogy for two reasons. it is also a good analogy for why you have comparative fault, why you have the ability to apportion fault. so what happens if the truck driver going down the road is speeding? well, maybe he is at fault. what happens if the pedestrian does not look before he steps out in front of the truck? well, both of them are at fault. so a jury in that particular case would have the opportunity to apportion the fault. it does not have to be all or nothing; that is what we have here. that is what we have here in this case. he asked why did not mr. lock quit the nicotine. we have talked about nicotine until we are blue in the face. we are not going to talk about nicotine anymore. i think you know about nicotine. there is an admission — discussion of admission, i did not object, but what i would like to do is i would like to read to you the admission that is in your jury instructions because it is not exactly the same as was mentioned a few minutes ago. this is instruction number 12 on page 17. this is what the admission is; this is verbatim. richard lock and peggy lock have admitted that the acts of richard s. lock related to the duration and the frequency of his efforts to stop smoking were a partial legal cause of his chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, copd, and the other diseases, in combination with the fault of the defendants. that is what we admitted; that is all we admitted. but that is an admission. you know, there was a comment made that you go ahead with $347,000 in medical expenses. we did not talk about future medical expenses. we gave you what we had. we do not know what they are going to be in the future. but mr. cofer suggested, if you get to this point, an appropriate measure of the loss that he had for everything else was maybe $347,000. i hope you found that as insulting as i did. it is the number — it is the number that you decide that is the right number. it is not $347,000. mavbe it is not 10 million, but it is not $347,000. we talked about reliance. when you think about reliance, read the instruction, read about inference, think about what caused people to smoke, and i know i mentioned it probably too many times, $250 billion of advertising to get people to smoke and keep them smoking. but then look at the findings. the findings specifically say that these companies concealed material defects from mr. lock and other customers. they did it. that is the reliance. they have already concealed it. the findings are important. they are a major part of the case. they make it a lot easier to get through this trial in three weeks, believe it or not. the punitive damage instruction. i would ask you to read the instruction. i'm not going to read it. you have got it, but read it carefully. it tells you what to consider. it tells you how you should up with a number and the kinds of things — what the burden of proof is, what you need to prove. i'm not going to restate it because you have it and you can read it. i just ask that you read it. the purpose of punitive damages is to punish, and to get punitive damages we have to prove certain things. you have to find that the conduct was such that it warrants punishment, and reprehensibility is one of the factors you can consider and should consider, both in the harm to mr. lock and mrs. lock and the harm to others. there was a mention about a legal product. well, it is legal to make cars; it is not legal to make a defective brake. it is not legal not to tell the person you do not have brakes; that is what happened in this case. they made a defective product. they did not tell the people about the defects, they did not tell them about the addictive nature of the product, but it is technically a legal product. but that does not make it right. what does the evidence have to do with richard lock? i've told you about that. the sad but true part of the answer to that question is that richard lock is going to be one of 440,000 people who will die in the next year from cigarette smoking because of what happened. so this case is all about richard lock and all about peggy lock, but the conduct of these companies is important. it is important to the locks that you know about the conduct. it is important that you know about that conduct in order to make that last determination on the verdict form about whether or not punitive damages are appropriate in this case, so we had to tell that story. there was a mention about 6,000 articles that are written by people from the ti. there was a mention about — i think it was eight nobel surprise winners. were you told whether any of those articles were on smoking and health? no. you know, i heard an analogy about a case like this. the analogy was sort of like maybe the people getting on the titanic. they were told and led to believe this was the safest ship in history; it was unsinkable. they got on the ship, and what happened is they found out that the ship really had not been built the way they told it was built; it was not the safest ship in history. it did have problems; it sunk. but once those people got on the ship, it was too late to get off. and once richard lock got on this voyage that he took, it was too late for him to get off. he tried. he tried mightily, heroically, according to dr. avery, and he could not get off. and we are asking you that by your verdict you tell r.j. reynolds and philip morris that what they did is conduct that we will not tolerated in this country. i thank you again for your time. i appreciate it, and we look forward to seeing you tomorrow.