mr. bigger: counsel. counsel. good morning. jurors: good morning. mr. bigger: it is nice to have a chance to talk to you again. i know it is been probably a long -- or hopefully not too long of two weeks or three weeks in this trial, but i appreciate your patience, i appreciate your perseverance, i know we all do. you have been very diligent, you have been here every morning, you have taken notes, you have studied and watched the evidence come in, and we all appreciate that. let us go to the first slide. you might remember some of the slides you are going to see, some of the things i am going to talk to you about from my opening statement because there is sort of a saying in our line of work that in opening statement we tell you what you are going to hear, then we show you the evidence, and in closing argument we tell you what you have heard to try and put it all together and help you understand how to answer the questions that are going to be on that verdict form that the judge has talked about and that i'll show you in just a moment. but this is an important case to jim and steven lourie. that is the position we have taken from the beginning. i hope that is the impression that you have all gotten as we have tried our case and brought you the evidence that you have heard. and it is important because it is about someone who was important to them. this case has been about barbara ruth lourie. she has been the person who was at the center of this case. and it is her life and the loss of her life that you have heard about and that you have seen evidence about. and, you know, she is been talked about at times as just sort of a person and described as someone who is well informed or intelligent. you have heard a lot of people talk about her, about their memories of her, about things that they remember about her, about choices she is made, things like that. but at the end of the day, she was a person and she lived in a time and she grew up in a time and she had experiences and she meant a whole lot to the people you have met in this courtroom, particularly mr. james lourie and steven lourie, who are the two claimants in this case. you also met in michael and david, her other sons, but jim and steven, under the law, are the ones who have the claims, have the ability to bring the claims in this case, and the claims that are being brought is about the loss of mrs. lourie. and so we started out by trying to bring you and trying to help you understand mrs. lourie. we talked about a lot of different aspects about her, about the medical side, about the medical situation she had at the end of her life, about her addiction, and about her smoking over the years. and we also had to bring evidence about the context in which she lived her life and about all the things that happened during the history of her life and during the experiences she had. because as you know, you have to understand the context in which a person is making choices, making decisions, to really understand the reasonableness of those choices and the things they did, the things they did not do. so we have this graphic that i'm sure you remember, you have seen it a few times throughout the trial. and it is kind of just a summary of really many of the aspects in the case. and it is an opportunity to kind of look at what really happened historically and what the significant events are. and if you look at this graph, you know, it shows we talked about the total cigarette consumption and the lung cancer rates, that is what those lines are. and i want to start with the one that is on the left, the yellow line. you can see from the lines that barbara, she was born barbara ruth sulkin, march 8th, 1945. you can see that she was born right in the middle of that rise, the rise of the time in our history where the tobacco industry grew and just grew tremendously and became an incredibly powerful cultural phenomenon that is in our history. it went from almost nothing back in 1900 to over 600 billion cigarettes being sold and consumed by 1981. that is a tremendous rise. and barbara ruth sulkin was born right into the middle of it. and you heard us talk about the importance of understanding that with regard to an era that she grew up in. we will talked about the fact that that rise was not coincidence. that rise of cigarette consumption was calculated, it was designed, it was planned, and it was very successful. it was done as a product of some circumstances, but those circumstances were capitalized on by an industry. and the industry is represented in this courtroom by these defendants. they make up the bulk of that industry today through either their own companies or companies they have acquired, companies they have bought throughout the years. but that was not a happenstance. it was intentional and it was done in order to do exactly what they did, which was to get people smoking cigarettes, get them caught up in this thing of smoking cigarettes throughout the years, but barbara ruth sulkin was caught up in it. she rode the wave up, and unfortunately as you can see the other yellow line on there is the female lung cancer rate, and as you heard from dr. proctor and dr. burns, that rate lagged very specifically behind certain things that were going on. the rise of cigarette consumption, and with the female lung cancer rate, the rise of female smoking and efforts to market and target cigarettes to females, to get more females smoking. and barbara ruth -- barbara lourie unfortunately died september 16th, 1997, right at the peak of that lung cancer death rate rise. that graph unfortunately tells the summary, if you will, of her life and her death. and it was all during the stuff -- all during this time when the tobacco industry and these companies were trying to get people to do exactly what she did. they tried to get her to do the things that she did, become a smoker, remain a smoker. they did it by making it seem acceptable, making it seem appropriate, by advertising it pervasively and make it something that was on television, radio, and that everyone did it, that it was the culturally acceptable thing to do. and then they kept her smoking by making sure that the nicotine in the cigarettes was at exactly the level that was needed to create and sustain addiction. it was not accidental, it was not coincidence, it was intentional and it was calculated, and you saw that in the evidence in this case. you saw that that was done deliberately and it was designed and it worked. it worked for barbara lourie -- barbara lourie, and unfortunately, it worked for hundreds of thousands of others as well who, like her, have also lost their lives. now, the verdict form you are going to have to answer -- i apologize, i'll have to switch back and forth from time to time. this is what the verdict form is that you will have to answer, and it has actually seven questions on it, but a couple of the question have subparts. as i walk through this today, i'll explain each of them in more detail. but there are seven questions on here. the first one is "was barbara lourie addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, and if so, was such addiction a legal cause of her lung cancer and death?" and you will check yes or no, and then there is more questions that have that same thing, and i'll walk through these in detail in just a moment. but you have to understand, as we talked about in the beginning, there was a specific burden of proof that applies. you heard the judge just instruct you on that, that the law in this case as far as the burden of proof is that it is called greater weight of the evidence. so when you are looking at the evidence that was put in and deciding whether we met our burden on those questions and we have proven our case to you, the burden you are supposed to apply is greater weight of the evidence. and that means the more persuasive and convincing force and effect of the entire evidence in the case. that means looking at everything that was put in, all the evidence we brought you, the cross-examination done by the defendants and the witnesses they brought you, our cross-examination, when you look at it all, all on balance, what was the more persuasive and convincing force and effect of the entire evidence in the case? what does it all prove when you look at it, not just little pieces cherry-picked here and there and not little statements here and there, not even just little documents here and there? looking at it all on balance, what does it show to you? and if it shows to you that more likely than not we are correct, then we probably are correct on our positions. it is a slight tipping of the scales, you have probably seen the scales of justice. it is hard to see on lady justice over there, but she holds scales, and that is what you are doing is you are measuring the evidence. when you look at all the evidence, if we tip those scales slightly in our favor, that means we met our burden and we have proved our case to you. you can have doubts. you may have doubts in the case. it is not a standard of beyond a reasonable doubt. the standard is that you all took an oath to uphold more persuasive and convincing force and effect of the entire evidence in the case. you might remember back in jury selection we talked about this and we asked if everyone is willing to apply that standard or if some people think it should be a higher standard. and those people who thought it should a higher standard, they were not able to serve as jurors. it is important we talk about those things because that is the law that applies to this case. i want to take a moment at the beginning as well to talk to you about another instructions that is in there. it is kind of in the back of your instructions, but you will have those from the court. and it is one on the believability of witnesses. and when you hear the evidence in the case, most of it came from the witness stand, from the testimony of the witnesses. and you have that in your notes and you listened to the evidence as it came in, and you are supposed to evaluate the believability of the witnesses that were brought to you, and one of the ways you do that is you look at who those witnesses were. you look at who the witnesses were, what their background is, what their qualifications were. that is true with both the individuals who were called fact witnesses and the expert witnesses as well. and i point this instruction out to you because i think it is important when you think about who the witnesses are that we brought you to meet our burden. you think about who they were, what they have done, their background, the experiences that they have had. and that is why we -- i know -- i know it is tiring. we spent some time going through those qualifications with each of those witnesses, and i'm sure there were times where you were probably just like, get over it, you know, just get on with the testimony, just get to it. but we have to do that because we know there is an instruction that tells you to consider that, consider the source. where is that information coming from? is it from someone who really does not do this kind of work? is it from someone who actually does not really have experience with smokers or with smoking issues? or is it someone who has worked with the surgeon general, for example, since 1975, as you have heard with dr. burns? who is the source of their information and what is their background? you know, are we bringing you people that have a credible background or are we not? that is why we spent some time talking about that and why i want to focus on that. you will also note that in this instruction and in other parts of the instructions that it says, "you can consider the evidence in light of your own experiences and common sense." and you saw that in another part of the instructions as well, that the court is telling you you can draw reasonable inferences from the evidence, you can use your own common sense and your own common life experiences as you deliberate to analyze the issues in the case and to decide what is more likely true than not. did we prove our case? are we more likely true than not? or did we not prove our case? so the first question you are going to have to answer deals with whether mrs. lourie is an engle class member. remember i talked to you about this in opening statement as well, that is the first question on the verdict form is, "was barbara ruth lourie" -- i think it actually says barbara lourie, and i apologize, yeah -- "addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, and if so, was her addiction a legal cause of her lung cancer and death?" you see a couple things when you look at that is that there is two parts to that question, "was she addicted, and if so, was the addiction a legal cause?" and you see that we have "a" underlined there, and it is not coincidence, it is for a reason. it is not the legal cause, it is a legal cause. and what that says is that under the law, and you heard the instruction from the court, it does not have to be the only cause. there can be multiple causes. and what that basically means is if you made a list from the evidence that you saw of all the reasons barbara ruth lourie smoked and died, where on that list does addiction fall? is it on that list or is not on the list at all? where on that list do some of the other things fall, like the conspiracy, the concealment that you heard about, the fact that there is testimony that she enjoyed smoking? those different things are on the list, and if they are on the list and they are a substantial reason she smoked, as you see in the instructions, then that is a legal cause of her lung cancer and death. it is called concurring cause. it does not have to be the only cause, and that is why it is a and not the legal cause. so the first question, first part of that question is, "was barbara ruth lourie addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine?" and you heard a lot in this case about addiction. you heard a whole lot about addiction, and you did because it is an important issue in the case. not just to this first question, but it is important to understand the other things that happened as well. it is important to understand why she smoked for all those years, whether that smoking was reasonable or unreasonable. and it is also important to understand the industry and why they made the choices that they made, why they decided to design and introduce cigarettes, and why they marketed them as heavily as they did and why they were as successful as they were. addiction is central to all that as well. but we have to ask this first question on whether she was addicted, whether mrs. lourie was addicted. so we brought you a lot of evidence on that issue. just to summarize some of the evidence that we brought you, she started smoking at 11 or 12 years old with friends in 1956 or 1957. you heard from lynda snider on that, you heard from linda coven on that, those were the friends that were with her at that time and they started smoking as kids back at 11 or 12 years old back in the mid 1950s. they snuck those cigarettes from their parents because they wanted to look cool because that is what the older kids were doing. you will see as we get a little further in the evidence, you remember that study where in the high school they went to, 55 percent of those seniors in high school were smoking. what does a freshman or a middle schooler want to be more than like the other kids in high school, the older kids. that is what the girls wanted to be like at that time. and like the movie stars and the actors they saw they were all smoking. like the adults in the advertisements and on the tv shows that you saw, the dick van dyke show, the lucy show. it was everywhere at the time they were growing up. and like too many other kids, they started smoking, experimenting. and you saw they were regular daily smokers by middle school and then smoking a pack or half pack a day by the time they got to high school. that is the way addiction works, starts with experimentation, a few cigarettes here and there, and then for too many smokers, not everybody, but for too many people it becomes an addiction and it grows into an addiction and it becomes a regular daily experience that escalates over time. you saw that eventually she got to smoking two packs per day. and you saw that that is not something you can do when you have your first cigarette. you cannot just have two packs of cigarettes the first time you ever smoke, if you do you will get nicotine toxicity and go to the hospital. that is called tolerance. her tolerance gradually grew up over time, and that is one of the criteria that is needed for addiction. she smoked immediately after waking every morning. you heard that from her husband, it was the first thing she did every day. the cigarettes were right next to the bed, she lit that cigarette. and that is important because overnight, the body metabolizes that nicotine. and so how quickly a person smokes in the morning is important to know whether they are addicted or whether they just like to smoke. addicted smokers, their body is screaming out and craving and needing that nicotine in the morning. they have got to smoke. people who smoke casually, socially may not smoke at all in the morning, may never smoke in the morning. may only smoke at night or socially. it is different for addicted smokers. they smoke first thing in the morning because their body needs it. they wake up dry and those receptors in the brain you heard about, those things wake up dry and they are ready to be saturated with more nicotine. she smoked all day long in every activity and endeavor. you heard about the fact that at that time there was not anywhere where you could not smoke. and that is just the way that it was. it is a very different time than today, but at that time there was not restrictions or limitations on where you could smoke and she smoked everywhere. she smoked right before she went to bed. it was the last thing she did. her smoking, based on her husband's testimony, increased after she switched to lights. now, granted he was around her more, but it went up. she smoked while pregnant with all three of her sons. this is a mother who it was undisputed testimony loved her boys, would do anything for her boys, and was ashamed and was trying to quit smoking but she smoked through her pregnancies. that is addiction. next slide. she smoked in the cars, quit visiting favorite restaurants when they would not allow smoking. you know, there came a time when you could not smoke in restaurants any more or they would have nonsmoking sections. you saw that she changed her patterns and habits. did not go to her favorite restaurant, the pillar restaurant, stopped going because it was nonsmoking. she started trying to quit in the 1960s. she wanted to not be a smoker all the way back then when mr. lourie met her, but she could not because she was addicted. that is what addiction does, you try to quit and you cannot. if you wanted to stop wearing yellow shirts, you would just stop wearing yellow shirts. addiction is different, it is a drug, it is actually changing your brain, it is changing the way you think and process, it is changing the way your biology works which is what makes it so difficult to quit. not for everybody, but for some people it is impossible to quit. some people never quit. mrs. lourie never quit, never was able to quit. she tried to quit by having the family hide her packs. you remember mr. lourie talking about that, hid the cigarettes and she pleaded and she begged. remember david remembering as a young boy this memory, this painful memory of his mother pleading and begging with mr. lourie to tell her where the cigarettes were. she joined a smoking-cessation group. one of her friends thought it was smokenders which was a popular group at that time, but she joined a smoking-cessation group and attended those sessions for a month trying to quit. had to drive all the way from framingham to waltham, you know, it was like an hour drive away. that is a motivated effort to quit. she tried. she tried nicotine gum. once it became available, she tried it. mr. lourie could not remember, he was not good with dates. i think they made a point out of the fact that he said it was framingham. he remembers the nicotine gum, he just could not remember when it was introduced. he was not a smoker, it was not something he would even remember, but he remembers her trying it. we know it was not available until '84, that is when she would have tried it is '84 or afterward. visited the addiction specialist, the mad russian. you have heard a lot about this mad russian. maybe it does sound like something that is just, you know, ridiculous, and maybe after they got there, it was not what they were looking for for lynda snider and for -- for mrs. lourie. but they went with a sincere desire to quit smoking. they set that appointment months in advance. they set that quit dates months in advance. they went with the hope that it would work. it did not. it was not successful. it is extremely unfortunate that it was not, but they went trying to quit. they were motivated. used the nicotine patches. there is testimony she used those right when they came out. her brother michael who was a heavy smoker and a doctor was involved in suggesting they try the patches, you heard that from the testimony. it was in massachusetts. and then again she tried the nicotine patches when she was diagnosed with lung cancer and trying to quit smoking. two patches, one on each arm. mrs. lourie was still smoking after she would had two-thirds of her right lung removed, she would had 5 centimeters cut out of her brain, she had a scarred head, a scarred chest, 40 pounds underweight, sick, very sick at the end of her life and still ashamedly smoking cigarettes. the evidence is clear that mrs. lourie was an addicted smoker. she was addicted. as to the first part of that question, the people who talked about that, her husband, the people who knew her best, her sons, michael, david, steven, lynda snider, linda coven. each of them both said that we were hooked. you know, they did not know the word "addicted", it was not a word that they used at that time. surgeon general did not even use it until 1988. now, the companies were using it, they knew all the way back in the '60s, but the rest of us did not know. dr. burns. the treating doctors in the '80s and '90s. the only way you could get those nicotine-replacement therapies, like the gum and the patches, is by a prescription. treating doctors had to make a medical recommendation to write that prescription that a person needed that drug, that nicotine-replacement therapy. and dr. herkov, you heard from dr. herkov. dr. rosman is the only person that they brought you to talk about these issues. now, they cross-examined our folks as well, but when you look at the evidence that is added up on this issue that was brought to you, we met our burden on this issue showing that mrs. lourie was addicted. dr. herkov, we brought him in especially to talk about the fact that you have to understand some of the details of addiction to understand why smokers act the way they do, why addiction works. it is just -- it is not some simple habit or some simple choice. it is a disease of the brain. it involves the neurotransmitters in that reward center. it activates that same thing that is in all of us to try and help us use survival mechanisms that are important, like hunger, if we are hungry we eat, things that are necessary for the sustaining of life. that same thing is what is activated by nicotine to cause a release of pleasure and it happens very fast and that is called reinforcement, that is what helps cause the addiction and create the addiction. and it does not discriminate. you can be smart, intelligent, strong-willed, well informed, does not matter, you still can become addicted. the earlier a person begins smoking, the more likely they are to become highly addicted. adolescents are most susceptible because their brain is still developing. you heard that in the case from the evidence in the case. their brain is still changing and developing, and those changes that occur, the upregulation, the additional receptors, it is all the more susceptible in young people. no doubt that mrs. lourie was an addicted smoker under the dsm-iv-tr, the test that he applied. he talked about all the criteria, you heard the evidence that applied to each of those criteria. the second part of that is whether addiction was a legal cause of her lung cancer. and so part of that you have to understand that addiction causes smoking and smoking causes the lung cancer and death. you heard from dr. burns on that issue. it is a chain of events. these diseases, like smoking, as you heard from dr. villa, they are dose-response diseases. they do not happen because someone smokes a little bit. they happen because they smoke over a lifetime. it is the addiction that drives that continued dosing of carcinogens in the lungs. that is how addiction causes lung cancer and death. but looking at the lung cancer specifically, you heard some defense in this case about whether mrs. lourie had lung cancer, whether her lung cancer was caused by smoking, you heard some of those issues. the evidence on that should be abundantly clear, but we brought you more of it anyways. mrs. lourie unquestionably had lung cancer caused by smoking. the first piece is of course she had lung cancer. all the medical records say lung cancer. the death certificate says lung cancer. she had lung cancer. we brought you people to talk about it anyways. some of this came out through cross-examination, some of this came out through direct examination, but all of these people believe that mrs. lourie had lung cancer caused by smoking. only dr. peterson said otherwise, but actually dr. peterson said if it was lung cancer, then it definitely was caused by smoking. even he agreed with that. we brought you dr. alison calkins first. she was the one who we had most of the records from. and just a point on the records, you recall from the beginning of the case you heard throughout this entire trial that there was limited records available, and there are. but you also heard throughout this entire trial that is nobody's fault. the defense said that from the very beginning of the case. there were more than enough records for us to decide whether ms. lourie had lung cancer and what the cause of it was. more than enough. dr. calkins came in, she was barbara lourie's radiation oncologist, she was heavily involved with the care, and her records are the ones that documented the treatment throughout the years -excuse me, throughout the months as mrs. lourie unfortunately got progressively worse and worse and the chemo and radiation was not working. she talked to you about how they tried to fight and battle that lung cancer, but unfortunately were not successful. and she made it abundantly clear there is no question that mrs. lourie had lung cancer. no question. you also heard from dr. villa. dr. villa was the gentleman who was board certified in six specialties, including pathology, oncology, and hematology. he was a very, very credentialed individual we brought you in. he treats cancer patients on a daily basis. he actually has a practice where he sees cancer patients on a regular basis, and he knows treatment recommendations, when surgery is required. he explained to you why just the course of treatment mrs. lourie received made it obvious that she had lung cancer. that is what her doctors knew at the time. doctors who were trying to save her life, who were laying hands on her trying to save her life, making decisions about what kind of cancer she had, and it was clear that it was lung cancer. he also said there is no doubt that it was caused by smoking cigarettes. and really as you have heard, there is no disputing that. i mean, if mrs. lourie had lung cancer, even their expert agrees it was caused by smoking. but there is no doubt that mrs. lourie had lung cancer caused by smoking. she had a 60-plus pack-year history of smoking. that is a pack a day for a year -- excuse me, two packs per day for over 30 years. as you saw from the numbers, and we will see in a moment, that is over 4 million doses of the carcinogens in smoke, all driven unfortunately by the need to get the nicotine that comes with it, that comes in the smoke. mrs. lourie's death certificate, which we put into evidence, certifies primary lung cancer was the underlying cause of her death. dr. david goldstein, who had no -- all he was doing is following his legal obligation to certify her death, and he did so as primary lung cancer. no dispute that the cause of death was lung cancer due to smoking. now, i mentioned that this is a case involving a legal cause, which you saw on the verdict form. and the instructions that the judge read to you contained the instructions on that issue. and the word i used was "concurring cause", that is that second paragraph there, that recognizes that there is often more than one cause involved in why things happen. and it says, "in order to be regarded as a legal cause of a disease or a medical condition, an addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine need not be the only cause. an addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine may be a legal cause of lung cancer even though it operates in combination with the act of another or some other cause, if the addiction to nicotine contributes substantially to producing lung cancer." so as i said, if you put it on a list, is the addiction on the list? is it one of the things that caused it? frankly, it is the top of the list. the addiction is what was causing the smoking for all these years. and just think about it the other way. in someone who is addicted, as you saw the evidence of her addiction in this case, would that possibly ever be some insubstantial reason why she smoked? would it ever be some insubstantial reason why she smoked for all those years? it was the substantial reason she smoked. and so with regard to this first question, "was she addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, and, if so, was it a legal cause of her lung cancer and death?" the answer should be yes for the verdict on that. and obviously, i am going to put answers on here what our suggestions are as the plaintiff on here. this is your verdict -- you will fill this out, you will select a foreperson who will fill this verdict form out and will decide what the evidence has shown, but i am going to make some suggestions on here based upon what we believe the evidence has proven. let us go to the addiction -- yeah. you saw this slide as well and it is worth just mentioning again for a moment because it is different than those folks who are social smokers, who may just smoke socially, and there is people out there like that. there are some folks who have the strength or the genetics or whatever it is that makes them able to just smoke occasionally and not be an addicted smoker. that is not who mrs. lourie was. she was a two-pack-a-day smoker, 10 puffs per cigarette, 7300 cigarettes per year, 4.38 million lifetime exposures to the carcinogens and chemicals that come along with the nicotine. as you heard from dr. burns, someone who studied this more extensively than probably anyone else in the world, that is how addiction causes disease and the surgeon general understands that. the public health community now understands that. that is the conclusion that they draw. that is why addiction is the cause of smoking-related diseases. the second question on the verdict form is really already answered by answering the first question, but you have to answer it again as to each specific defendant and it involves whether smoking cigarettes manufactured by each defendant was a legal cause of barbara lourie's lung cancer and death. there is three defendants in the courtroom. and you heard that because of the brands of cigarettes mrs. lourie primarily smoked. there were some other minor brands, but the primary brands that she smoked based upon the testimony of those who knew her best were the kents, starting out, at least based on mr. lourie's recollection, 1966. however, there is certainly suggestion based on the evidence that you can infer she was smoking those for a period before that because people do not just start smoking that brand, and she was someone who would smoke a primary brand for a long time, and that was also what the parents and the friends were smoking as well that she was smoking with. then there was the raleighs about the early 1970s. based upon when they moved to their next house is when she switched to raleighs, and that became her primary brand, and that is r.j. reynolds company. and then finally at the end, the late '70s into the '80s is when she had the marlboros, and then the marlboro lights were from the early '80s until the end, until she passed. marlboro lights were by far the longest brand that she smoked. but you heard from the experts in the case, like dr. burns and others, that each cigarette is dangerous. in fact, they said that from the beginning, there is no such thing as a safe cigarette. each cigarette compounds the problem and it is addiction that is driving the smoking. each cigarette provides the next dose of nicotine, the next hit, the next thing to keep the person smoking. all of those cigarettes and all the smoking she had, unfortunately, linked together from the beginning all the way through her smoking history and each of them is a legal cause of her lung cancer and death. there was sufficient smoking of each of them to cause her lung cancer and death. and so the answer to question 2 on the verdict form as to each would be yes as well. philip morris was the marlboros, lorillard were the kents, and r.j. reynolds, those were the raleighs that she smoked for sufficient periods of her history throughout the '60s, '70s, '80s, and '90s to be the legal cause of her death. the other brands that she smoked as well, just worth mentioning, but these are the ones that mr. lourie told you about that she smoked for a period of time, but not sufficient to be a primary brand. the salems and the newports, those are the ones that are menthol cigarettes that mr. lourie talked to you about her trying menthol because she read something. she was responding to the information that she was getting and tried menthol, thinking they were safer, and then switched when she realized that they were not. and then the other brands as well, the raleigh lights, the virginia slims, benson & hedges, and winstons. the next question you are going to have to answer is where a lot of the issues that you have heard about in this case are appropriately handled. as i told you all the way back in jury selection, under the law of florida, it is not an all or nothing situation. this is not a situation where it is all those companies' faults, it is not a situation where it is all mrs. lourie's fault. it is a situation where we have what is called comparative fault. you look at the circumstances and you decide what portion of the responsibility belongs on each party, what portion -mr. fasi: your honor, i object to a misstatement of the law on that. the court: overruled. proceed. mr. bigger: when you get to this third question, you will look at what percentage of the responsibility belongs on each. and there will be an actual blank on there that i'll show you in a moment where you actually have a blank with a percentage. and you will decide, based on the evidence that you heard in the case, if you reach this question, what percentage belongs on mrs. lourie, what percentage belongs on philip morris, r.j. reynolds, and lorillard tobacco company based on what you have heard about the actions that each of those parties took over the course of mrs. lourie's lifetime. and when you are looking at this issue, you have to think about some important facts. you have to think about the fact that mrs. lourie started smoking at 11 or 12 years old, back in junior high school is when she first became a regular daily smoker. you have to consider that that is when she started on that train, on that process of addiction. that is when she got caught up in the addiction cycle that you heard dr. burns talk about that people get caught up in. you have to analyze her choices, not only that she was a child at that time, you have to analyze the fact that it was a different time, as i've talked to you about, and you are looking at what fault, what portion of the fault belongs on her, you have to remember that not only was she a child growing up in a different time, but that she was doing exactly what the tobacco industry wanted her to do, what they were trying to get people to do, which is start smoking. and they knew that their business started with teenagers. they have known that all along, that most of their business comes from teenagers. most people do not start smoking over the age of 18; most people start smoking under the age of 18 who become regular smokers. there was some suggestion during opening statement, all the way back, that, you know, you have to have a direct and substantial connection. you may have heard those words, you may remember that. well, we brought you evidence in this case about a direct and substantial connection with regard to mrs. lourie. you may remember this document, this 1967 ftc report where they actually studied mrs. lourie's school, her town. she was actually in the group of people who were surveyed, 1959, in the ninth grade. and the conclusion, based on studying her class and the people from her class, is that "teenage smoking appears to be widespread. youth are apparently smoking at ever earlier ages, and everyone, particularly teenagers, is constantly exposed to cigarette advertising." that is a direct and substantial connection, folks, to ms. barbara lourie. that was her that the ftc was recognizing that was being caught up in the cycle as a teenage smoker as a result in part of the pervasiveness of cigarette advertising. and it was not just ftc. you saw in the documents that we brought to you from, for example, r.j. reynolds tobacco company, when they did that big, 50-year retrospective analysis, they did a 50-year historical study and they looked and said, "younger adult smokers have been the critical factor in the growth and decline of every major brand and company for the last 50 years." and then you looked at the appendix and you realize they are talking about people who under the age of 18, in fact, all the way back to 12. 12 to 18 year old, 69 percent are smoking by the time they are 18. the industry is built on kids. and they did not just call them younger adult smokers, they called them replacement smokers. they have recognized all along the only source of replacement smokers for their business model is getting more teenagers and more kids to start smoking. mrs. lourie was one of those replacement smokers in the 1950s who started smoking and got caught up in that cycle. we talked about this with the witnesses. we did not -- the only way we could bring these folks here is by their deposition, but we brought you the representatives of the r.j. reynolds tobacco company and the philip morris companies to talk about some of the documents at the time. you remember with r.j. reynolds about the fact they were studying and recognizing how important brand choices were for teenagers, they wanted to do high school surveys, giving the details on high schoolers. same thing with ms. bonhomme, they were going around with the philip morris brand, for example, and sending johnny, jr., out trying to talk to kids and give them lucy dolls and to put philip morris in the minds of our future smokers. that was the mentality at the time. when there was a report on cbs about teenage smoking, they were so concerned that the ceo actually sent a telegram demanding that they take different action as a result of that program because teenagers were going to hear about the dangers of smoking. they knew how their business was built and what it was built upon. that third question is going to be "please state the percentage of any fault that is a legal cause of the lung cancer and death of barbara lourie that you charge to:" each of the parties. this is the place where you put down if you think that ms. lourie was completely fully informed, that she made choices, and she was fully involved in that, and you think most of the fault is on her, but she was an addicted smoker that died from addiction, you still answer yes to the first two questions and you put the fault down on her for her, you put fault down. we will submit to you, barbara lourie, who started smoking at 12 years old, 12 percent is the appropriate amount of fault that belongs on her for what happened, and the other 88 percent should be distributed amongst these companies. i'm going to let you decide based on the evidence how you think that should be distributed. but starting at 12 years old, 12 percent on her is an appropriate number, and 88 is an appropriate number, too, because it was not until '88 that the surgeon general had the ability to know what they knew. that was the first time they could report that nicotine was addictive. and the next questions that you saw on the verdict form are going to deal with the fraud and the conspiracy. you have heard from the judge that once you reach this point in the verdict form, once you get past the fact that mrs. lourie is a class member, that is when you start applying the findings in the case. and those findings exist in this case, that cigarette smoking is -- excuse me. that these companies designed cigarettes that were unreasonably dangerous and defective, that the companies acted negligently. they did not act carefully, sufficiently careful, the way that they were -- in their business model and the way that they did things. that these companies committed a fraud to conceal the health effects and the addictive nature of smoking. that these companies did not just do that individually, they did that as an industry. they conspired together as an industry to do that. now, when you are applying the findings to these next questions, we also brought you some additional evidence on that issue, and that evidence came from a couple of individuals, but one of them was dr. proctor. remember dr. proctor was here, he was the historian who talked about all of these things that were really primarily from the company's own internal documents. the things that they had never told anyone, the secrets that they had kept for all those years, and we only finally found out about them after mrs. lourie had already died. these things did not come about in her lifetime, and during her lifetime they never once had an honest statement to the public about what they truly knew. it was throughout her lifetime that they concealed and conspired to conceal all these things. dr. proctor talked to you about the fact that the companies knew back in 1953 that their products, if used as intended, caused lung cancer. he talked to you about the fact that they knew in the early 1960s that nicotine in cigarettes was addictive. and that rather than being truthful, they engaged in a 50-year fraud and conspiracy to mislead the american public and the public health community. as you heard from dr. burns, it was not just smokers in the public, it was also people who were trying to get the message out. all the way back in 1954, we showed you this document, it is called a frank statement, mrs. lourie was only nine years old at this time, and you might think because she was nine years old what significance does this have, surely she did not read it, she did not see it in the paper, why does it matter? it matters because the companies accepted as a basic responsibility, paramount to every other consideration in their business, the health of their consumers, the health of people in this country. they accepted that responsibility, but they have not discharged it. they still have not taken that responsibility. instead, they perpetrated this fraud and this conspiracy for all those years and did not just simply tell the truth. they did not accept the -- they did not follow through on their promise. and if they had followed through on their promise at the time they made this statement, if they had just done what they -- if they had just said what they knew at the time, you could certainly reasonably infer that people like mrs. lourie and others would never even have become smokers because they would have told the truth. and the truth after this statement was, if our products are injurious, we will stop making them, we will go out of the business. they never did. they never kept those promises. and it would have made a difference in the life of mrs. lourie. even if you -- well, i'll come back to that point. instead, what they did is they engaged in this controversy that you heard about from dr. proctor. and it can really be summarized in essentially this sentence, "doubt is our product. it is the best means of competing with the body of fact that exists in the mind of the general public." "doubt is our product." that is what they decided to do instead of what they promised to do in the frank statement. you saw in opening statement, and i showed you there was crossroads repeatedly throughout the years that mrs. lourie was growing up and she was smoking and she was becoming a smoker. there were crossroads for the industry to make the choice to do the right thing, to do the responsible thing, to just follow through on the promises from the frank statement. but they did not. they never did. instead, this was their plan. this was their playbook the whole time. doubt is their product. because a little bit of doubt is all it takes for someone who is struggling with an addiction. a little bit of doubt is all it takes to try and undermine that motivation just a little bit, maybe make them just a little bit less motivated to quit that day or a little bit less motivated to try to quit or try stronger to quit. doubt is all they needed. they talked about it as a psychological crutch, giving smokers that psychological crutch to keep smoking, to have that little bit of doubt in their mind. you saw in the documents that all the way back in 1963, the companies recognized what they really were doing. you know, they are not selling cigarettes, they are selling addiction. they are selling nicotine. that is what they are selling. that is what they have been selling for all these years. "we are then in the business of selling nicotine, an addictive drug, effective in the release of stress mechanisms." oh, but they have certain unattractive side effects. that is what they called them. lung cancer was called just an unattractive side effect. this was before the surgeon general's report. this was six months before that report was ever released, 1963. you know, they have talked a lot about this 1964 surgeon general's report and whether she read it or not or whether she knew it inside and out. even if she read it, assume that they are right, that she read it cover to cover, the only conclusion she could have taken away at that time is that her cigarette smoking was just a habit and she just could not quit because she was too weak-willed. if they told the surgeon general what they knew in 1963, he would have announced in 1963 that cigarettes were addictive, smoking cigarettes was addictive, just like the surgeon general did in 1988. that would have made a real difference in the life of people like mrs. lourie and thousands of others who thought they just could not quit because they were too weak or too -- did not have enough strength or enough character or whatever it might be. it is because they are addicts, these folks were addicted to nicotine, and that is why they were struggling so hard in trying to quit. once the word started to get out that nicotine is an addiction and it is a drug, that is when they have this rise of these nicotine-replacement therapies, nicotine gum, patches, things that were not even around in mrs. lourie's lifetime today, like chantix and wellbutrin, these pills you can take that will help smokers who are addicted quit. all those things have come about because the truth has finally gotten out. but it never got out during her lifetime. instead, what the industry was doing, rather than telling the truth, is they were congratulating themselves on what a good job they did. 1972, you remember this document "for 20 years, this industry has employed a single strategy to defend itself on three major fronts: litigation, politics, and public opinion. while the strategy was brilliantly conceived and executed over the years, helping us win important battle battles, it was not a strategy for victory, it is a holding strategy." just need to hold on a little bit longer so we can keep making more money. that was the whole plan. that was the playbook, just to hold out for as long as they could. to ride that wave as far as they could, and now it is come back down as the information has gotten out; as people have started to learn about what cigarettes really are, how dangerous they are, consumption and cigarette smoking has declined dramatically in this country. and they knew that day would come, they just tried to hold it off as long as they could, and they held it off long enough that barbara lourie could never get out of it. what do they know and what do they say about addiction in their own internal documents? september 9th, 1980, almost -- a little over 34 years ago today, "the entire matter of addiction is the most potent weapon a prosecuting attorney can have in a lung cancer/cigarette case. we cannot defend continued smoking as free choice if the person was addicted." it is an admission. they knew it. they knew it then, and they did not do anything about it. they kept it to themselves. they kept it secret. when the surgeon general finally got word in 1988 and finally released a report, c. everett koop finally put out the word that nicotine is addictive, rather than do what they said in the frank statement, which is to cooperate closely, to acknowledge the public health concerns and to cooperate with them, they mocked him. they mocked him, they put out a press release calling it -- "claims that cigarettes are addictive contradict common sense." common sense that they had in their own internal documents, their own internal knowledge, since the 1960s. it was common sense to them that nicotine was addictive, but they mocked the surgeon general when he put it out there. you heard mr. johnston in his testimony they played, the additional testimony at the waxman hearings when he talked about the fact that, you know, cigarettes cannot be addictive, nicotine is not addictive, and his explanation was because 50 million smokers have quit, it cannot be addictive. that was their position, it is not addictive because 50 million have quit. in this case, they said 50 million have quit, so mrs. lourie is not addicted. it was the same mantra. if you can quit, you are not addicted. it does not work that way. addicts can quit, but just because you can quit, does not mean you are not addicted. look at the person's condition. mr. seiden: objection, your honor. the court: the objection is overruled. mr. bigger: that is another part of that fraud angle, there is a specific angle that is pertinent to mrs. lourie because of her habits and her smoking and her patterns, and that is the idea of the lights brands, the filters and the lights. you have heard a lot about this. the fact that these brands were marketed as lights, as low tar, low delivery, that was done as health reassurance brands, they are called. and you heard from dr. burns, we brought you in, who is someone who has been involved with the surgeon general's reports since 1975, worked closely with that office, who has been trying to get the message out, who told you that they themselves were deceived by what the companies knew. ms. tedder: objection. mr. bigger: and what they did with their products. no doubt -the court: wait. wait. objection is overruled. mr. bigger: oh, i'm sorry. i'm sorry, ms. tedder, i did not hear that. he also talked about the fact that ms. lourie had lung cancer, she was addicted, and that her addiction caused her lung cancer, but for her addiction she would not have gotten lung cancer and died. but the central point we brought him for to talk to you about is the fact that companies engineered and marketed these filters and these cigarettes specifically to reassure smokers who were trying to quit or who were concerned about the dangers, switch to these, they will be safer for you, they are better for you, they are lights. it is like diet coke and light beer. it is lights. it is what anyone would think it would mean. well, the reality is the companies knew, though, that they actually did not provide any less delivery because smokers smoke not for enjoyment or pleasure, they smoke for addiction. and so they compensate. they smoke them differently. because they are trying to maintain subconsciously that same level of nicotine in their body. their brain is telling them i need a certain amount of nicotine, so they will pull harder, they will inhale deeper, they will smoke more puffs. the only thing they really did to the cigarettes to make them any different was put that extra layer of ventilation holes on there, so when they stuck them in those little smoking machines, they would pull more air through there, so the machines would be tricked, but smokers would smoke them differently and get the amount of nicotine they needed. that whole thing was a deception and it was done purposefully. you saw that in the internal documents of the companies. if we look at the one from 1975 all the way back right when these -- oh, hold on. the work that dr. burns worked on was that monograph 13 that he discussed and talked about. that was 2001, when monograph 13 came out. mrs. lourie obviously had already been gone. mrs. lourie had passed. this was all work that was uncovered and all facts that were uncovered after she would passed away. but during her lifetime, what we heard from her husband is she specifically said, you know, "i've tried to quit, i cannot quit, i'm switching to the marlboro lights because they are safer." they are lights. she believed them to be safer for her, that is why she smoked them. you know the reality is, though, that is not true. we saw in their own internal documents all the way back in 1975, one of the ones that we showed you, they knew that smokers were smoking them differently. they knew that they compensated. they knew that they were not getting a lower delivery of tar and nicotine because they smoked for nicotine. they did not smoke the way the machines did. and the other documents that are in evidence, you saw that they -- they knew that smokers switched to these brands, though, because they were healthier. "the tobacco company advertising has been switching many full-flavor smokers to low-delivery brands. it is likely, for example, that the popular belief that low-tar cigarettes are healthier than full-flavor cigarettes means that people who are concerned about their health will be more likely to switch to low-tar products than people who are not concerned about their health." that is 1978. that is a few years before ms. lourie made that same switch, before she did those same things thinking that it was healthier. she tried to quit and she could not. she tried to quit all the way back in the 1960s, cold turkey. if it was not addictive, she would have been successful. she tried to quit in the years before that and could not, so since she could not quit, she switched to the lights, thinking that they were healthier. she believed what they were saying, which unfortunately was just another lie. so when you look at the verdict form, there is going to be two distinct questions on there about these issues that deal with the fraud and the conspiracy. there is going to be one dealing with the fraud, which is question 4, and it says, "was each defendant's concealment or omission of material information about the health effects and/or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes a legal cause of her lung cancer and death?" and then there is a question on the fraud as to each defendant. because each defendant did things individually with regard to the fraud, and you need to assess it as to each defendant. but as you saw from the documents and the evidence, they were all doing the same kind of things. lorillard was marketing those kent -- those kent filters as the greatest protection, has more scientists and educators, they were offering those kents to people who needed that initial protection from the filters. and then raleighs with their lights and the things they were doing, the internal documents you saw about their participation in the fraud and conspiracy. you saw marlboro with their lights and the lights fraud. each of them is complicit in that fraud. each of them played a role in ms. lourie's continued smoking and her lung cancer and her death. because she was looking for information. she was the kind of person who was trying to find information. she was reading it, she was well read. if they had told the truth, she would have read it because she was looking for it. but they never did. they kept the information to themselves. what they did tell her were lies, switch to lights, they are healthier for you. was not true. and then the second question is was the defendants' agreement -- was it just the fraud or was it all of them working together in concert. even if one had broken ranks, it could have made a difference. it was the conspiracy and the industry working together as a whole that made this whole history, this sad chapter of our history, so successful. it was an industry working collectively to keep people smoking, to keep perpetrating a fraud, to keep hiding things that they knew. no one broke ranks. no one came clean and told the truth. they were all in it together, and all in it together had something to do with what happened to ms. lourie. now you will see at the bottom of this section here there is specific instructions. and it is a little bit confusing. so i just want to go through it with you so you can follow it. so the next questions after this are going to be about the damages in the case. "if you answered no as to any defendant to both questions 2, 4, and 5," so, in other words, if you said no to one of the defendants here on question 2, if you said no to that same defendant on question 4 and you said no on question 5 as to the industry as a whole, then you do not answer question 7 as to that defendant, but if you answered yes to any of those questions, you go on, even for that defendant. it is only if you answered no. if you answered no as to all the questions for all of the defendants, then you found mrs. lourie to be a member of the class, but you found that the fraud, the conspiracy and the smoking of cigarettes was not a legal cause. so you would stop. we would submit to you that is not possible if she is a member of the class, if she is an addicted smoker and kept smoking for all those years, but that is what the instructions are on here. and then if you answered yes for a defendant, please proceed to question 6 and you go on. so just read those instructions at the bottom closely when you get this verdict form and depending upon how you answered the questions ahead of it, just follow what the instructions are on there. once you get through those questions, then the next issue you are going to have to address is damages. and it may -- it may be the hardest issue in the case because it is going to require you to look at what the loss of mrs. lourie has meant to her husband, james lourie, and her son, steven lourie. what that is meant both in what we call economic damages by the loss of what you have heard about with support and services and also by the loss of the human losses. the fact that -- that someone's wife of 30 years, someone who he was over from -- on the first date, someone who, you know, he spent every moment with, more time than some folks ever spend with their spouses. working together, playing together, raising a family. the closeness of that relationship. you have to evaluate all the evidence on that. you have already heard. you have heard from the stand. i could summarize it for you. i could tell you what the witnesses said, but it would not do it justice because you have heard if from the witnesses themselves. you heard them testify what they talked about. but when you are looking at the damages, you have to understand that mrs. lourie was a mother, obviously, and a wife. she was a mother to -- to steven and michael and david. she was someone who, by all accounts, was instrumental in being a parent, giving that instruction, that guidance. and you heard steven talk about the fact that he obviously feels that loss every day, and he has every day for the last 17 years since she is died, and he is going to feel it every day throughout what the court told you would be their joint life expectancy, but based upon the tables, mrs. lourie would still be alive today, and they would have years to come in the future. you saw michael and david as well, who had their mother for a longer period of time, who had their mother for more of those formative years in college. you can decide whether that made a difference in their outcome versus steven's and the direction that they got -- the people that they became versus him. you can decide whether that loss was insignificant, meaningless or whether it was real. when you lose a mother like mrs. lourie like we heard about whether it means anything or whether it does not. the claimants in this case are jim and steven. you saw their demeanor when they testified. steven was obviously very nervous, and you saw that. it is a big, important day. this is their only case. you are their only jury. this is the only chance they are ever going to have to come to someone and tell them the story of their wife and their mother. this is the only chance anyone is going to have to hear this information. so you are their only jury. only you can decide whether their damages are -whether they have damages and what those damages are. and you can decide it in your collective wisdom based upon what you know and what you have heard in this case. you will have to decide on the verdict form, and there is blanks on there. that is 6, and it has a, b, c, and d, and there is blanks for the different elements of damages, and you will see these in the instructions as well. but in the first one for -- it is for mr. lourie. a and b are for mr. lourie, james lourie. c and d are for steven lourie. and the first one is what i think i referred to as the economic damages. it is the loss of support and services. remember we brought in dr. raffa, who is an economist, and that is what you have to do. you have to bring in an economist to do this analysis to decide based on the law, what are the losses a person suffered as a result of mrs. lourie. and those are just the things about her and the kind of woman that she was, the kind of mother she was, the kind of wife she was, that the losses that those folks would experience. and dr. raffa calculates those and adds those up based on the data. and there was not really any cross-examination. there was no dispute on what those numbers were. if you reach this question, there was not any dispute as to what the numbers would be. but the numbers that dr. raffa used for mr. lourie -- and this is the question that combines both support and services. the number for mr. lourie is more significant because it was his wife, and it adds it up over a more significant period of time. whoops. sorry. bad writing. the number for mr. lourie for the loss of support and services was $723,257 over the time that has passed. and for steven, it was a smaller number because his only runs for the period of his minority, but it was $8,253. those were the numbers that dr. raffa talked to you about. the other blanks, b and d, those are the ones where it is the human losses, and those are the harder ones. those are the ones you have to evaluate what is the loss of a wife. what is the loss of a mother? what does that mean that someone died at 52 years old when they did not need to? what is that premature loss? all i can do is give you suggestions on here for all these numbers. the decision on this is absolutely your decision to make, and you can decide that my suggestions are way too high. you can decide that my suggestions are way too low. you can decide whatever the evidence shows. it is ultimately your decision, and all i can do is make suggestions. but the suggestions from us with regard to the evidence on here, i'm going to give you a range. a range of between 2 and 5 million for the loss of a wife and a mother based on the kind of woman that you saw mrs. lourie was and you heard about in this case. those are suggestions. you might think my low end is too high. you might think my high end is too low. it is entirely up to you to decide whatever those numbers are to reach this question on the verdict form. and then you add them up for the total, the final lines, the total, you just add those up, whatever it ends up being. another important point on here, under the law, fraud and conspiracy are -- are significant enough that if that is a cause of injury to someone, then there is not a reduction, even if that person is partially responsible. so we have told you we are partially responsible. but under the law, if the fraud was involved in what happened to ms. lourie or if the conspiracy was involved in what happened to ms. lourie, then that partial responsibility, the judge does not reduce the damages for that amount. and that is what that instruction tells you, just so it is clear. that is what that section here refers to. the final question on the verdict form, as you heard us talk about at the beginning, will be whether punitive damages are warranted. and you heard from the judge's instructions that if you decide punitive damages are warranted, there will be an additional brief phase. what that basically means is that if you -- we break up, so if you as the jury decide that punitive damages are warranted, there will be an additional brief phase where then you decide what the amount of those punitive damages are. and when you get into that punitive damages phase, you might hear some additional evidence, but it will be brief, and if you get to that punitive damages amount phase, you can still decide at that time that the amount is zero, you can still say that then, but if you decide that they are warranted, there will be one more brief phase, hopefully right after your verdict is returned we will go straight into that phase, but looking at the evidence in the case, one of the thing -- the final thing you have to consider is whether punitive damages are warranted. and i think i told you this in the beginning, but there is a slightly higher standard -- excuse me. apologize. there is a higher standard for punitive damages. it is called clear and convincing. so the standard for punitive damages is a little bit different. let us go to that standard, if we can. oh, the next one. sorry. so greater weight of the evidence is what you heard about for all the rest of the claims, and everything else, questions 1 through 6, all of those questions, greater weight of the evidence is the standard that applies. but for punitive damages, it is a higher standard, because we do not want to just punish every company that does something wrong. it has to rise to a certain level. and so it says clear and convincing evidence is evidence that is precise, explicit, lacking in confusion, and of such weight that it produces a firm belief or conviction, without hesitation, about the matter in issue. you heard a lot of evidence about what took place over the years of mrs. lourie's lifetime, and one thing that you heard at the beginning of the case is that it is undisputed that smoking cigarettes causes cancer, that nicotine is addictive. well, it is also undisputed that none of that was ever said during mrs. lourie's lifetime, and instead, what took place is unfortunately a chapter in our history that caused tremendous injury to this family and many others. and you will hear in the instructions or you saw in the instructions, you can consider that harm to other individuals when you are considering whether the conduct that was engaged in by the companies -- the one before. whether the conduct was sufficiently reprehensible to warrant punitive damages. you can consider what happened here. this was not just simply one isolated act. it was not some event that took place in one year or one period of time. this was a pattern of ongoing conduct that happened over 50 years of time. each and every day, choices were made. each and every day, executives from these companies woke up and drove to the office and decided not to be honest that day, not to tell the truth that day, to continue to perpetrate the same fraud. opportunities were repeatedly presented to tell the truth and to make a fair statement, to tell people what they knew, to come clean. and instead of coming clean, what we saw in the evidence is over and over and over again, these companies just continued the same pattern of dishonesty. as one example we just wanted to show, you might remember this from the evidence, but this was dr. wakeham. dr. wakeham was the head of research and development for philip morris. he had been involved in research and development all the way back into the 1950s and '60s, but at the time this interview was given, he was the key guy in research and development. a person who could make a statement that would make a difference and come clean and talk about what they actually knew their products were doing and why people smoked their products, but when presented with that opportunity, this is how dr. wakeham took advantage of that opportunity. (video clip played as follows:) mr. wakeham: none of the things which have been found in tobacco smoke are at concentrations which can be considered harmful. p. taylor: but the components themselves can be considered harmful, can they not? mr. wakeham: anything can be considered harmful. applesauce is harmful if you get too much of it. p. taylor: i do not think many people are dying from applesauce. mr. wakeham: they are not eating that much. p. taylor: people are smoking a lot of cigarettes. mr. wakeham: well, let me say it this way. the people who eat applesauce die. the people who eat sugar die. the people who smoke cigarettes die. does the fact that the people who smoke cigarettes die demonstrate that smoking is the cause? (video clip stopped.) mr. bigger: an opportunity to just tell the truth squandered, not utilized. instead, comparisons made to applesauce. to perpetrate that fraud and propagate that same message of just false controversy and doubt. same thing we saw over and over and over again, all the way up until shortly before mrs. lourie's death when they stood before congress, the executives were brought in, given an opportunity to testify before congress, placed under oath and asked simple questions about things that were clearly documented in their own internal records decades before this, decades before. and instead of telling the truth, they lied. (video clip played as follows:) speaker: i would like you to rise. and those who will be testifying as well with you to rise. would you raise your right hand. do you swear that the testimony you are about to give is the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth? the witnesses: i do. speaker: please consider yourself to be under oath. mr. wyden: let me begin my questioning on the matter of whether or not nicotine was addictive. let me ask you first, and i would like to just go down the row, whether each of you believes that nicotine is not addictive. i heard virtually all of you touch on it. and just yes or no, do you believe nicotine is not addictive? mr. campbell: i believe nicotine is not addictive, yes. mr. wyden: mr. johnston? mr. james johnston: congressman, cigarettes and nicotine clearly do not meet the classic definitions of addiction. there is no intoxication. mr. wyden: we will take that as a no, and again, time is short. if you could just -- i think each of you believe nicotine is not addictive. we just would like to have this for the record. mr. taddeo: i do not believe that nicotine or our products are addictive. mr. tisch: i believe that nicotine is not addictive. mr. horrigan: i believe that nicotine is not addictive. mr. sandefur: i believe that nicotine is not addictive. mr. donald johnston: and i too believe that nicotine is not addictive. (video clip stopped.) mr. bigger: you now know from the evidence what we knew before the case even started in jury selection and we could not tell you is that that is just a lie. they knew it. they knew that it was addictive. they knew it all along, and they did not tell anybody. not until after barbara lourie had died and it was too late to do any good in her life or the life with her family, did they tell the truth. but they still have not told all the truth. go to the next one. actually, you know, sorry. is it 84? mr. telofski: yeah. mr. bigger: yeah. you saw from the evidence why this was done. it was clearly motivated by financial gain. "let us provide the exquisiteness and hope that they, our consumers, continue to remain unsatisfied. all we would want then is a larger bag to carry the money to the bank." all of it, all of the things you saw about the evidence in this case, everything that happened to mrs. lourie and unfortunately hundreds of thousands of other smokers because of the same conduct, money, all driven by money. and even today, there are things they still have not acknowledged, have not admitted. they are not a changed company. they have not admitted that millions of people have died from smoking. 480,000 deaths every year, if you add it up over the last -- it takes you three years to get to the millions. if you add it up over all those years, there is millions of deaths from smoking. never been acknowledged. the marketing to children, the youth marketing, has not been acknowledged by the companies or admitted by the companies. the fact that advertising plays a role in causing people to smoke, never been acknowledged despite the fact it is recognized by the public health community. nicotine addiction causing death, as dr. burns talked to you about, as the surgeon general recognizes, these companies have never admitted it. in fact, they brought you dr. rosman to try and give an explanation of how addiction does not cause death. mr. seiden: objection. the court: approach. (the following proceedings were had before the court at the bench and out of the hearing of the jury.) the court: what is the objection? mr. seiden: we are being criticized for a position we took in litigation, that a credible -an expert witness who said nicotine does not cause addiction. our first amendment right, we have a right to defend ourselves in litigation. we cannot be criticized and have an argument that we deserve to have punitive damages imposed upon us because of that position. mr. bigger: i am just making a comment on the evidence. the witness testified that addiction does not cause death and disease. mr. seiden: it was in the context of things the companies have never admitted, your honor. mr. bigger: i'm not going to make the point. i'll move past it, your honor. that is fine. the court: i'll overrule the objection. move on. (the following proceedings were had in open court before the court and jury.) mr. bigger: never admitted that most people smoked because they are addicted. never admitted that most people would like to quit or would rather not be smoking. they never admitted that filters are a fraud, that lights, low tars, or milds are no safer than regular cigarettes. cannot even find them in the stores anymore because they are not legal to sell like that. they manipulated the chemistry of nicotine to create the same addiction. never admitted that nicotine is closely controlled to create a sustained addiction. it occurs naturally in the plant, but it is controlled by these companies at precisely the right level to keep people addicted to smoking. they never admitted that. lying to the public, lying to the united states government and congress, as they just did, forming a conspiracy to hide the hazards of smoking. they never acknowledged or admitted to those things. and for all these reasons, these companies need to be punished for what they did to mrs. lourie and her family and for what they continue to do. they need to be a deterrent to others in the industry and other industries. you should check yes for punitive damages. because we have the burden of proof, i'll have a chance to get up again after the defense goes for a brief rebuttal closing argument, and so i look forward to talking to you again. thank you for your attention, and i thank you for listening to me as i tried to summarize some of the evidence. obviously, we have been in trial for two weeks now. there has been a lot of evidence. i cannot touch on it all, but i have tried to summarize for you what the evidence has shown and why we believe that it is shown that we have met our burden and we should have a verdict returned in favor of the plaintiff, as i have suggested to you. thank you again for your attention and for your service. it is been a pleasure to try this case with you, with my co-counsel and for my client. i look forward to talking to you again after the defense goes to clarify whatever i need to clarify. thank you, your honor. mr. bigger: yes, sir. i've got bad news and good news. bad news is i've got over an hour to talk to you. good news is there is no way i'm going to use even close to that much time. i understand what time it is. i know you guys have heard a lot. you have sat through 12 or 13 days of trial. you have heard the evidence. i'm not going to stand up here and try to respond to everything that they have said. there is a few points i need to respond to, and so i appreciate your attention just a little bit longer so i can address some of the things that mr. fasi and ms. tedder and mr. seiden said. i appreciate that. we start kind of backwards and forwards, the way you saw us do when we did kind of redirect during the trial. mr. seiden was the last one to go, so i'll start with him. you know, the raleighs and the raleigh lights. he is right. mr. -- mr. -- mr. lourie did not remember the raleigh lights, but it is in the picture. there is no doubt that she is smoking raleigh lights. and we wanted to bring you the evidence in the case that is there. and we said from the beginning we do not know. we do not have stronger than the picture of just that. that is the evidence in the case. we wanted to present the accurate, complete picture to you. that is what we tried to do all along. and there is raleigh lights right there. we knew she was smoking. so we brought you the picture. did we say it was a primary brand? no, of course not. raleighs was a primary brand. if you will look at the other pictures, you will see them. there is pictures of raleighs in the other pictures that are in evidence. mr. lourie remembers her smoking the raleighs. he remembers her furnishing the house in part with the coupons from the packs of raleighs. that is why we brought you that evidence. we did not come in and say that the raleigh lights was the key to the case. we just we wanted to bring you the full picture. so that is why we brought you that evidence. as far as the company's involvement, make no doubt about it, the findings you heard about, the fraud, the conspiracy, r.j. reynolds and lorillard tobacco company, they were sponsors on the frank statement. they were in it from the beginning. they were fully committed. and what was the word? all in. they were all in on the fraud. they were all in on the conspiracy the whole time, making millions of dollars, happy as clams, selling their cigarettes, not saying a word about what they knew. they were all in. they were also the brands of cigarettes that mrs. lourie smoked, the kents and the raleighs, and that is why they are here. they are here on the product use issues as far as the fact that she smoked five, six, seven years, depending on the testimony, of those brands over her lifetime. and they are also here because they were involved in the fraud and the conspiracy. mr. seiden also talked about the fact that there was no statements from r.j. reynolds. i think some of the other witnesses -- excuse me -some of the other lawyers said this as well, that there were no statements that they could point to that ms. lourie read or heard. folks, look at the instructions from the judge on the law, and you will see that the findings that these companies are responsible for, the findings are fraud by concealment. and you will see that when that -- when you read that finding closely, what it says is that they failed to disclose a material fact. it is not that they said something that was not true. that is called a misrepresentation. this is a fraud by concealment. they knew stuff and did not tell anybody. of course, mrs. lourie did not tell someone that she was impacted by the tirc or the ti. they did not tell her. that is the whole point is they knew the truth and did not say it. that is a fraud by concealment. and you will see in those instructions, if you read it closely, it says they concealed material information. material information is defined. a material fact is the kind of fact that but for the concealment, mrs. lourie would have acted differently. you heard a lot about but for from mr. seiden. it is in the instructions. the very stuff they hid from her and lied about is the stuff that would have made a difference in her life. but for. and while we are on that point, look at those instructions on legal cause, because they spent a lot of time talking about the first paragraph. we showed you both paragraphs. there is two paragraphs there, and the second one is very important because i told you this is a concurring cause case. it does not need to be the only cause. you need to make a list. make a list of all the reasons mrs. lourie smoked. make a list of the reasons back there. and if -- if fraud is not on the list, then it was not a concurring cause in why her lung cancer and death happened. if the fact that they lied all this time and it would have made a difference, if that is not on the list, then it is not a cause, but if addiction is on the list, it is a cause. it is a legal cause. if fraud is on that list, if the fact that what you saw they did for all those years had to play a role, if it is a reason why she continued to smoke when she was the kind of person who is seeking information, who wanted to find out the answers and the truth, if it is on the list, that means it was part of the legal cause of her lung cancer and death. mr. fasi at the beginning of his opening statement said that you deserve to have all the facts, you deserve to have the full picture. if we had not brought you the evidence that we brought you, you would have thought mrs. lourie grew up on mars, okay, because they do not talk about anything their companies did except to say that they were dumb or wrongheaded. you think? lying to the american public about what you know to the expense of hundreds of thousands of deaths is not dumb or wrongheaded, it is egregious. it is reprehensible. it deserves a punishment. and it led, if you read those instructions, to the death of mrs. lourie. she is the kind who was seeking information, and the stuff they lied about is the stuff that would have made a difference had they told her. he said how many times we had to bring you the friends and the other people. we brought you lynda snider. we played linda coven in our case before we rested. we brought you all of that stuff. the only person they brought you, elaine berman, so they can come and disparage mr. lourie about what happened, about how he handled his grief after his wife had died -mr. seiden: objection. mr. bigger: -- because of their products. after his wife died because of their products. and they want to sit in judgment of how he responded to that. his kids did not sit in judgment. they said they want -- our mom was gone. we wanted dad to try and be fine. and he tried. you saw he was not fine because his kids had to admit him to the hospital. he tried to move on, and they want to judge him for that. they want you to judge him for that. the law says that stuff comes in so that the whole truth can be known, and it did, but it is wrong for them to ask you to sit in judgment of that and suggest he was not grieving his wife of 31 years that he loved with all of his heart. he told you it was over on the first date. there is not a witness that came in here who could have said anything other than they were completely in love during their marriage. must be easy to sit in those seats over there and not to talk about your client, to only -- only point the finger at mrs. lourie. only focus on her and try to suggest to you -mr. seiden: objection. may we approach, your honor? the court: objection overruled. mr. bigger: stayed away from mrs. lourie in the case and the evidence. you were here. dr. calkins, first witness. lynda snider, michael lourie, david lourie, steven lourie, dr. louie villa, all of those people were about mrs. lourie. dr. proctor did not come until i think five days into the trial. the whole first part of the case was letting you get to know who mrs. lourie was from the people who knew her best so you could understand based on who she was how she fit (indicating), what it had to do with mrs. lourie. all the things their companies did all those years had to do with mrs. lourie. you knew her then. you understood. when you saw what dr. proctor talked about, you understood, gee, that would have made a big difference in the life of someone like mrs. lourie. the fact they knew it was addictive and did not tell anybody in '63, someone who was well informed and seeking information and trying to quit. that would have been really important information to know, that it was not just her weakness, she was not just weak and unable to do it. and now they want to frame this idea as if someone's failure to succeed is evidence of a lack of motivation. you think peyton manning was not motivated to win the super bowl last year just because the broncos lost? motivation is defined by what the people did. she tried to quit. the people who knew her best talked about that. the evidence is there. you know, just briefly on the medical side. the people who were there treating mrs. lourie at the time all of them concluded unequivocally that she had lung cancer. that is what she was treated for, that is what the records say. there was no mammogram because there was no suspicion of breast cancer. there was no colonoscopy because there was no suspicion of colon cancer. dr. goldstein, her primary care doctor who was there holding her hand with her the whole way, certifies the death certificate as primary lung cancer for the cause of death. you know, what does it have to do with barbara lourie. mr. fasi used that truck analogy about a truck, the legal cause. our case is concurring cause. that has nothing to do with barbara lourie. and he said that ninety percent, 95 percent thing. i'm waiting to hear the answer what that has to do, you know, what about that? this case is about barbara lourie, she was on the other side of the equation. she was the people who were smoking. they already had their hooks in her. that is the part we are talking about. they had already gotten their hooks in her. and all that advertising and all that stuff, of course they are not trying to reach one person when they mass advertise. their whole goal was to get the entire country smoking so that parents would smoke and kids would be influenced by their parents, so that siblings would smoke and influence their brothers and sisters. that is what they needed. they needed this ground swell. they had salesmen everywhere in the country, in parents and in brothers and sisters and in friends who they knew would help get other smokers smoking. it was a huge movement, it was not just to get a person, it was to get every person. you know, dr. herkov, they talked about that '67 thing, you were there, you heard. that was his first deposition, he had not had the testimony of lynda snider yet. he would just gotten lynda snider's testimony. and he told ms. yates that, she would not let him explain, so we had to do it on redirect. but he said, yeah, before i had lynda snider's testimony, who smoked with her at 12 years old, i did not have the evidence to make a decision about how much sooner she was addicted, all i had was mr. lourie's testimony who knew her in '66. once he had testimony from miss snider who knew her, who knew she was a regular daily smoker who had the evidence that he could apply the test at that time, he was deposed again. they had the testimony, they know that his testimony goes back earlier than that. he said she was addicted when she was in high school. they knew that. but they still present it. even now in closing they present it to you as if it was a half truth, knowing what they know. the quit attempts and that job analogy about what if someone only applied to work, well, aside from the fact that mr. lourie said she was always trying to quit, what if someone was paying that guy not to work. that is what they were doing by having her addicted to nicotine, they were paying her not to quit, basically, by giving her the nicotine that she needed to keep her smoking. i'll just say one last thing before i sit down. you know, they talked about mr. lourie having interest in the outcome, just coming here to try and ask you for money. and you have sat through this case, you have seen the testimony, you know it is not the case. but all of the stuff they want to rely on, all of the stuff they point to to try and support their defenses comes from the same witnesses. it is the same people. they want to just pick the stuff they like and then say the other stuff from the witnesses, you cannot believe that. all of their evidence comes from the same people they are questioning. they are just being very select -- they are cherry-picking the facts that they like and presenting only those and then discrediting the witnesses on the other stuff. you cannot have it both ways. it is not heads we win, tails you lose. i thank you for your patience. i appreciate you taking a few more minutes to let me explain a few more thing to you, and i appreciate again your service on this and look forward to receiving your verdict, whatever it may be. thank you.