closing arguments by mr. smith mr. smith: good morning. i'm rod smith an i'll be doing part of the closing. brent bigger, my co-counsel will be doing part of the closing. there is a couple of things that everybody can agree on and i think everybody in the courthouse will agree. (a) that you have been a most attentive, most attentive jury. and that (b) that some of you look like your on volume three of your notes. thank you for your service. we told you in voir dire that it was a great function of our citizenship and everybody in this courthouse thanks you in advance for the work that you have done and art about to do. there is something else in this trial with which no one can disagree. there was no battle that pete mack ever ran away from. think about it. this is a guy who flue 75 missions as a tail gunner to help defeat the action in world war ii. this is a guy who just a few years later went to korea and fought so bravely for his country that he was again decorated. this is a guy who finally in 1981 won one of the toughest battles of his life. but sad thing about that battle is that in the beginning it was an ambush. pete's war against his addiction to the nicotine contained in r.j. reynolds tobacco company's tobacco took him years to win. and the cost of that battle was a dreadful and undeserved suffering in what should have been, what we all hopi is, the golden years of our life. the trouble is that by that time pete had an 80-plus pack-a-year smoking history. we know that he probably began smoking in the mid 1930s. we certainly know he was smoking, by medical records, in 1938 which would have made him 16 years old. we know that by 1945 when he met his beloved wife he was smoking camel cigarettes, and we know h told his children that is what he would always smoked. so that is stuff we know about. we know then that if he quit in 1981, he had a 40-plus-a-year smoking history and we know that he smoked r.j. reynolds tobacco, it was camel cigarettes in the beginning, sometimes lucky strikes, sometimes pall mall. and, remember, whether it was brown & williamson tobacco compan american or r.j. reynolds, r.j. reynolds is equally responsible here for all. we know that in the end 40 years plus of smoking up to two, then three packs a day led to horrible consequences and terrible suffering. we know this: we know that in 1996 sadly pete was diagnosed with laryngeal cancer. he had to go through painful radiation. he took it and afterwards he never really regained his voice. he actually, you remember, when he told his sons he had to save his voice because it bothered -- or the records show that he continued thereafter to have difficulty with his swallowing. he never went back to normal, but fortunately at least the cancer did not come back, but he suffered. but we also know that even before that, at his 50th wedding anniversary, according to his sons, he was complaining about his shortness of breath. we know that he was complaining about his shortness of breath and we know that his wife told the boys that he was showing that he was having shortness of breath. we know that in 1996 he complained about it medically. sadly we know that in 2000 he received the diagnosis of chronic obstructive bronchial disease, pulmonary disease. it is, as described by the only doctor here that really was on the case, dr. ryerson, a slow and insidious disease. he had it for many years before it manifest. it manifested during 1995 when he began to suffer from progressiv breathing. he finally went in in 2000 and by then he was diagnosed with copd, and there is nothing you can d about it. we know from 2000 forward he began to b chained progressively to machines, like those sitting over there that i rolled out for you. we know that by the time he left his house in melrose he was already using a motorized wheelchai and breathing to help; a breathing apparatus. we saw yesterday from 2000 on, it was co2 is co2. we know that from that year forward and for the next seven to eight years of his life pete focused on the most basic things. he had to swallow with pain. he could not talk much to his children as much as he had before. but more importantly every minute, every hour, every day, every night his entire focus began to be to get enough oxygen for his next breath. you remember when his son said when he was a boy he remembers his dad wore cigarettes but in the end he wore oxygen, just like clothing. perhaps the saddest and the most ironic part of this case is that r.j. reynolds sits over there claiming no responsibility for the suffering of pete mack, despite the fact that dr. cummings told you that looking back through the records pete mack should have been the poster boy -- his words -- the poster boy of r.j. reynolds tobacco company's customers. we know in the beginning that he smoked camel this is what camel was saying back in those days about their cigarettes. "more doctors smoke camels than any other cigarette. the t-zone, no problem there with camel cigarettes." we know that sometime in the 1960s and into the early 1970s he switched. "the big difference is the filter brand, only winston has it." and then we know in 1974 while winston was bragging about their filter cigarettes, they came up with a new market product. light cigarettes. now, we know from dr. cummings that the early studies on lights did not contemplate one of the problems and that was, what happens if because it is a light cigarette and you need more nicotine, we have not considered early, what would happen if you began to smoke more? because if you began to smo more, actually light cigarettes would become more harmful. and what do we know happened here? actually pete, in trying to cut back, according to his wife, going to light cigarettes actually began to increase the amount of smoking. in the end he was smoking almost three packs a day. what a great idea light cigarettes was. and we know the year he switched because his friend mr. tolbert cami in here and said, you know, i worked over for him over in the store one year, 1974, and i know he switched to winston lights that year. and i remember it because they were the gold pack. and light cigarettes were such a scam that doctor told you, cummings told you they cannot even say that anymore about their cigarette product. every sales pitch that r.j. reynolds came up with worked on pete mack and thousands like him, until after years of trying, finally in 1982 pete kicked his addiction to cigarettes. and we say years of trying. his wife said he tried for ten years. now there is that other inconsistency. this was a woman in her mid 80s wh had three days of deposition. you heard her say things that were not always consistent but if you read them together, guess what? what she said was, oh, i know he tried to quit because we tried to quit together. we both were smokers. his son told the story about the time he knows he tried to quit because he remembers the men at work complaining to him that, man, he got so irritable i hope that he goes back to smoking. we know he was trying to quit. we know he was trying to quit when he went to filters. we know he was trying to quit when he went to lights. why? because his wife said, well, that is how he was trying to cut back, because that is what the company wanted you to think you were doing when you went t filters and lights. we know that they are going to make this case, this case will be, and i predict right away, this will be about the free choice of pete mack. that is what they will want to focus on. and i would, too, if i had a history like we are about to go over. but let us talk for a while about the free choices made by r.j. reynolds. we know that in 1928 -- now, this was when pete would have been about six years old -- we know that r.j. reynolds made a choice. their choice was they were going to go after school students. now, this does not say college students. this says high school, prep schools, colleges and university. they wanted to get them young. this means that thousands of special students and teachers, both men and women, will be assembled at various places during the summer months. we want you to get your men to giv these schools immediate attention and follow up from time to time as much as possible. we know that r.j. reynolds was focusing on young smokers just like pete when pete was just a boy. and we know that focusing on juveniles like pete mack, what the company called in their documents, you know, replacement smokers, was so effective that r.j. reynolds chose to focus on those kinds of smokers for the next 50 years. remember dr. teague -- we will get back to him -of r.j. reynolds in 1973. in this confidential document some thoughts about new brands of cigarettes for the youth market. open it up please. if our company is to survive and prosper over the long-term, we must get our share of the youth market, he said. because they knew this: once the mechanism has been experienced, that is the cigarette, used, physical and psychological habit patterns are firmly established and become self-perpetuating. once we get them smoking, they are hooked. once they start smoking young, we have got them for a long time, and we know the tim to get them is when they are young. and as dr. werner told you, and even their doctor conceded, that is not when mature decisions are made. r.j. reynolds knew that. in 1975 -- 1975, r.j. reynolds was still choosing to focus on young people, hooking them young. why do they do that? because as this 14- to 24-age group matures, 14 years old, the very age when they had gotten the group when they got pete least, they will account for a key share of the total cigarette volume, for at least the next 25 years. they do not say in there what happens to that customer after 25 years of smoking their cigarette. you know -- go back to 1040 for a second, please. one of the things i find amazing is when dr. teague is talking about it, he actually talks in his report, dr. teague actually says -- back one, please -- that they are -- look at the top of this -- at the outset it should be said that we are presently, and i believe unfairly, constrained from directly promoting cigarettes to the youth market. then he says later, if this be so, there is certainly nothing immoral or unethical about our company attempting to attract those smokers to our products. now, what is he saying there folks? real simple. i know the law's changed but i'm supposed to -- we are not supposed to appeal to youth smokers anymore, but there is nothing immoral or unethical about it. we ought to be allowed to go ahead and continue to hook young smokers, because they knew that that was the way that they could succeed, because they knew that the physical and psychological effects would become self-perpetuating and they would becoming overriding importance, and they just kept appealing to young people for all those years. so the fact that tobacco thought pete mack in the late 1930s in their web is not a surprise. he was just the kind of target they chose to go after. tobacco knew what they were doing. you know, think about it. tobacco gave cigarettes to the army, we heard this, for our troops and the army gave to them to world war i and world war ii and pete was in world war ii and pete came back. and when he came back he was the perfe customer. and i want to say this: there is nothing to suggest that pete was a guy who would ever question much because he lived by a code of honor. he expected others to do the same. the man in the military for a career, duty, honor, your word is your bond, these meant something to pete and his generation. he did not know and he would not imagine that a company in a country that he had fought for, that a company would betray its citizens by concealing the truth from them about something they knew and they knew would harm them. at the very time pete was fighting for his country in korea in the board rooms of big tobacco like r.j. reynolds, there was a huge problem. the scientific community in 1953 was confirming more ar more what tobacco knew. smoking, while wildly popular, had serious side effects. it caused illness and most prominently it caused cancer. rjr immediately ordered a massive study of the current science and assigned the task to their new up and coming scientists who was then dr. teague. take a look at that date. 1953. i do not want you to say 1953. i want you to notice it is february of 1953. this is before the meeting that happens later because r.j. reynolds is now trying to figure out on its own before it is getting together with its tobacco friends, r.j. reynolds is trying to figure out on its own do we have something here. and this young scientists goes through and he does a comprehensive study before the executives, and he comes back and tells them, there appears to be a growing suspicion and even acceptance among medical men and cancer researcher that the parallel increase in cigarette consumption and the incidence of cancer of the respiratory system is something more than coincidence. several statistical studies, he says, show him, a new young scientist, what he tells r.j. reynolds; our product, according to medicine and science, causes cancer. r.j. reynolds had another problem. all the tobacco companies had a problem. the stock was beginning to die. remember dr. cummings? so they called a meeting right before christmas, plaza hotel, new york, behind closed doors all the executives to get together. now, it was not about health because there were no doctors asked at that meeting, no scientists asked at that meeting. there was nobody coming from the surgeon general to com in and give a presentation. someone tells us what we can do about public health, what is the right thing to do. no, that is not what happened in that meeting, but they did invite someone else. they brought in madison avenue for their problem because they alway saw this as a public relations problem, not a public health disaster. right then and there r.j. reynolds and the tobacco companies made their decision. and their decision was that they would choose to market their product notwithstanding what they knew and that th would advertise -- they would make that product the most advertised product in the history of marketing. so what did tobacco do about the so-called health crisis? what did r.j. reynolds say about showing any concern for the health of the nation? nothing. what were their choices? deny and advertise. put enough money behind it and tell the story big enough and we will get out of this thing. contradict, confuse; anything to keep people smoking. why did we know this? because 1972, looking back 20 years, that this is what tobacco said: for 20 years this industry has employed a single strategy to defend itself; creating doubt without denying about the health charge, without actually denying it. in that same memo: in the cigarette controversy, the public, especially those who are present and potential supporters, must perceive, under and believe in advance to -- believe in evidence to sustain their opinions that smoking may not be the causal factor. that was from the very beginning. they have not shown it is the causal factor. by 1972 -- not one piece of evidence will suggest to you that by 1972 the medical and scientific knowledge of the cancer relationship between cigarette smoking and illness and copd an cancer was well-established. but that is what someone said from the institute looking back. and they said, by the way, there are millions of people who would be receptive to a new message; cigarette smoking may not be the health hazard that the anti smoking people say it is because other alternatives are at least as possible. their old pitch was always, come up with something else to blame it on. by the way, i promise you that the themes of confusion, contradiction, somebody else is blamed, unknowns, some other cause, something they started with in tobacco 20, 30, 40, 50, now 60 years ago will still be heard in this courtroom today. i guarantee you that the words you find in tobacco's documents a half a century ago about how to avoid the truth will echo in this courtroom. take a look. let us go back to 1953 for a minute. what was the objective? was it health? no, the objective would be an industry response to these charges exposing their lack of scientific foundation. now, wait a second. this is in december and in february they have had an internal study that shows there is a scientific foundation. well, the method would be such as might be -- might determine including use of advertising media. i believe that the very fact that it was a statement having complete industry support would itself carry strong conviction. is there anywhere someone says we need to talk about the health problems of cigarettes? never was a subject. the reason was obvious. they knew wha they were doing. 1933, please. they knew in '64, they knew in '54, they knew in '74, we must, in the near future, provide some answers that will give smokers a psychological crutch and a self-rationale to continue smoking. now, how well did all that work? well, let us just examine some documents. look at 4051. this i what the ftc said about the influence in 1967. this is how much they had penetrated the market of the ideas in american. cigarette advertising reaches virtually all americans who can either read or understand the spoken word. cigarettes are advertised, as it goes on and it says, so persuasive is cigarette advertising that it is virtually impossible for americans of almost any age to avoid cigarette advertising. that was the culture in which they kept people smoking. the reason? well, because it worked. now, we know, pete's sons who testified here, that his mom and dad like every generation, they got a tv, they all sat around television. they watched. people remember the jingles. the company will say, i predict, and they always do, well, you cannot show a particular ad to pete, you cannot find a particular ad. folks, advertising, as dr. cummings said, works on how man messages you hit. and i think his testimony was everybody got at least five messages a day from tobacco. and today, as we sit here, i asked the son on the stand, years after that tobacco's long since been on tv or radio, winston tastes good like a cigarette should. why? because some things never go away; they are in the back of your mind, and that is what tobacco knew. you know, and how much was r.j. reynolds willing to spend to gloss over the truth? well, let us look at 3165, please. the staff report of the ftc. 1981. cigarettes are the most highly advertised product in america. it has been estimated that six major cigarette companies spent one billion dollars in 1980 to sell their product. and then the most telling. the national commission on smoking and public policy reported 1978 -- read it -- that they spent more in a day than the national clearinghouse spent in a year with health messages. they drowned out the truth on one front. and, of course, that meant, as we know, that they were very effective. the year he quit, 1981, this report from the ftc, read it. at that point in time, forty percent of the people polled did not know that smoking caused eighty percent of lung cancer, which we now know was ; underestimate in 1981. similarly, although the evidence indicates smoking causes seventy percent of all chronic obstructive lung disease, which we now kno\ was an underestimate, approximately sixty percent of the public does not know that most cases of emphysema are smoking-related, and one/third of those polls are even unaware that many cases of emphysema are smoking-related. it worked. the american public did not know and did not understand and that is what tobacco counted on. but it was not the advertising that was the core of their fault because first you have to have a plausible story. you cannot advertise yourself -you cannot say in their advertising and they never would, that, by the way, it is a beautiful day in our ad, but we do need to tell you that we cause copd and cancer because nobody would accept it. so they had to have a real plausible story. the real conspiracy of tobacco, the real fault of tobacco was from 1953 forward they created doub and controversy where none really existed. not one person has come in to tell you that the scientific evidence was unsettled by the late '50s. certainly not the '60s and certainly not in the '70s and, of course, not the '80s, but tobacco never once admitted the truth. they simply invented a controversy of false doubt. 3196, please. well, can you go to 2186, please. this is what they were saying when they wanted to get stories out. the most important type of story is that which casts doubt on the cause and effect theory of disease and smoking. and when wer they saying that? 1968. we got to show that there is doubt about the cause and effect. they knew the cause and effect of smoking. all their scientists knew by then. 3196, please. remember in 1967 what they had to do? recreate the cigarette controversy. that is what they were trying to do because they had to live in the margins of human doubt. what did tobacco sa then? same thing they will say now. was not enough proof. there was not a causal link. there was still unanswered questioned. they used their economic power to create a illusion so they could keep people smoking, because, as they said in 1953, let us go back to the original study of the research directors. these are their words, folks; not mine. this is when they were first coming up with their ideas of how to do it. one of them; it is fortunate enough for us that cigarettes are a habit they cannot break. research director for tobacco said another. boy, would not it be wonderful if our company was the first to produce a cancer-free cigarette. what we could do to the competition. did they say, would not it be wonderful to have a cancer-free cigarette because it would help the public health? did they say, we do not have to worry about it because we do not have cancer? no, they knew right then they were looking for a cancer-free cigarette, but not for public health because they wanted to beat the competition. and look what they then said. the stock market fall is terrible when you consider dividends are going to be much larger next year without the excess profit tax. the focus of the research directors of the company was not on health of the american peopl it was on how to make another buck. and how could r.j. reynolds use their muscle so effectively? well, they had to have scientific doubt. they had to say that they would assure the public that they would use an unprecedented amount of ads. you k now, they would feature doctors and athletes and celebrities. they would have john wayne. you saw john wayne. you saw all the famous actor and actresses of the time. you saw the athletes of the time. think what it said to a young man when lou gehrig in the '30s or joe dimaggio in the '50s, it does not bother my wind. you know, this was just a way for them to take money to the bank. and then they came up with, i'll tell you what let us do, let us assure people right away. 1954, the frank statement, put that up. you remember this. we believe the products we make ar not injurious to health. they did not believe that because in february 1953 they knew it was not true. we will always have and always will closely cooperate with those whose task it is to safeguard the public health. and then, of course, they have to throw in their zinger which they will do for the next 50 years. and maybe in this courtroom today, the medical research of recent years indicates many possible causes. and this one of many possibly causes of lung cancer. there is no proof that cigarettes is one of them. no proof that cigarette smoking is one of the causes. they knew that was not true. they just want to send that out to all the american people. but let us see what they really did in response to it. how did they react to the surgeon general's reports in the future? 25510, please this is what they said about the -- this is right after the release: claims that cigarettes are addictive, irresponsible and scare tactics. were they saying that just in the '50s? were they saying that just in the '60s? this is 1980 they are still saying that to the american people. this is after pete had quit. they still kept going because they wanted to make sure that the american people alway heard the false side. 3615, please. this is one of my -- this is 1963. it is in evidence. it is called the battelle hippa report by some, but this is what i found in one of the pages reading through. thus, to accept its responsibility would, i suggest, free the industry to take a much more aggressive posture to meet attack. it would in particular free the industry to attack the surgeon general's report itself by pointing out its gaps and omissions, it is reliance on statistics, it is lack of clinical evidence, et cetera, et cetera. you know, there is something interesting about that. that is dated june of 1963. the surgeon general's report was not even out yet and they were preparing to attack it. the frank statement was anything about frank. they did exactly the opposite of what they told the america people they would do. they would use their shields, their fronts, if you will, tirc, ctr, tobacco institute, to give their industry conspiracy the much needed cover. i] you want to make an agreement like that, when they all get together, you gonna tell a lie this big, you need cover. we know that. i say shields. it is not my word; it is there. 2268, please. it was tobacco industry research council, you know, this important research they were going to do it was set up as an industry shield. ctr has acted as a front. people who tell the truth do not need shields and do not need fronts to hide behind. in fact, the whole tobacco thing was -- next please -in the words, it was tirc, it was conceived as a public relations gesture. it has functioned as a public relations operation. it was not a research council. tobacco wanted people to believe that you do not have to give up smoking. how do we know that? 2279. they decided they would put out -- paid for putting out a book. you do not have to give up smoking. and this is what the true magazine articl said in 1954. this is typical of -- you see this is part of a long list -- but this is what tobacco was willing to say. next please. if you are a man or woman smokes, relax and enjoy it. if you have tried to give up smoking a dozen times and fail, quit trying. that is what tobacco said to the american people after they were being frank with them. but, of course, r.j. reynolds knew the real truth. 3363. the truth they never really told the american people they knew in 1958, with the exception, causation, we mean any chain of events which leads finally to lung cancer which involves smoking as an indispensable link. they knew the truth in '58. they knew the truth about their product in '62. 2164, please. obviously the amount of evidence accumulated t indict cigarette smoke as a health hazard is overwhelming. the evidence challenging this indictment is scant. now, that is two years before the surgeon general's report. they are admitting that the truth is there, but, of course, they are not going to accept it. they knew it in 1963. 3615, please. we are in the business of selling nicotine. we will get to that later, but that was their business. it had some side-effects they said. they caused or predisposed to lung cancer, and it may well be true to cause emphysema, et cetera, et cetera. now, this is before the surgeon general's report, which they will deny. but they internal secret documents they never thought somebody like you would see tells the truth. 3615 again, please. they knew what the surgeon general was going 1 say. assume the surgeon general concludes whatev jargon the scientific analysis that there is real and relation between smoking and cancer. that is what they are saying. one, would suppose we would not repeat dr. little's often reiterated not proven defense. that was not a stick they do. certainly one would hope to prove that there is no etiological factor in smoke, but the odds are greatly against the success in that effort. that is not after the surgeon general. that is in contemplating of the surgeon general. they knew the truth before anybody but they never told pete mack, and they never told the america people. but then that is what tobacco always says, it is unproven. play the tape, please, 1696. 1971. (video played for the jury.) announcer: from cbs washington in part, fa the nation, a spontaneous and unrehearsed news interview with joseph cullman, iii, chairman and chief executive officer of philip morris, incorporated, and chairman of the executive committee of the tobacco institute. mr. cullman: we do talk to the question of whether or not cigarettes are hazardous. we do not believe that cigarettes are hazardous. we will not accept that. (video stopped.) mr. smith: stop, that is it. 1971. when pete mack was first started to try it, what were they saying? that is it. i did not say it; they did. they knew they were in the business of selling nicotine. nicotine was their ace in the hole. and they knew that it was addictive and they knew that it would keep them in business. 2141, please. the physiological requirements of the smoker with respect to nicotine can be met by the application of the optimum amount of nicotine to extract the tobacco. 1959. they knew it in '59. they knew it thereafter. 3615, please. second page, please. 1963. next page, please. we are in the business of selling nicotine and they knew the truth in 1972. 1920, please. they were selling nicotine, and they knew that nicotine was addictive. they knew it in '63. they knew, in a sense, the tobacco industry we thought was a specialized, highly ritualized, and stylelized segment of the pharmaceutical industry. next, please. what we should really make and sell would be the proper dosage form of nicotine with as many built-in attractions and ramifications as possible. next please. if our business is fundamentally that of supplying nicotine in useful dosage form, why is it really necessary that alleged harmful tar of nicotine? what they are talking about is we are selling nicotine because it kept them in business. they knew that no one ever became a smoker by smoking cigarettes that did not contain their nicotine. they recognized the key role of nicotine in consumer satisfaction and design and they needed to promote products with the end of nicotine dosage in mind. everything they said they will say again. that is all they have ever said. contradict and confuse, avoid the truth. but you know on the inside there were secret concerns beginning to be asserted. before i leave that, go to 2186, please. this is an internal memo. it is in evidence. this is a page you were not shown. they were talkin about strategies they would use. this was going to be tobacco's strategy. controversy, contradiction, other factors, unknowns. that is what they always say when facing the inescapable truth about there product in every instance. but on the inside there were secret concerns. go to 2130. people were beginning to know the truth and some were beginning to worry about it. our basic position in the cigarette controversy is subject to the charge and may be subject to a finding that we are making false or misleading statements to promote the sale of cigarettes. we are not telling the truth but they never admitted it to the public. 2184, please. i'm told -- this is the heart of this case -the entire matter of addiction is the most potent weapon a prosecutor can have in a lung cancer cigarette case. we cannot defend continued smoking as free choice if the smoker was addicted. they knew it. they have always known it. that is not my words; that is theirs. and what was the real goal of all they have done? 2142, please -- 2412. it is dyslexia. let us provide, they said. they are talking about in one of their documents. let us provide this exquisiteness of smoking and hope that our consumers continue to remain unsatisfied. that means they need more nicotine. all we would want then is a larger bag to carry the money to the bank. that is what tobacco is all about. you know, we know the following. pete was the perfect customer. he relied on tobacco's lies every time. when tobacco had a new answer for filters, pete switched. now, they knew filters do not work. you remember t document that said they do not work. and you remember -- you guys -- i want to go back to -- go up to 2143, please. this is what tobacco knew about filters. several studies have shown a large proportion of smokers believe that any filter reduces the health hazard, and a smaller proportion believes that charcoal filters afford more protection. but show the rule truth. number 10, please. the illusion of filtration is as important as the fact of filtration. remember when i asked you in voir dire about -and i think the judge knew where i was going about why you have a filter on your hot water at the house. somebody said, well, it gets out the impurities. that was the gig. they wanted to convince the people to switch and pete did. every time they did something pete bought in. you know, ladies and gentlemen, they always wantec the public to rely on what they said. mr. heimann told you that. others told you that. they want to make this case all about pete. with a history like theirs who complain. but i want to talk about pete's history just for a moment. he was a hard worker. he became a good boss. he was man who was focused on his wife for 63 years. whe his son was wounded he went every weekend to see him. he was not a drinker. he was not a partyer. he loved to travel with his wife and he liked to square dance with her. all that was taken from him in the last years. what did pete do wrong? what was his big mistake like millions of other americans he did not know th£ he could not believe that -- and their argument, if you break it down today would be this: he should have known better than to believe us, he should not have fallen for what we were keeping from him. he chose to smoke, they say; but they chose to lie. just remember the end, they all stand up and try to convince you that pete should be blamed because he should have been the better -- he should have known better than believe r.j. reynolds. he should have known not to believe what they spoke -they chose to spend a fortune convincing him he ought to do. they say he did not try hard enough. well, they never tried telling people the truth. ladies and gentlemen, your job has been made easier. your job has been made a lot easier today, because a case came along, and the judge has already told you abou it, called engle. and engle in 1994 and all forward finally we ended up with a set of findings that are the law in this state: nicotine is addictive. smoking cigarettes cause laryngeal cancer and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. r.j. reynolds was negligent in failing to exercise the degree of care that a reasonable company would exercise under like circumstance. r.j. reynolds placed cigarettes on the market that were defective and unreasonably dangerous. r.j. reynolds, the council for tobacco researc and other tobacco companies concealed or omitted material information, not otherwise known or available, knowing that the material was false or misleading or failed to disclose a material fact concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes or both. r.j. reynolds and other tobacco companies entered into an agreement to conceal or omit information regarding the health effects of cigarettes or their addictive nature with the intentions that smokers and the public would rely o this information to their detriment. now, that is what the law will be if we get pete in the class for which engle hopes. and you know pete himself, in his last year -- last years, as i told you, he never ran away from a battle. and pet filed a lawsuit and filed after -- filed under engle. it is a lawsuit that his son is here because he promised his dad he would finish it. the only two things that we have to prove to get in the class, first, that pete mack was addicted. i will tell you addiction's pretty simple, but i want to go back over it in this case. i think they are probably going to come up and admi it, but i do not know that. i know that dr. werner told you it is addictive. a man smoking at this level was addicted. he was heavily addicted. he quit -after several tries he quit. he beat it, but not in time. 40 years smoking two packs a day does not ju: go away. he was addicted. now, was his addicted cause -- did his addiction cause illness? well, that is i thought kind of a semantic question, kind of almost riddled but the doctor addressed that. well, actually cigarettes cause disease. nicotine in cigarettes -addiction is to nicotine. therefore, in an unbroken cycle, she said, addiction causes those illnesses that result from cigarette smoking. that is simple. he was addicted. he was addicted to nicotine. it was in the cigarettes of r.j. reynolds and he, in fact, had laryngeal cancer. no question about it. we believe and we will discuss later he had copd. you know, i think that there is always a question of how reasonable it was for people to rely on what tobacco said and did, and i'd like to go back and i want you to know what american tobacco, one of the companies, what one of their executives said as to what he expected people to do and how he felt about the issues in the time. this is what the position of tobacco really was. play 3845, please. this was mr. heimann, remember? (video played for the jury.) unidentified speaker: can you swear the witness, please. unidentified speaker: mr. heimann, would yo state your full name? mr. heimann: robert k. heimann. unidentified speaker: you understand at your deposition and your testimony today is just as though you were in court testifying before the judge and jury? mr. heimann: i do understand that. unidentified speaker: you have been designat as a witness by american tobacco company in response to a request that they produce a witness that is familiar with various aspects of the company. now, you also, if i understand correctly, your company also put on an association called tobacco institute sometime with the other tobacco manufacturers; is that accurate? mr. heimann: that is true. unidentified speaker: and was this more a lor branch of public relations arm of the industry? mr. heimann: i think that is a fair statement. unidentified speaker: can you tell us how the tobacco institute and the tobacco industry research committee were financed? mr. heimann: they were financed by the major cigarette companies. unidentified speaker: one source of expectations concerning a product which a consumer has are the advertisements of that product; is that accurate? mr. heimann: i would agree with that. unidentified speaker: would you expect the consumer to rely upon your advertisements? mr. heimann: yes, our advertisements are truthful and we would anticipate that they would rely on if they chose. unidentified speaker: so it is your thought what the consumer can expect in your product? mr. heimann: yes, it is. unidentified speaker: now, throughout yo tenure with -- and it was not only american's position but your position that cigarettes were not injurious to health; is that accurate? mr. heimann: yes, that is so. unidentified speaker: that is something american tobacco wanted the public to believe; is that correct? mr. heimann: yes. (video was stopped.) mr. smith: that was the only frank statement tobacco made. that is what tobacco was all about. for us to get to engle we have to prove addiction and then we have to prove there is only two things left in the case. one, legal causation -- medical causation. we have legal causation. medical causation. and the other is damages for mr. mack. thank you for being so attentive to me. the remainder of my argument on those subjects will be made by my co-counsel. i hope you will give him the same attention that you have throughout the trial. closing arguments by mr. bigger mr. bigger: good morning. the jury panel: good morning. mr. bigger: i want to turn into some of those topics that mr. smith just mentioned that talk about the verdict form. you heard the judge talk about we will go through the verdict form and we will explain how we think the evidence shows in that verdict forr should be answered, should be completed. but i want to pick up right there where mr. heimann left off, because i think you have to appreciate the arrogance of this company, the arrogance of this industry. they thought that would never come to light. they thought they could have that attitude for as long as they wanted and keep making the millions and billions of dollars selling their cigarettes. they never expected that videotape to be seen by jurors like yourself in a courtroom like this. never expected it. an important part of this case, a case -- a part you cannot escape is that there is an element of responsibility here. this is a case and you heard in the instructions from the judge about addiction may not be the only cause, negligence may not be th only cause. the concealment of the industry may nc be the only cause. that is because there is multiple things going on here and there is multiple responsibilities here in this case. one of the very first things that peter mack, sr. did when he filed this lawsuit -- you heard mr. smith remind you -- he filed this lawsuit at the beginning. one of the very first things he did was to accept responsibility for his part in the process. he acknowledged that he bears a part in this sad story that you heard about in this courtroom. he acknowledged that he has a role in this, absolutely. and we accept that responsibility. we have told you that from voir dire. mr. mack, sr. accepted that in the complaint that he filed in this case. the other side of this is that r.j. reynolds tobacco company accepts no responsibility. you heard that. there was actually some confusion abou that in voir dire because when someone comes in anc they put a statement on their website and they say, our products are dangerous and addictive. that sounds like someone is accepting responsibility. that sounds like that is an acknowledgment that we did some things wrong. bi it is not. it is a marketing statement. it is something they put on their website today so they look better, a better company now. but they accept no responsibility for what they did to people just like pete mack and what they did to him. they accept no responsibility for the fact that pete started smoking in the 1930s, almost thirty years before the first warning label was on cigarettes at all. 1930s would be more than 70 years before this company actually put that statement out there that our products are dangerous and addictive before they owned up to that, at least on their website, if not in this courtroom. he smoked throughout the '40s, the '50s the '60s. as you heard from mr. smith he was the perfect customer. he did everything they wanted him to do until he did two things. he quit. he broke his addiction. he got free from their product and then he came and he filed this lawsuit and he asked for some responsibility. he asked for some accountability from the company that did all the things you heard about from mr. smith, all the things you heard about from dr. cummings. all the evidence you saw you will have. you can look at it yourself. it is not us. these are not our statements or our words. this is their words. memorializing these documents they never thought would see the light of day. never thought they would see this courtroom. but pete accepted his responsibility. and that is an important part of all these questions you got to answer on the verdict form. you cannot escape it. he accepts his responsibility and they accept none of theirs. this is the verdict form you are going to have and you see the first three questions there. the class membership questions are the first two. the third one's a little different. i'll explain it. but was peter mack, sr. addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine manufactured by r.j. reynolds tobacco company, and if so, was such addiction a legal cause of his laryngeal cancer? was he addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine manufactured by r.j. reynolds tobacco company, and if so, was such addiction a legal caus of his copd? there is a little variation on the third one because there is a date, you heard the judge tell you about that is important, november 21st, 1996. that is the class cutoff period. mr. mark can be in the class definition if you say yes to the first question because that disease, no question about it, it was there in 1996, everyone agrees. there is a dispute over the copd. we think the evidence will show, we think -you heard from dr. ryerson, you even heard from dr. andrews it is insidious disease, it takes many years to develop copd, it manifests over time. you heard the family talk about the fact that he was complaining at that 50th wedding anniversar of shortness of breath. you heard dr. ryerson say it is not uncommon at all for someone to have symptoms like that in 1996, 1995. that shortness of breath is there. people do not always go in and get it checked it out. he did get it checked out. unfortunately he went to a doctor who was not a pulmonologist. he went to a doctor who was a weig management person so he did not know what to do. h thought, well, we will just do the weight. you heard from dr. ryerson when he finally goe in and gets the gold standard, the pulmonary function test. no question of copd. and dr. ryerson said there is nothing on here, nothing in this data to suggest that his weight was causing his breathing problem. if he had gone to get that diagnosis in 1996, that is what the test would have said, he is got copd. and we believe that there is manifestation before. now, like i said, he gets in if you say laryngeal cancer. the copd is number two. and i you say yes to question number three, that means that is a class disease, too. he is a class member by both diseases at that point. all right. so those are the questions you are going to have to answer. and you see it says, was addiction a legal cause. let us go to the next slide. this is the instruction you got from the judge. addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine is a legal cause of injury if it directly and in a natural continuous sequence produced or contribute substantially to producing such injury so that it can reasonably be said that but for the addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine, the injury would not have occurred. and then i told you this is a case about concurring causes. it is not just one cause. addiction is not a simple robotic thing. no one said it was. we never said people who are addicted are robots. you have to use your common sense here. the judge will tell you to use your common sense. we never said addiction means you had absolutely no choice. of course you a choice. that is the only good news in the whole story is that when you finally become aware of the danger you tr to quit. it may take you a long time. for some folks it may take them a very long time. for pete it took him ten years to try to quit. but you can get free and he did. he did. but he was not free of the disease, because by the time he finally found out what was going on, by the time he started trying to quit, made those efforts and finally succeeded, 80 pack years, 40 to 45 years of smoking because he started in the '30s. no one was telling him in the '30s what was going on. r.j. reynolds sure was not. they were not telling him in the '80s when he was trying to quit in the '70s. they were not telling him then what was going on. but if you find that addiction does not have to be the only cause, it can be in combination of other causes with pete's choices in combination with all the things that were going on that is the question for class membership. and we think that the evidence is clear that when someone's addicted, and you heard from mr. smith, i do not know how there could be any debate about it when it is been said that it is not going to be disputed. you heard from their expert he was addicted. our expert says he was addicted. i think that is clear. what else can an addiction be? what else is an addiction if it does not at least contribute substantially to the person's using the product? that is what an addiction does. people who are addicted to a drug use the drug. it compels the use. next slide. and that is how substantial contributing cause works. it is the question for the smoking. you heard from dr. werner. you saw in the 2010 surgei general's report report and saw it in that statement from that organization from which dr. nace was a president at one time. addiction is the primary problem. it leads to the health consequences because of the continued smoking. that is what the surgeon general just said in 2010 in his major conclusions of his report. you have the addiction. you have those negative reinforcers, the cravings, the withdrawal. you have the positive reinforcers, the pleasure. you get the denial in there, the rationalization. it all works around that addiction, that drive, the relapse, the continued smoking and that leads to the disease. it is all those millions of doses you get from those cigarettes. you are getting the nicotine. you are getting what dr. teague knew they were reall selling, what addison yeaman knew they were sellin but you also get the carcinogens anywhere, at least 1953 when they had a clear opportunity to do the right thing, to tell their customer, to actually make a blanket statement; to say, we believe our products may be injurious to health, instead of, we believe they are not when they knew they were. they could have told people then. nothing stopped then, but they did not. they did not tell them. let us go to the next slide. another instruction that is important is the believability of the witness. you heard there is a lot of experts in this case. there is no doubt about that. you saw a lot of testimony, a lot of experts from both sides. it is up to you to decide what was believable and what was not. you can consider their demeanor, their credibility, the stuff they were saying, whether it comports with your own common sense, whether that makes sense. everything you saw in the case, all the evidence, you can compare all that. and you can decide who is believable or not. we can bring you the testimony. we can put the evidence in front of you and let you consider it, but the decision is ultimately yours. only you can make this decision. but you should consider that testimony. you can reject it, but you can do whatever weight you feel it deserves. let us go to the next one. our first witness was dr. villa. he came last friday a week ago. you remember dr. villa. he wa pretty clear. he said this was a pretty simple case. he is a pathologist, he is an oncologist, he sees laryngeal cancer all the time. he knows this disease. it is classically associated with smoking 95 percent of the time. he said laryngeal cancer is extremely rare in nonsmokers. and the quitting does not matter because, like i said, at the time pete mack quit he had 40 to 45 years. one, two, three packs a day. smoking history was enormous. all that damage does not go away. takes decades he said sometimes for that cancer to development. those injuries were there. what goes down over time as the years go by is the probability or the chance you are going to get the cancer. so every year you live is another year that is fantastic. and, of course, quitting has benefits. your chances of getting it are much less. when you get the cancer, as dr. villa said, you look at what causes this kind of cancer. it is smoking. it is extremely rare for a nonsmoker to get this kind of cancer. next slide. we brought you dr. eugene ryerson. he was the next witness. this was mr. mack's treating physician that diagnosed him in 2000 with copd. h was the one who did not have any dog in this fight at all. he was at the va working as a pulmonologist as he had for the last 35 years before that treating patients. and pete mack came in and had a pulmona function test and dr. ryerson interpreted it. gave him the diagnosis of copd in 2000. but he came in here in the courtroom and he wanted to explain that to you and show you why he decided pete mack had copd. and he also wanted 1 tell you i had a smoking history at that time, it is not something that i look at in my practice, my patient, i do not tell them but, yeah. and people like this, i've seen thousands of people like this. almost all are smokers or former smokes who get copd, and with his smoking history, to a reasonab' degree of medical certainty, smoking is what causec or substantially contributed to causing that copd. it was overwhelmingly characteristic of copd. next slide. you then saw dr. civantos, it was monday. he agreed with dr. villa, very similar, said 90 to 95 percent of his patients who get laryngeal cancer like this on the vocal cord or smokers or former smokers. many of his patients can quit for 10, 15, 20 years but they still get the cancer. that damage can be done but it just takes time before it can manifests itself. within a reasonable degree of medical certainty mr. mack's history of heavy cigarette smoking contributed to producing his laryngeal cancer. and rarely, he agreed, rarely do nonsmokers get laryngeal cancer. but rarely is where they live. the exception to the rule is always where they wanl to come in and defend this case. next slide. we brought you dr. werner. i'm not going to g( through addiction. mr. smith covered it. as i said, it is pretty clear in this case that addiction is met. mr. mack was addicted. but she said to a reasonable degree of medical certainty these addicted people do not have complete control; not complete control. they lose that free choice. their documents confirmed it. they may stand here and deny it in this courtroom, but their documents confirmed it. they cannot run from that. she said that addiction causes disease just like you heard from the other doctors, just like the surgeon general says. you use that product over an over again. it is that continued use that addiction that drives that continued use that leads to disease. it is a sad tragedy of it that plays a role. next slide. then their case started. their case started after dr. werner with -- their medical case started and their lead witness was dr. fee. lead witness is important in a trial. you want to put your good foot forward. we did with dr. cummings. this is what you heard dr. fee. first he said there is no question cigarette smoking causes laryngeal cancer; and then two sentences later he said, well, we do not know what the cause is. he could not tell you what the cause of pete's was. he said it was not caused by smoking though. we do not know what caused it, but i know smoking did not cause this one. after i told him that r.j. reynolds stipulated that smoking causes laryngeal cancer he still would not acknowledge it. remember the website tha he relied on. surgeon general's a crook, scientific -- commits scientific fraud as a charlatan. he admitted that if he says something that r.j. reynolds does not like, they are not going to hire him again. their next witness, dr. barsky, same thing. he did not know what caused the cancer. he says smokin is not caused -- i just cannot say it is a cause in this case. i think -- i said this is what i expected during open statement. they are just going to say we do not know what caused his laryngeal cancer. 25 years he is been working for the tobacco companies. $3 million in fees. and he disagreed with mr. mack's treating doctors. said it was a different kind of laryngeal cancer. you remember the story about how, you know, o bodies do not fight cancer. after we have had our babies, after we have appropriated, that is it, there is no sense to live anymore. next slide. dr. nace was their next witness. remember we talked to dr. nace. he said he was addicted but he would not admit that addiction can cause smoking-related diseases, period. not for mr. mack, even though his own organization says it is the primary problem, that health-related diseases are a consequence of nicotine dependence. even though tl 2010 surgeon general's report says that is how addiction causes disease, that is how addiction to nicotine causes disease. next slide. dr. cole was their next witness. he said, i do not have any opinions on causation. i'm just here to talk about what the anatomy looks like but i cannot really offer anything on causation. that is the issue you got to decide is causation. another one of these witnesses that is been there many years, working a long time, made a lot of money. next slide. dr. andrews, he was their last witness yesterday. despite the fact that mr. mack treated here at gainesville va and that dr. ryerson diagnosed him with copd, he had eight years of treatment for copd, oxygen for copd, all that care, dr. andrews says, no, he never had copd. those doctors were wrong. all those other doctors who are getting paid $350,000 to come in the courtroom. he said, all those doctors were wrong. they just did not know what they were doing for eight years. he said got to be something else. i'll pick anything. i think he mentioned the pickwickian syndrome. he said, i think he had pickwickian syndrome. you saw that in the records. he ceased on that. i think dr. andrews had pick anything syndrome. he wanted to pick anything but copd th was in the records. he did say, though, yeah, well, if he did have copd, i agree smoking was the most significant factor. if you are wrong -- i said, if the jury thinks you are wrong and he did have copd, as the doctor said, what was the most significant factor. well, then it was smoking. and he could not say what effect lung cancer had on mr. mack's breathing problems. you heard the instruction by the judge and we will get to damages. he could not say how much it was, but we will get to that in just a moment. next slide. and dr. sider was our last witness. he came in and he talked about what dr. cole said and he agreed. we cannot, as radiologists, tell you what causes the disease. we cannot make a diagnosis. that is not what we do. but he did disagree with di cole. he said, i do not see the pulmonary hypertension, and that was consistent with mr. mack's medical records. that is not what they were treating him for. that is not what he is getting oxygen for. it was for his copd. next slide. we have covered these, but you will see that our witnesses all said within a reasonable degree of medical certainty smoking was the cause of these injuries. they have all confirmed it. go to the next one. dr. civantos confirmed it and his testimony is there. if you want to have it read back, you can always ask to have it read back. you all know. yc took those notes and you have fabulous notes. next slide. dr. werner, dr. sider talked about how addiction caused disease. next slide. i said in the beginning this was their case. it was going to be the same as before. there is no proof that smoking causes laryngeal cancer or copd next slide. and this case, there is no proof smoking caused mr. mack's laryngeal cancer. next slide. there is no proof peter mack even had copd was the defense in this case, despite the records that you saw. next slide. and you heard from them, we do not really know what the cause is. it could not be stated what the cause was for his laryngeal cancer. next slide. dr. andrews, i believe his shortness of breath was a combination of factors. none of them was copd, of course, although the records said that. actually go to the elmo for a second, will you? we believe that the evidence in this case -- i should stop for a moment to talk about the evidence. you heard the judge, you heard us in the beginning that the burden we have on us to prove to you these things is the greater weight of the evidence, more likely than not. what is more likely than not the case? 51 to 49, that is the burden we have, to show you with the evidence in this case that more likely than not he was addicted and that his addiction drove his continued smoking for 40 to 45 years and that led to these terrible diseases that he got that our doctors told you were related to smoking. and we believe the evidence in this case is sufficient that you should say, yes, to these questions. as i told you, the third question is one that you may grapple with, maybe you might wrestle back in the jury room. i do not know. we think the evidence will show that mr. mack suffered with shortness of breath in '95 at least when his sons were there at the 50th wedding anniversary when the had the square dance. we think the doctors have all said, this is not a disease that comes there overnight. you do not get to fifty percent lung function overnight. it is slow and it creeps up. it takes a long time to develop and we believe the evidence has shown that, yes, he did have copd before november 21st, that it manifested. he did not have a diagnosis, but that there was symptoms. he was feeling things. they were going to leave -- that was copd that he was going to get. mr. smith talked about these, but once you answer yes to those questions, you go to the liability case and mr. smith spent a lot of time talking about the negligence of these companies and how that was a cause of injuries to pete. the defective and unreasonably dangerous products, the concealment and the conspiracy are the important ones. and mr. smith told you you got to look at mr. mack's conduct at the time. he could not be here to tell you, yes, i relied. and i got to submit, if somebody sits on that witness stand today when they are filing a lawsuit and says, yes, i rely, i do not think that would be, to me, as believable as the conduct that took place at the time. he started smoking in the '30s when he was a kid, just like they want him to when they were spending millions ( dollars and you saw from those documents when the; did not advertise, that year that they stopped advertising those camel cigarettes, sales plummeted. remember that document? the advertising work it got people started smoking and they knew they just had to get them started, because once they got them started they would get addicted. eighty percent of his generation, people born in the '30s, just like him was smoking by the '50s; greater than eighty percent. he continued to smoke. he listened to those messages. there was some information coming out until he got a clear message, until he got a clear message, he did not know he needed to try to quit, but he got that message from the surgeon general finally. he did not get it from them. they could not do it in '54. they wanted to put out a frank statement instead. he got the clear message. he tried to quit. tried to switch to filters. they were supposed to be safer, better for you. he switched to lights, it is light. it is got to be better for you. the year winston lights came out, there is testimony that pete mack was smoking. that means he started smoking them the year they came out, 1974. that is someone who believes the message, who tries to do things the company is saying, you need to do this. we believe the evidence is clear that their concealment had an effect on him, that it was a legal cause of his injuries, and we believe that their agreement, the industry's agreement, all these things were done collectively, they were done through those organizations, the ctr the tirc, they were all done together, they were one force united, a front, a shield. we believe those things were a legal cause of his injuries. once you get there, that brings you down to the percentage of fault. and this is an area where we said mr. mack accepts his responsibility. and we are going to ask you to put a number in here. we believe pete mack deserves a number in here. you may remember from ms. mack's testimony w she was talking, you may remember that they asked her, your husband's at fault; she said, yeah, partially. she agreed, too. she was being fair. they asked her how much is he at fault. she said 25 percent, a quarter. i think a quarter. i think that is a fair number. do i think that sometimes the people who know us best, who spent 63 years with us, who love us, our spouses, our significant others, do i think sometimes they are the most critical of the choices we make? absolutely. but i'm going to suggest to you that 25 percent is a fair number. you may talk about it amongst yourselves. you may say, you know what, that is not, that is not fair, it needs to be higher; more fault should be on mr. mack. i do not care what the industry did, i do not care when he started smoking or whether there is warnings, more should be on mr. mack. that is a decision that y'all can make and only you can make in this case. we cannot make it for you. you may think that mr. mack started smoking in the '30s when there was no warnings, not from the companies for decades to come. never during his smoking lifetime. you may think that more should be on r.j. reynolds tobacco company. that is your decision. it is up to you, but we are going to suggest that 75/25, the number used by his wife is fair. we are going to suggest that is a fair number. you saw pete at the beginning, near the beginning of his life to take responsibility for those choices that he made to start smoking. when pete was at the end of his life he still took responsibility. that is just the kind of guy that he was. he wanted to own up to what he did, he wante to say i played a part in this. the sad part of the story is they still will not own up. and i ask them to. when they come u here, expect them to. expect them to accept responsibility for what they did, for what their products did, and continue to do today and what the did to pete mack. once you get to that part of the verdict form, the last part of your case is going to be damages. and i think it is part of the case where it is tough, it is a tough issue. it is tough to decide what the measure of damages is. it is a difficult decision. one you are going to have to make. you are going to have to decide and look at the evidence in this case and say what is a fair and reasonable measure of damages. what is fair for the age at what mr. mac! was. one of us might say that is the golden years, that is the years that are supposed to be the most special. that is when minutes are worth years because you do not have that many left; when days matter during those years. but others might say, well, people get older, they get diseases, other things happen, it is worth less. maybe that is what r.j. reynolds wants you to think, it is worth less. they put on doctors that said he did not have the diagnosis that he had. they put on a lot of evidence about the fact that he was older. it is up to you to decide. you need to decide what the fair measure of damages is in this case and only you can decide. you need to decide what a fare measure of damages is for being chained to an oxygen bottle, to a concentrator for the last seven years of your life. for somebody whose hobbies were driving and traveling, you saw that in the record, that is want they wanted to do, they wanted to travel together, go out west. you heard his family talk about it. they made one last trip, tried to go out there and it was too difficult. you heard mr. klaas' deposition, pete's trunk was full of oxygen bottles. he had to use it everywhere they went. they tried to keep living their life. pete kept working for a little while. he tried to live the life he wanted to live. you saw in that regard, 1996, he said and he retired from the service station, he retired from the military. this was a man who worked hard his whol life but he wanted to keep doing it because he enjoyed it. he enjoyed being with people. he enjoyed doing the job. he did it as long as he possibly could. could not do it anymore. he eventually became homebound. the only travel was to the hospital or to doctors' appointments, to the store if they had to get stuff, food, things like that. you will have to decide what the fair measure of damages are under those circumstances for what a company did, for the conduct of this company, wha their products did to a person, what they took away from him, what they robbed from him during those golden years with his wife. only you can decide that. we are going to suggest to you that a fair measure of damages for what r.j. reynolds tobacc company did in this case is $5 million. $5 million is a fair measure of damages for what this company did to this man, for the laryngeal cancer he received. they tried to minimize it and say, it is okay, he only had five weeks of radiation therapy, no big deal. for the seven years, the eight years that he lived on copd, living on oxygen. the last year of his life, no question he had copd until he died. his very last breath was taken, labored because of copd. but that hear last year of his life he had a lot of complications, you saw it. and if you feel it is not fair to award for that last year, then that is fine. it is up to you to decide. if you think you can separate out those damages and say, no, that was the lung cancer, that was not the copd, that is what was causing all those problems. you can look at the records and decide for yourself. dr. andrews could not do it, but if y'all can, that is fine. the decision is entirely yours to make. no one can decide but you what is a fair measure, but that number, $5 million, about 7 cents a breath is what that comes down to, from the time he had copd, from the time he started thinking aboi his breaths because they were labored, they were his diseased lungs that were breathing in and out. and you heard dr. ryerson say, it is like taking a deep breath and then breathing through a straw and he had to do that. and if you agree with our suggestion, you write it in there. it is up to you though. you can say that is too much or you can say that is not enough. you have heard the evidence. you can decide in this case what is fair and what is just. the final question is under the circumstances of this case, state whether punitive damages are warranted against r.j. reynolds tobacco company. you heard the standards from the judge. you heard the standards from the judge, there is four things here to consider, those four questions about the conduct causing damages to mr. mack. the conduct you heard about from dr. cummings the conduct you saw on their documents, their own statements, their own admissions from mr. heimann, from all these people, you will need to decide in this case whether that was so gross and flagrant to show a reckless disregard for human life or the safety of persons exposed to such conduct. it is hard to imagine after you saw what this industry did and why they did it what they knew with that information and what they did with it, but that is not so gross and flagrant to show reckless disregard. you will decide if they showed an entire lack of care, that they were consciously indifferent, that they must have wantonly or recklessly disregarded the safety and welfare of the public or whether they showed a reckless indifference to the rights of others as to be equivalent to an intentional violation of those rights. those are the decisions you will have to make in this case to decide whether punitive damages is warranted or not. we believe the evidence has show that it is. we believe the evidence is shown that this company, this industry, does not respond to anything except for the voices of citizens like yourselves in courtrooms like this. standing up and saying, if you will not take responsibility for yourselves, we will do it for you. that is the only thing they understand. it is the only thing they can get and you all have that power. you may never be able to sit on a jury again. you probably will almost never sit in judgment of ar industry like this again. this is the only chance mr. mack, sr. had to have his story told to you. you are his only jury. you are the only people that are ever going to hear this story, hear this evidence and decide this case. you are the only people that have the power to decide what this verdict form is going to say. as i told you at the end of my opening statement, what this company did to a great america hero, to a man who was, by all accounts, even by mr furr's admission, a hero was unamerican, was unheroic, was cowardly, and we ask you to return a fair verdict, a just verdict in this case. thank you so much for your time. thank you so much for your service. you are you have been a very attentive jury.