mr. bigger: ms. henninger, mr. persons, mr. bayuk. ladies and gentlemen of the jury, good morning. the jurors: good morning. mr. bigger: it is nice to finally talk to you again. i was able to talk to you almost a week ago today after we finished jury selection. it seems like it is probably for you been a long week. it feels like it is been at times long and at times fast for us short. thank you. the first thing i can say is thank you. i thanked you in the beginning, i want to thank you again. everyone in this room, the lawyers, everyone recognized, the court, that you were extremely attentive, you were taking notes, you were listening to the witnesses. we appreciate that very much. some things we say often is that this is one of those freedoms that we have that is so important, to come into a courtroom, have people in the community listen to the case, listen to the evidence, and decide -- decide things for us, despite disputes, and we appreciate that, especially now, december, i'm sure you are ready to get back to your families, get back to your lives, christmas shop and whatever, whatever you put off to be here, we really appreciate it. i told you at the beginning that this was an important case. and i hope that now that you have seen the evidence, you agree that this is an important case, because it is a case where you will have an opportunity to decide is it a shared responsibility when a smoker in 1938, 16 years old, gets caught up into that addiction cycle, smokes until he receives the fair warning from the surgeon general, tries to quit, finally breaks free, but it was too late, is that shared responsibility, or is it the position of r.j. reynolds tobacco company, is it no responsibility? do they have no responsibility for designing a product to create and sustain addiction, for knowing the product was dangerous, and not telling anyone about that, and for continuing to create this false controversy and create a holding strategy to continue to buy time to sell more cigarettes? is there no responsibility for that? and you will be able to decide that in this case, that is what you can do with this case. at the outset of the case, one of the things that i told you was that you had to keep your eye on the ball, just like when we were kids learning to hit a baseball, a tennis ball or whatever it might be, a golf ball. you have to keep you eye on the ball. and i did not tell you that soon enough because in opening statement there were representations made that i think if you were watching the evidence, if you were careful, you saw that the evidence was not consistent with those, and there were -- there were points where you had to listen closely and you had to see what is this about, what does the evidence show on this issue, is this an issue in the case. and i watched it, and i said, all of you were diligent and you were attentive, and you did, but that is important because each party has the right to choose the case they want to put on, how do they want to present their case, what evidence do they want to put forward, what claims do they want to make, what arguments do they want to make, and so it is important to keep your eye on the ball. and one of the very first things we did in this trial is we moved into evidence a couple pieces of the evidence, a couple documents you probably thought at the time, all right, they are starting their case by just publishing documents, what does this have to do with anything. well, two statements were made that mr. mack worked at brasington cadillac from '64 to '73, that he worked, drove cars for national until his 80s, and there was evidence that we have all had access to, the social security earnings report, it was not a surprise, it was not something that only we had, everyone had it, and we wanted to move that in right away because we wanted you to know the first thing you saw is that we know the facts in this case, we know the evidence, we are not going to put forward things that are not consistent with the evidence. the case we wanted to bring you is one that is consistent with what the evidence would show, and so we wanted to start the case on the right foot, and so we put that piece of evidence in. you have it, you can look at it with all the other evidence. you can see, hold it in your hands if you want and look at it yourselves, but it was important, that is just part of keeping your eye on the ball. you had to do that throughout the whole trial because there was a lot of opportunity to be distracted, to see things that just are not issues in the case, things that just were not borne out by the evidence or that were not supported by expert testimony that no one could say had anything to do with mr. mack, so you had to keep your eye on the ball from the beginning. and at the outset of the case, i told you that there were basically three questions for you to decide, and what i want to do right now is kind of walk you through that. and i realize this might be kind of blocking your view. sorry, jim. can everyone see that okay? jurors: (nods head affirmatively.) mr. bigger: everyone can see that okay? so i said at the beginning there are three things i told you about, that there are basically three issues for you to decide. you are going to have to decide was mr. mack, sr., a member of the engle class; what is r.j. reynolds' portion of the shared responsibility for what they caused or for what happened to mr. mack sr.; and what is fair and full compensation for what happened to mr. mack. i'm going to talk to you about these first two, and when i finish, mr. smith is going to get up for a few minutes and talk to you about this third one. and on the verdict form you are going to get from the court, it is going to be the form you are going to answer these questions on, and i just want to give you an understanding as to what the questions that are on this verdict form are reflected on here. and so the first question you are going to have, as the judge told you, is engle class membership. and engle class membership is really these first three questions on here. this third one is a little bit different, it is kind of an unusual issue, and i'll talk about it a little bit later, but as the judge told you, you need to decide was mr. mack addicted and was his addiction a legal cause for the laryngeal cancer and the copd, and this third one about manifestation. so this right here, this is question 1 through 3 on the verdict form, and then the next thing you have to decide is regarding the negligence, the negligence and the strict liability, and i told you in the beginning those are the two claims we have in the case, negligence, r.j. reynolds' negligence, and strict liability, which deals with the product themselves, the cigarettes themselves. and so you are going to decide those right here, the negligence is a legal cause and the defective and unreasonably dangerous cigarettes is a legal cause for the injury, the laryngeal cancer and copd. and so this one here, this is questions 4 and 5. and then mr. smith is going to get up, and he is going to talk about the last two questions, what is the fault chargeable to each party, what is reynolds' fault and what is mr. mack's fault. we said from the beginning he is accepting his responsibility. one of the first things he did in the case is to say i played a part in this, i'm not blaming them for all of this. i want some of this on me. and you heard from his wife what a fair answer it was. she was very honest. they asked her that in deposition, and she answered. and mr. smith will talk to you about that. and number 7. so number 6 and number 7 to damages, what is fair compensation for what happened to mr. mack. so i'm going to start, if i can, by telling you what is the standard, because, you know, when we are going to build a desk, if we are going to build a house, if we are going to put down a football field or a road, we have got to know what is the standard we are going to measure that by, how are we going to measure it. you heard from the court that the standard in this case to measure the evidence by is the greater weight of the evidence. and that is from the jury instructions, you have got them there, you have heard it from the court, it is the more persuasive and convincing force and effect of the entire evidence in the case. and what it basically means, what you have heard from most is what is more likely true than not, looking at it, what tips the scales, as mr. smith talked about in voir dire, what is the evidence that tips the scales. did we tip the scales or did we not? because we have the burden, and you know what, we are happy to have that burden, we are happy to come here with the estate and prove our case to you because we have a case that we believe we have proven very, very well. we believe we have not only met our burden, we believe we have exceeded it. we believe the evidence that you saw throughout this trial proves our burden, and we believe we have met that. but you need to know what that is, and that is for every issue. it is greater weight of the evidence for the class membership issues, it is greater weight of the evidence for the portion of reynolds' responsibility for the negligence and the strict liability, and it is also greater weight of the evidence for the damages, what is fair and full compensation, same standard for each of them. so on this first question, was mr. mack a member of the engle class, the judge told you the verdict form is going to have two questions on it, and they are right here, i've also got them up on the screen with just a little bit of emphasis on it, but they basically involve two issues, was mr. mack addicted and was the addiction a legal cause. and i want to emphasize one word in that, "a legal cause." and that is important because you heard the judge in his instructions tell you the law in this case is that it does not have to be the only cause, it is does not have to be the only thing, it is not the cause, it is a cause. and that is important because there is things that happen in the world, there is things that happen to us, there is things that go on in life, and there is more than one cause usually in most things. so the issue is was it a substantial contributing cause, and that is why i wrote that this way here. was he an addicted smoker and was his addiction more than an insubstantial reason for all that smoking? did it contribute substantially or was it an insubstantial thing? was the addiction just some insubstantial reason? was all that smoking just an insubstantial reason for the diseases that he got that are so highly associated with smoking cigarettes? so on that issue, on the class membership issue, we brought you a number witnesses. we brought you dr. michael cummings. he was the first witness you heard from a week ago today this morning. we brought you dr. werner, she was not able to be here, but there was the deposition that was read the next day on friday morning, it was read that morning. and then we had dr. eugene ryerson, he was here on friday, too. and the defense, they brought you a witness, too, they brought you dr. tucker. there was another person in the case that assessed mr. mack's addiction and concluded he was addicted, r.j. reynolds' other board-certified psychiatrist. so there were five people who assessed mr. mack's addiction, and four of the five said he is addicted, no question about it. so let us start with dr. cummings, because he was the first witness that you saw. or, excuse me, the cycle. that is right. so you remember at the outset of the case and as the evidence started to develop, you heard from dr. cummings and other witnesses in the case that the addiction process is a cycle, it is not just something like flipping a switch, and the unfortunate part of the cycle is it happens most of the time with kids, especially with smoking. it starts in your teens, and they experiment, it is the cool thing to do, it is popular, it is the thing that their friends are doing, they get caught up in that cycle, they experiment. and because it is an addictive drug, when they are experimenting, their choices diminish, and pretty soon they are at that addiction cycle. and when you consider that for mr. mack, as i told you in opening statement and you heard from the judge, you can use your common sense, but you have got to use common sense that was common at the time. you cannot use 2012 common sense for whether that was the right thing to do or whether it made sense for mr. mack to become a smoker. we have got to go back in that time machine, '60s, '50s, '40s, '30s. he was born in 1922, started smoking in 1938, what was it like at that time? was that a reasonable decision? and i think the evidence will show that that was a reasonable decision, the evidence we brought forward on that issue from dr. cummings explained what it was like. and as part of using that common sense, i do not say this to offend or upset everybody, but some of you may have an easier time because you were there. and you do not have to forget about that, you brought that with, that is your common sense you bring with you from having gone through it. and so you apply that to the case, and you look at that, how did he get caught up in that cycle. and then once you are in, as you heard from mr. cummings, as you heard from dr. werner, once you are in that cycle, it is no longer free choice. it is not no choice. i mean, we came in the case saying mr. mack bears some fault here. it is not no choice, but it is not free choice. it is not like what shirt am i going to wear today or where am i going to eat for lunch. that is not a choice like that. those are free choices. once you are in that addiction cycle smoking a pack, two packs a day, it is not a free choice anymore, it is a constrained choice, and it is constrained by their choice. they made it a constrained choice. it was what they were designed to do. it was what they were selling all along, nicotine, an addictive drug, "we are in the business of selling nicotine," 1963. so once you are in that cycle, get caught up in it, and you heard from dr. cummings -i think that is the next slide. dr. cummings is by far and away, the judge told you you can assess the believability of witnesses, there was not another witness that came in this courtroom that has more pedigree than dr. cummings. he has worked on the surgeon general's reports since the first one on nicotine addiction. he has contributed. he has worked with the national cancer institute, the world health organization. he works with nida. he is run smoking cessation centers that have treated tens of thousands of patients. he set up the new york state quitline that has helped thousands of smokers quit smoking. he has assessed addiction more than anyone else that came in this courtroom by far. and he said no doubt about it, he was an addicted smoker. he applies a test that is -- that very well was proven in the epidemiology, it was proven in the studies, it was proven by his studies heaviness of smoking index, regular daily use, how much do they smoke on a day and what is the time they have their first cigarette in the morning. it is been borne out with tens of thousands of his people that he is assessed. and mr. mack was smoking one, two, even at the end up to three packs when he switched to the lights and the filters. he was smoking, as his wife said, first thing in the morning, it was the last thing he did at night. and you sat here, you saw the conviction, you saw the understanding she had. she was there. they were married for 63 years. she was there for all those mornings on those 63 years. she knows that he woke up, it was the first thing that he did. that is the evidence dr. cummings had, no doubt he was an addicted smoker. we also had dr. tonia werner. and you did not get to see her, but that is her picture. and she talked about how that once you get in that addiction cycle, there is a point where you no longer have that free choice; it is constrained. you are using the substance to avoid withdrawal. you even heard dr. tucker yesterday say, yeah, the dsm says that people get up first thing in the morning and smoke, it is because they have been asleep for six, eight, nine, ten hours, or whatever it was, and they need that nicotine, their body is telling them. you have heard from us how it is a brain disease, that there is that natural process in all of us that has taught us to fight or run, it is that survival instinct, it reinforces behaviors that will help us survive, and that is what cigarettes hijack, that is what nicotine takes over, that instinct in us that is there to make us eat food and have sex and procreate. i mean, that is what it is there for, it is that basic drive, and it takes over that, that is what cigarettes do, that is what nicotine does. you also heard from dr. ryerson. and we brought dr. ryerson in to talk about this issue because this is a man who for 40 years was a pulmonologist, he was treating patients, he was on the front lines of assessing these issues. he was looking at those issues and he was saying in my patients, i have not seen one who smokes one, two packs a day, who has that quantity of smoking, who was not addicted, who was not smoking daily. that is his experience. he is seen thousands of people like this, treated them for their disease like mr. mack had, copd and emphysema, and he just knows it from his experience, he knows it when he sees it, and he came in here and he told you about that. so what does the evidence prove about addiction? and, i'm sorry, this is small, if you cannot all read this, but he smoked first thing in the morning, we talked about that. he started as a teenager in 1938, a 16-year-old kid, 1938. he smoked one, up to three packs a day, according to ms. mack, who, when he got to the lights and filters trying to cut back, the exact opposite effect. and dr. cummings explained that to you that there is that compensation that people have where they smoke more, they take it deeper trying to get to that usual nicotine level. it is another evidence that mr. mack was smoking for nicotine, he increased his smoking as he smoked brands that delivered less, technically, according to the system, because he needed to compensate to get that nicotine in, he smoked more. he smoked for 40 to 45 years. again, i mean, the evidence was not completely clear on that. mr. mack did say different things in his records when he was in his 70s and 80s, but the first record reported smoking history, 15 years earlier, 1981. and you saw when the defense was talking to ms. levine, ms. mack's sister who was in here, for the first time they produce a death certificate that shows 1981 is that funeral, consistent with the trip everyone says he was on to tuscaloosa in 1981, consistent with ms. levine's recollection of what was going on in '81. they did not remember the exact year, they were off by a year, '82, '81, but they had the death certificate, and yet they were saying '78, '79, we do not know, we do not know. the persuasive and convincing force and effect of all the evidence in the case, 1981 was the clear one. he tried for ten years to quit. and his wife told you again and again about how when we got the message, when the warning finally went on the pack, and she was very clear about it, she was not hesitant, finally we got the warning on the pack 1970, surgeon general says, "warning: smoking is hazardous to your health." the word finally gets out, the efforts to suppress it are stopped, they cannot do it anymore. the word get out, and ms. mack says we got the information, we knew it was not the best thing for us to do, we started talking about wanting to quit, we were encouraging each other. what does a husband and wife usually do? we encouraged each other to quit. we tried. he tried for ten years. she remembers herself trying to quit for more than a day. does she remember him? no. when they put it in her own personal experience, "well, what did you do, ms. mack?" she remembered, "yes, we tried, we tried together." you know, she was 85 years old, and she remembered it, and they tried to take those words and twist them around and suggest that she could not remember quitting for one day. you saw in the testimony the next questions after that she remembered, she remembered herself, and them doing it together. that is consistent. that is a good memory of what was going on. switched to filters and lights to try to cut back, but smoked more. switched to lights to try to quit, but smoked more. quit with ms. mack and mildred for several times for more than a day. and he smoked last thing at night. and i put those two together because it is kind of like the -- i mean, it is the day. first thing in the morning smokes, he is got all these things going on, smoking all day, and then smoke last thing at night. the evidence points to only one conclusion, folks: mr. mack was addicted. and the only evidence you have heard on that that was credible was that mr. mack was addicted, and that should be your conclusion. and so then once you have the conclusion that he was addicted, you go to that next step, was the addiction a legal cause? was it more than just some insubstantial reason? and this is a copy of the jury instruction which you have that is the copy that the court read to you. addiction is a legal cause of the diseases mr. mack had, laryngeal cancer, copd, if it directly and in a natural and continuous sequence produces or contributes substantially to producing such injuries so that it can reasonably be said that but for the addiction, the injuries would not have occurred. then as i told you, it is not the cause, it is a cause. to be regarded as a legal cause of laryngeal cancer and copd, it need not be the only cause, it may operate in combination with the act of another, some natural cause, if the addiction contributes substantially to producing laryngeal cancer or copd. when a person is addicted to any substance, what else can it be but a substantial contribution to their continued use? that is what addiction is. when you are addicted to something, of course it contributes to you continuing to use it. if you did not, then addiction would have no meaning, it would be nothing, it would be meaningless. so of course there is a substantial contribution. it is not some insubstantial thing that causes someone to smoke for one to two packs a day for 40 to 45 years. it contributed substantially to producing the injuries. and you know that was borne out by a couple of things you heard in the case. if we can go to the next slide. the amount of exposure. this is why addicted smoking causes smoking-related diseases. this is essentially the same thing as the major conclusions you heard from the surgeon general's report in 2010. the thing that unfortunately dr. tucker disagreed with and said no, that is not right, he is never worked on a report, he is never worked with the surgeon general, but he disagreed with the conclusions of the 2010 report. an addicted smoker is smoking two packs per day, this is mr. mack's scenario on the high end, at eight puffs per cigarette, the range is between 8 and 12, as you heard from dr. cummings, and that ends up being a 4.6 million lifetime exposures over 40 years. a social smoker, someone who just smoked a pack a month, would only have 76,800 lifetime exposures over 40 years. addiction causes disease because each one of those exposures is like getting another unfortunate lottery ticket. every time you get that, you saw from the statistics, it increases your risk of getting a disease. and you heard from the experts in this case that for laryngeal cancer, that risk can be on the average 20, even as high as 40, 40 times more likely than people who do not smoke, and it gets there because you smoke over and over again, each of those doses, each of those exposures adding up, adding up, adding up. and you heard i think probably the key or one of the key defenses in the case is this idea of declining risk. yes, your risk, your chances of getting that disease does go down, that is why it is so bad to have nicotine in cigarettes, because if people can just put them down when they get the message, when they get the danger, when they realize what they are doing to themselves, if they can just put them down, it would not lead to disease. it leads to disease because the addiction compels the use, it drives the use. and you have all these exposures, and so yes, as your time goes by when you quit, you start throwing away those lottery tickets, those unfortunate lottery tickets, they get tossed away, but you know what, after ten years, if the lottery calls that number, you get laryngeal cancer, you get copd, the damage was done, your chances of getting it were reduced, but you heard from every expert in this case, it is attributable risk. what is the most likely cause of that once you have it. once you have the disease, the chances of getting it do not matter anymore, you have got it. you have the disease. you have got to look at what causes that kind of disease. it is differential diagnosis. it is what dr. villa, the other doctors talked about it. it is just a differential diagnosis. take a history, what is the patient's history. based on that history, what is the most likely thing to have caused this disease. so that is how addiction is a legal cause of the cancers and copd's. that is how addiction gets you there, a plus b equals c. addiction causes the smoking, contributes substantially to the smoking. smoking contributes substantially to the cancer, that is how you get there from addicted smoking. and i want to talk about the smoking issue, too, because there was a lot of testimony on this. there was more testimony than anything else. you had dr. villa who was our pathologist. he was the guy who had six board certifications from miami. he was here on friday. you had dr. ryerson on the copd and the addiction, he was here on friday as well. and then you had dr. civantos who came in on monday. he was the otolaryngologist, the one who does head and neck cancer as specialty. and then dr. sider, he was the one we had to call at the end of the case yesterday to refute some of this nonsense about asbestos. we had to bring him in to try and put one of these issues that was distracting, one of these issues that was just out there to bed once and for all. we brought him in. the defendant, they called dr. hogan, you remember him, dr. fee, dr. cole, and andrews. and the question marks by hogan, fee, and cole are because they did not offer opinions on causation. they did not have opinion on causation. they could not say that anything caused it. dr. hogan had no opinions, he just read a bunch of literature, read a bunch of studies. dr. fee said i do not know what caused it. his opinion was i do not know what caused it, and dr. cole did not have any opinions on causation. he was the one who just looked at the films and told you what he saw. but dr. cole did not -- he is not a niosh b-reader. he does not specialize in asbestos like dr. sider does, he is not that type of chest radiologist. ms. henninger: objection, your honor, just briefly. the court: sustained. go ahead. mr. bigger: yes, sir. let us go to the next slide. so we brought you dr. villa. and dr. villa's conclusion, his opinion at the end of the day on mr. mack's laryngeal cancer was i do not think there is any doubt that this very strong history of tobacco use, it is the actual cause or most likely etiologic factor for a squamous cell cancer of the larynx, the kind of cancer mr. mack had. he looked at the pathology to be sure, he wanted to make sure there was not something in the pathology that would suggest this was some of those 5 percent, some of the smaller ones, make sure there is not something in there that is unusual, classic case, he knows it, he sees it. he sees it all the time. he is a pathologist, he looks at it all the time. he was the only pathologist in the case we heard from. he is the only one who looked at those slides who came in here to talk to you. oh, the other thing that dr. villa said that i just want to remind you of, this idea of declining risk, i think dr. villa summed it up very well when he said those theoretical ideas, those ideas that are theories, statistics, they do not mean a whole lot once you get the larynx cancer. yes, they are great, that is why we tell people to quit. we want them to quit. and it is true, your risk should go down, but once you get it, it does not matter anymore how likely it was. what matters is you have got it, what causes that type of disease. dr. civantos was the next witness that we called on this issue. he came on monday, as i said, and the major cause of his laryngeal cancer, as in most cases, is his extensive exposure to tobacco, his extensive smoking history. he sees these cases all the time, the patients all week long. he sees former smokers he says on a very frequent basis because unfortunately the risk does not matter anymore once you get it. you got to look at what causes it and it is that extensive smoking history, 40 to 45 years, one to two packs a day and driven by that addiction. now, r.j. reynolds called some witnesses as well and the judge told you that, you know, with any witnesses, my witnesses, with r.j. reynolds' witnesses, you have a right to listen to what they said and you can either accept or reject their opinions. you do not have to take them from me or from them, but when you look at them and you compare who brought what evidence to you, who is the one with the more persuasive and convincing force and effect of the entire evidence? we believe and the estate believes the conclusion is going to be clear that we have met our burden, we have exceeded that burden. dr. hogan, just briefly, dr. hogan, he did not have any opinions on causation. all he had to say was i read a lot of studies, spent 350 hours looking at studies, that is 40 hours a week for nine weeks reading epidemiology, but none of that anyone could say had anything to do with mr. mack. no one could say any of that stuff had anything to do with mr. mack. maybe. possibly. but they could not actually say it. dr. fee, dr. fee came in here the other day, nice doctor, he actually agreed with most of our positions about how it is attributable risk and not declining risk once you get the disease, how 90 to 95 percent of the cases are caused by smoking for larynx cancer. and as you remember dr. fee, he did not have one of those critical documents, he never got it. r.j. reynolds never sent it to him about this issue that nine years later, mr. mack is going to his doctor saying i have a sore throat, i have difficulty swallowing, i have a raspy -- the doctor wrote down, mr. mack did not say i have a raspy voice, the doctor in listening to mr. mack said he has a raspy voice. he hears it. dr. fee never got that, and when he had it, he wanted to consider it. you saw him read it, he wanted to read it and know, what is this, why have i not seen this. dr. cole, again, no opinions on causation. he just talked about some of the things that he saw on the radiology. dr. andrews we will talk about a little more in a minute, but he was the one who was here yesterday talking about -- well, talking about not having copd, talking about mr. mack's care from the breathing problems, things like that. and then dr. tucker, he was the last one you heard yesterday. he was the addiction psychiatrist. not the only addiction psychiatrist for r.j. reynolds but the only one to say mr. mack was not addicted, and he was here to talk about the fact that essentially his opinion is, you know what, smokers, if you cannot quit, you are just weak willed, this addiction has nothing to do with it. he applies dsm in such a stringent way that it is hard to imagine any smoker that he evaluated being addicted. mr. mack, the facts that he had, as conveyed by his wife, that frankly were just rejected because she was, in his words, the plaintiff in the lawsuit, she was discredited, even though he acknowledged she is only lived with him 63 years and no one knew him better and she did her best to remember those questions as she was asked again and again and again over three days of depositions, the same questions different ways, being tripped up. all right, so let us go to the next slide. this is what the witnesses said, all of them. 95 percent from smoking, 5 percent from something else, and frankly, 90/10. so 90 to 95 percent from smoking, 5 percent from something else. and the something else that was sort of thrown out there as an issue that you had to be careful of, asbestos and what dr. fee i guess referred to as the etiological soup, you know, just the living life, being out there in life. well, looking at the evidence in the case, what contributed substantially to the laryngeal cancer. let us go to the next one. so those three things. what does the evidence prove. let us look at the asbestos first. dr. hogan came in here and talked all about it and all these studies and all this stuff that was out there and all the things that were in the military machines, and sure, no one disputes there was asbestos in the machines. did it make a difference to mr. mack? no one could come in here and say yes. no doctor they brought to the case could say yes. all our doctors said it was smoking. dr. sider finally came in yesterday and said i looked at the radiographs, i'm a niosh certified -ms. henninger: objection. the court: overruled. ms. henninger: if we may briefly approach. the court: no, ma'am. mr. bigger: he is a niosh certified b-reader, did not see pleural plaques, he did not see that asbestos evidence in that. so the asbestos has not been proven to be there. and you know what? let us just assume that there was, let us say there was asbestos there. it is synergistic with smoking and it is not the only -- it is not the cause case, it is a cause. we all live life. everyone experiences life, we are all out there encountering this, but you cannot just throw away the 40 to 45 years of smoking and pick the 5 percent. if they were working in there, they were both in there working together. it is a concurring cause case, but i think the evidence has shown the asbestos was not an issue in this case. it was a distraction, it was something that was thrown in there, there was a lot of time spent on it, and quite frankly, this case could have been to y'all on tuesday. there was a lot of testimony that was just unnecessary on this asbestos thing. go to the next one, jeff. the last one i guess is the etiological soup, and again, this is essentially saying that people live, people work, people do things in life and get exposed to things, urban living i think was one of the things dr. fee said, so i guess if melrose, florida, is urban living, but urban living. so we are all out there, and we are all being exposed to these things. just like genetics, genetics of course plays a role. it is why not all smokers get cancer. every expert in here agreed, yes, genes have something to do with it, you have to be susceptible, but that does not give reynolds a pass. reynolds does not get to say, oh, well, since you were susceptible and you got cancer, well, then we are not responsible. it is a concurring cause case. those things are working together, but what is the major thing? what is the major thing in there? it is the 40 to 45 years of smoking, and that is what the evidence has shown. next slide. i think that is what the evidence has proven. let us go to copd. next slide. oh, excuse me. the evidence has shown mr. mack was addicted, shown that he was smoking for 40 to 45 years and that was contributed to by his addiction and that smoking for all those years was the major contributing cause of his laryngeal cancer. the evidence has presented that picture, so we believe the answer to the question 1 will be yes. question 2 is dealing with the copd, so let me just touch on that briefly, and i think this one will be much faster for reasons that you will see in a moment. dr. ryerson came in here. dr. ryerson was the gentleman from the va. he was the treating physician who reviewed that pulmonary function test. he was the one who was treating mr. mack at the time. and after the case got brought, we went and talked to dr. ryerson, and he agreed to come in here and testify and essentially to defend his treatment that he provided from a challenge that just did not bear -- it was not borne out by the evidence. but he said this patient has copd due to cigarette smoking, and i would be at least 80 to ninety percent correct, and that was his conclusion because copd in a gentleman like this with his smoking history, it is there. next slide, please. dr. andrews was the only witness they brought to address this issue. and as i was saying earlier, you have the ability to accept or reject the testimony of the experts in this case. the court has instructed you on that. dr. andrews said the centerpiece of his opinion was that mr. mack never had copd, that the va for all those years diagnosed him with copd, treated him for copd, got it wrong. that was his conclusion. you all were here yesterday, you saw that a basic medical textbook that is used in medical schools around the country disagreed with the two reasons that he gave for why he interprets the pulmonary function test differently than dr. ryerson. a basic medical textbook. one that is on his shelf, he has it in his office. he looks at it and he refers to it and it said both of the reasons that he gave for justification for why mr. mack did not have copd on that pulmonary function test were just wrong, they were listed in that book, murray & nadel's as misleading and not used for any clinical significance. so with that centerpiece gone from his testimony, i think you -- you have to look at the rest of his testimony and say how believable is the rest of it. if that was the key component, that mr. mack did not have copd, and so that is why i've to look for what the cause of these other breathing problems were. the va knew the cause. they did a differential diagnosis in the very beginning, april of 2000. is it copd? is it chf? or is it -- you know, should we ask about sleep apnea? and they followed up on all of those things, and the only one that stuck throughout all the records is copd. let me go to the next slide. and you heard this from dr. ryerson. i do not think there is even any competing evidence on this that obviously the conclusion of dr. andrews is there was no copd. he did not have any opinions on what caused it, what did not cause it. his opinion was that the va got it wrong, there was no copd. but the evidence was borne out 80 to ninety percent from smoking, dr. ryerson said smoking was the cause. next slide. mr. mack clearly had copd causing those severe breathing problems almost a hundred entries for copd from gainesville va. he was o2 dependent, his oxygen requirements increased, worsening shortness of breath. eventually he has to sleep in a recliner and then he asks for a hospital bed because the recliner was obviously difficult for him. and by the end there, february of 2008, the day you heard the court, that is the date, after february of 2008, nothing beyond that is an issue in this case, that is the date for the damages, by that point, he is only able to walk 60 feet while on liters of oxygen. you know, the only i think issue that needs to be addressed one more time is this is that sort of the declining risk thing. they kind of made that with smoking too, that once you stop smoking your rate of lung function returns to that of a never smoker and that is true. but it is kind of like when you go to the airport. if you are walking down the airport, you are going to go a certain distance, but if you get on one of those moving walkways, you are going to go a lot further along than a person who is just walking on the road and not the moving walkway. and when you get off that moving walkway you are a lot further ahead. now, you are back to walking the same pace as the other person who was not on the moving walker, but you are already way up there. that is what happens when you smoke. when you smoke, your lung function much faster than the people who do not smoke, and when you stop, it returns to that same rate, but you are way down there. your lung function is already down. remember that diagram we showed with dr. ryerson? and that is why you can have this where, you know, no symptoms, no symptoms, no symptoms, or cough not going to the doctor, i'm just getting older, i just need to slow down, i need to adjust, and all of a sudden, they go in and they get diagnosed and they are at fifty percent lung function. dr. ryerson said he sees it all the time. dr. andrews said he had never seen it, but murray & nadel's, the textbook on his shelf, they had a whole passage on how common it is, textbook medicine, and he disagreed. let me just take one moment to talk about this -- so here i think the evidence is very clear here on question number 2, but number 3 if your answer to question 2 is a yes, did mr. mack's copd first manifest on or before november of '96. if you answer yes or 1 and 2, you are going on to the other questions. if you answer yes to only question 2, then you need to look at this third question. okay? you need to look at this third question. and looking at question -- question 2, when does copd first manifest. in order to be a class disease, it has to be at that date, and so if you say no to 1 and you say yes to 2, you have got to look at this question 3. and look what the evidence has borne out, that record in '96 when he goes to a weight management specialist and he gets the shortness of breath and they put him on a diet, and tell him to lose weight, does not help, does not help, finally he gets the pulmonary function test and we know what the problem was. but that was the manifestation. those symptoms were going on. ms. mack in her deposition was asked prior to the throat cancer did your husband have that hacking smoker's cough, was he coughing, yes. that cough he had been having even back when he quit in '82, yes, he had that cough. it is not like he just was out fine doing nothing, all of a sudden (snaps fingers) showed up, had copd. it was developing. that is what the medicine shows, the textbook medicine shows, is that it developed slowly and it was manifested before '96, so you should answer this question yes, too. but again, if you say yes on one, you are going on through either way, but i think the answer to these three questions are yes, yes, yes. but once you get through that, engle class membership is proven. the addicted smoking, motivation from a surgeon general to quit, interference with those efforts to quit because of the nicotine, and you have proven class membership, laryngeal cancer and copd. and once that happens, those engle findings kick in. once mr. mack is a class member, the engle findings kick in and these are the findings you heard from the court. they are in your jury instructions. so cigarettes caused those diseases, it is undisputed, all the experts said it anyways. nicotine in cigarettes is addictive, same thing, no one disagrees with that in this case. it is conclusive. r.j. reynolds tobacco company was negligent and r.j. reynolds placed their products on the market that were defective and unreasonably dangerous. once you get past class membership, the judge instructed you they were negligent and they had defective products. and now we had a talk about that a little bit, though. we brought people in -- let me jump through the next two slides. do this one. yeah. we had a talk about that a little bit. and it is going to be that same standard you had on addiction, was it a legal cause, did it contribute substantially. did what they did for all those years, design the market, developing cigarettes, designing them to be addictive, to deliver nicotine, was that more than just some insubstantial reason for what happened to mr. mack? was it just some half random coincidence that they designed cigarettes to be addictive and deliver nicotine, he became an addicted smoker and smoked for all those years. it was not coincidence. it was planned. it was a thought-out plan by r.j. reynolds. we brought in dr. cummings, obviously r.j. reynolds, their only defense was mr. mack's own fault. that is their defense. yeah, we were negligent, yes, we produced defective products but it is his fault, he did it to himself. let us look at a few of these things really quickly just to remind you what some of the evidence was you saw. who was r.j. reynolds' market? you saw it. at the time mr. mack was a teenager, a young man himself, a boy, they were targeting high schools. "school days are here. and that means big business for somebody. let us get it. and start after it right now." that was the plan from the beginning. they were directing their salesmen to go to those schools, target those kid, get the leaders, the popular kids signed up. they knew how the game worked. next one. so what did they know? well, before 1953, the only thing r.j. reynolds did was sell cigarettes by the billions. they did not do research. they did not look into it. they were not trying to concern themselves with is this dangerous and something we should be worried about selling to our customers, they just were making money hand over fist. but what did they find out in 1953? no question about it. they studied all the literature that was out there, yes, smoking causes disease. okay, perfect, let us sound the alarm, let us do something about this, let us tell people, let us get the message out. well, they got the message out, next slide, except it was the wrong message. we do not -- "we believe the products we make are not injurious to health." they said the exact opposite of what they knew. not only did they not warn, they said the opposite. they confused. they created doubt. they created a false controversy. we have and will always cooperate closely with those who safeguard the public health. you saw in the evidence that was not the case. the surgeon general was obstructed. they interfered with it and challenged the conclusions and they did it during the time mr. mack was smoking. finally the warning goes on the pack and mr. mack gets the warning from the surgeon general, not from them, they never warned him. he finally got it from the surgeon general. next slide. what did they know a few years later in the late 1950s? no question about it, it causes disease -- i mean, excuse me, no doubt about it, it has carcinogens that are dangerous and they are -- we cannot take them out, they are there. so what did they say about that? nothing. did not say a word. what else did they know? by 1962, the surgeon general is working on compiling his report. he is asking the companies, give us what you know. tell us what you know. obviously, the amount of evidence to indict cigarette smoke as a health hazard is overwhelming. the evidence challenging such an indictment is scant. they knew it, overwhelming. so what did they say to the surgeon general, to the public? did not say anything. they said nothing. the surgeon general finally gets involved, you saw that 1964 report, that comes out. there is a response to it right away. and what is the response by the tobacco companies, by r.j. reynolds tobacco company, by american tobacco company, what do they say through their spokesperson? technical difficulties, just a second. (video clip pt01685 played.) mr. bigger: i do not think the industry admits there is something wrong. that is exactly it. they did not admit it. just did not admit what they knew at a time when it would have made a difference to mr. mack and at a time -- as you saw, the declining risk thing is there. the longer it is from the time you quit as you age, the better off you are. the better off he would have been in 1964 and 1953, 1962 if they had come out with this information, he had gotten the warning. he responded to the warning when he got it that it was hazardous. what if they joined arms in 1954, if they had come out and said, you know what, scientists, you are right, there is a danger, these are hazardous, people should quit. cigarette smoking is adverse to health. the same message that got out there finally by 1970 that got the macks to try to quit. what if it happened by 1954? that declining risk thing, probably would not be here. we would not be here. so why did not rjr tell anybody? a holding strategy. "while the strategy was brilliantly conceived and executed over the years helping us win important battles, it is only fair to say that it is not nor was it intended to be a vehicle for victory. on the contrary, it has always been a holding strategy consisting of the creating doubt about the health charge without actually denying it." a holding strategy, a way to continue selling cigarettes at billions and billions of cigarettes a year. a way to continue selling nicotine. that is what they were really selling. next slide. 1963. again, before the surgeon general's report. the knowledge is clear, "nicotine is addictive." '63 to '88, that is 25 years before the '88 surgeon general's report, when the surgeon general finally says, you know what, we now have the understanding of the tobacco companies. we finally caught up. we know nicotine is addictive. "we are in the business of selling nicotine, an addictive drug, effective in the release of stress mechanisms." that is one of those things that you hear a lot of times. why smoke? because it relaxes me. i smoke because it stimulates me, it affects my mood. those are the psychoactive effects of the drug. that is what a drug is designed to do is to produce those mood-altering effects, to relax, to feel good, to stimulate or to calm you down. and oftentimes the relaxation is not because it is just a drug, it is because they are experiencing the withdrawal without having the drugs. the relaxation comes from abating those withdrawal symptoms as their body is looking for the nicotine, gets used to those dopamine release at the higher levels, used to those enhanced receptors up there. it is looking for it, saying that is why they get jittery, edgy, irritable, things you hear about. what was rjr really selling? they were looking for the best ways to exploit nicotine satisfaction. that is what the product was designed to do, that is what they designed them for, that is what they were intended to do. and finally, they recognized well that "the major factor which makes smokers continue to smoke is the nicotine effect, although social and psychological factors do affect smoking behavior." it is multifactorial. "in other words, nicotine acts as a reinforcer for the smoking act." it is that positive reinforcement by giving pleasure, it is the negative reinforcement by making those withdrawal symptoms go away. that is the 2010 surgeon general's report and this is the tobacco industry documents back in the '70s. so what was their real business, what was reynolds' real business? "in a sense, the tobacco industry may be thought of being a specialized, highly ritualized and stylized segment of the pharmaceutical industry. tobacco products uniquely contain and deliver nicotine, a potent drug with a variety of physiological effects." a pharmaceutical company, they are in the drug business. last -- or the next slide. their negligence was not some insubstantial reason for what happened to mr. mack, sr. focusing on sales and advertising over 50 years targeting teenagers in high schools, failing to admit known dangers before 1969, designing cigarettes to always deliver addictive levels of nicotine, manufacturing that false controversy, the holding strategy, exploiting nicotine satisfaction and nicotine addiction cycle, designing and marketing filters and lights to close the exits. you heard dr. cummings, filters do not do anything. they do not actually do anything. it is a gimmick, marketing gimmick, lights, same thing. it sounds like it is a diet coke or coke, diet sounds better, but lights actually do not do anything. all they do is make the smokers smoke more to get the same nicotine level they are used to, so it is actually worse. the next one, please. and some of these overlap, because negligent conduct is also part of the defective product. it was doing it and it was having the product be that way both. controlling inhalability, controlling nicotine delivery at the optimum level, using additives to enhance addictiveness. like i told you in opening with mary poppins, a spoonful of sugar makes the medicine go down. making it taste good, making it better flavor, getting the nicotine in, but the purpose was to deliver the nicotine. designing cigarettes to deliver addictive levels of nicotine. you heard from dr. cummings it never got below that. now they take it out. in the manufacturing process they take it out when they make that reconstituted tobacco, but they always put it back in. they always put it back in, so it is exactly at that precise optimum level. so you can go to any grocery store, any convenience store, anywhere you went you would always get cigarettes that you knew would deliver that addictive level, perfect level that they knew, i should say, not that we knew, but that they knew would deliver that right level of nicotine. manipulating the chemical composition, the ph manipulation. exploiting the nicotine satisfaction and addiction cycle. and again filters and lights, closing those exit gates, people who were trying to quit, like mr. mack, switching to filters after the surgeon general's report, after getting some information from mr. brasington, after getting the information from the warnings. all this information is coming out after '64, mr. mack switches to filters, which is what he was told. you heard it from there, filters, filters filter it out. that is why smokers should switch to filters. and then tries the lights as soon as those come out. in 1974, roger tolbert worked for him two years, '74 to '75. winston lights came out in 1974 and mr. mack smoked them. he is getting the message. when lights come out and they are promoted and they are available (snaps fingers), he switches to them, but they do not do anything. he smokes more until he is finally so sick, so ill, so choking, so coughing, his wife said he could not even tolerate the smoke anymore. and that is what it takes. addicted smokers a lot of times they have to hit rock bottom. i mean, addiction sometimes to break it out, you got to hit rock bottom and that is what he did on that trip to tuscaloosa. it was mr. mack's rock bottom, and he finally broke free. and you heard from people who knew him, they were almost shocked and surprised but so proud of him for finally doing it, but unfortunately because of what they failed to tell him, what they did to the product to keep him smoking all those years, it was too late. he was betrayed. he had been betrayed by something that he had no reason to not trust, none. let us show the recent clip. and you all remember this from the evidence as well. it was not shown to you, it is part of what was caught out, but what harry reasoner said after that '64 surgeon general's report. (video clip pt01685 played.) mr. bigger: betrayal. what is reynolds' portion of the shared responsibility for what happened to mr. mack? the judge told you it is decided as a matter of law, mr. mack as a class member, if he is a member of this engle class, they were negligent and they produced defective products designed to create an addiction. and was that a legal cause of his laryngeal cancer and copd? yes. was it a defective product cause? yes. what else were they designed to do but keep people smoking, that is what they were intended to do. mr. smith is going to get up now, and he is going to talk about this last question, and i'm not going to have a chance to talk to you again, so i just want to say thank you very much for your attention. if there is anything i did throughout this trial that for some reason that was upsetting or was disappointing, whatever it might be, please do do not hold it against my clients. thank you very much. we are doing the best we can for our clients. thank you very much. mr. smith: folks, this is pete mack's lawsuit i told you in voir dire. it is pete mack's last battle. it is pete mack's lawsuit because he decided in 2005 that he was going to sue r.j. reynolds for what they had done to him and what they had caused him, and in 2007, that lawsuit was filed. and we are seeking damages in this case for a time period that is from whenever you decide it is appropriate and no later than february the 8th, that is the time frame for the damages we seek in this case. and i want to tell you one of the great difficulties in talking about damages. put up damages. one of the great difficulties is i would like to come in and give you some sort of mathematical precision, but as you will see from the law that has already been given to you and which you will take back with you, there is no exact standard for measuring such damages. but what are the kinds of ways that you can assess, what are the damages that happen to people from the negligence of r.j. reynolds, from their products being so defective, what are some of the kinds of things you may consider in assessing the damages for pete mack? pain and suffering, physical impairment, mental anguish, inconvenience or the loss of capacity for the enjoyment of life. and that is what i want to talk to you about. i want to talk to you about physical impairment, mental anguish, inconvenience, pain and suffering, or the loss of capacity for the enjoyment of life because those are very valuable. one of the great ironies in our lives, and some you have seen the mastercard advertisements, one of the great ironies in our life is some of the things that are most valuable are priceless. and those are the things that we are here to talk about with pete mack. some of it is just plain pain and suffering. laryngeal cancer he had. we know that in 1996 he had five weeks of being radiated. and we know that his voice at least nine years later was still raspy from that experience. we know that his family observed that after that, he never could talk as much as he did before, and, in fact, he got to where he could not stay on the phone very long. in fact, when they went back to the house, they found piles, sacks of notes that he had written to his wife about things because it had become where his voice just would not last. now, there are going to be times in here where you will see that he did not complain about his voice or he would always say he was getting better or things were improving. he was not a complainer. how do we know this? this is a man that 50 years later finally tells the va, yeah, my leg is -- that is a problem, but i've had that problem since -- well, it would have been korea. this was a war hero. he was not a complainer. physical impairment. physical impairment means you cannot walk. that is one of the things where you cannot walk -- at first you cannot walk, it is just a shorter walk. in 2000 -- first he cannot dance. then you can walk, but your walks are not as long. then you cannot walk very much at all. then all of a sudden you are in a scooter, but you are only in it some of the time, you still walk around the house. then you can only go out to the porch. then you can go to your sister-in-law's house and you cannot get from the car 12 stones to the front door. that is a physical impairment. you are living on a scooter. you are in a vehicle instead of walking. that is a physical impairment. that is what happens from the copd. he had the laryngeal cancer affecting his voice, he had the copd affecting every capacity he had for the enjoyment of life. the mental anguish; the embarrassment, if you will. i want you to think for a moment what it was like, what it was like for a man like pete mack to no longer be able to go around his house very often that he was not wearing something connected over his ears, into his nose. think about the value you place on going to see your old army buddy in 2002, going all the way out west, the time when r.j. reynolds says he was fine, he goes to -- out west to see his old army buddy, and his buddy is shocked because pete mack's trunk of his car is full of co2 bottles in 2002. they go to branson, missouri, but pete, he is got to stop and take breaths and take oxygen. think what it is like to wear a mask all the time around your own house and be tethered to a machine, which we showed you, that goes about 25 feet that becomes progressively your life. that is what we are talking about here. every breath becomes more difficult. your life eventually is not measured in going to little league games in the joy of your retirement, the trips you wanted to go. your life is now measured in liters of oxygen and bottles available. loss of capacity for the employment of life. that means, as you heard said, and i think you watched the sons, it is not their lawsuit, it is his lawsuit, it was then hers and then theirs because they all wanted to continue this lawsuit because pete mack wanted his day in court, and he is got it. and he is asking you now for the loss of capacity. i was trying to think of a way to put that to you in the best possible terms you could understand. i thought of it this way: if you took -- and by the way, there has been some suggestion in the questioning, even in the opening, there is some suggestion i think that somehow your last years, well, you are getting older, they are less valuable. you know, actually, i think an argument can be made, and i think there was a poet who once said youth is wasted on the young. the truth of the matter is the days become not less valuable, they become intentionally more valuable, you appreciate them that much more. these are the days that you are not going to serve your country every day. these are the days you are not going to work every day. these are the days that if you do work, you drive a national car because you want to go see the guys. and when you cannot work anymore, which he could not after 2001, we know it, we saw it, but you cannot work anymore, you try to take care of your wife, and then you cannot do that because you yourself cannot take care of the person that you have spent 60 years with, those days are more valuable. this is the difference of what pete's last years should have been and what they were because of tobacco and its effects, what they should have been worth and what they really were. these are measured, his life where he should have been sitting in ball games watching kids and grandkids and great grandkids, this is when you get to take the trips to see all the places you always promised yourself you were going to go with your wife and all the things you were going to do, you did not get to do, all the things you put off, you did not get to do. that is a value. i cannot put a value on it. you can. i remember in voir dire a couple people, maybe some of you, raised your hands, said i do not know what the number is, i believe in caps. there are caps, folks. the caps is the evidence in the case and your good judgment. that is what it is. that is the value. that is the only thing we have. that is why i cannot go up here and multiply number of days. this is not a salary case or a lost wage case or an expense of the car case. this is the most priceless things in your life and the price you have to put on them because they were taken from somebody by tobacco. r.j. reynolds changed his life, and that change, that diminishment, that loss of capacity for enjoyment, that is what they owe him for. i'll make suggestions, but i will tell you in advance that the suggestions that i make are just that, because i do not know what you will decide. and you are in no way bound by what i suggest. i think that the damages, and you will have the verdict form in front of you in which you put together the total damages, i do not think that -he had -- we know for nine years that he suffered from laryngeal cancer. we know that. we know that that laryngeal cancer affected his swallowing such that -- funny thing, they always criticize him about his weight. well, one of the things that happen when you quit smoking, you put on weight. and the other thing is that he began to eat greasier foods, and the reason why, they went down easier. and then guess what? then he could not exercise because he was now on a scooter. loss of capacity for enjoyment of life. i think the laryngeal cancer is worth a million dollars. he had it for 11 years. it is at least worth a million dollars. i mean, i do not want to put a value. you guys know what values are out there today. maybe much, much more. it is your decision. for his copd, $3 million. there is no question in my mind that that is a reasonable figure from 19 -- really from 1995 we know he was showing the effects, but from 2000, his diagnosis forward till february, i want us to measure his loss of capacity of life, what his life could have been and should have been and what it was not because of them. and i think $3 million is a minimum number. the damages should be put down as $4 million. and then what you have to do is you have to come up with a percentage. now, please remember, whatever number of you arrive at, you do not reduce that number, that is not for you to do. you put in the number, whatever you decide. greater or less than this, whatever you decide, you put that number in and do not change what number you put in. we believe that 25 percent and 75 percent are the right split, and i'll tell you why, we came into this courtroom and the number was already given, i think some of you might have written it down, she said it, i think my husband was a quarter at fault. it was easy for me to stay with that because you cannot believe that r.j. reynolds did not know three times longer what was wrong with their product. you cannot believe that they did not have three times more information, three times more capacity to tell the truth about their product, they did not have the ability to do something about making a safer product, they finally admit they could not make it any safer, they have just got to keep selling it unsafe. and if you think about it, even when they had a chance to say something, say, you know, we admit there are some problems, we are working on it, no, it has not been proven. it is not proven. there is a controversy. r.j. reynolds was in a holding pattern and pete mack was the victim. we think this is the correct split. we think that 25 percent, it is 25 percent his fault, he should have quit in '72. he could not. but he did quit. he did quit. it took a long time because he was addicted. folks, we think this is a fair outcome, and i will put it this way. i think that in this case, your decision is this, a man lived the american dream. fought in two wars for his country. and his nightmare at the end of his life that should have been his golden years was because of tobacco and what they did and what they did not tell anybody about their product, and he, like the greatest generation he was part of, suffered for it and he deserves his day in court and he deserves -- today, pete mack deserves a statement right there of that is what r.j. reynolds did to you. and you can do that. i will talk to you later. thank you for your attention. i hope you will give the same attention to counsel. mr. smith: may it please the court, counsel. i want to kind of interpret the way i understand what we just heard. he did not have it, if he had it, it was not caused by smoking, and if he got it from smoking, it was not our fault. that is all this case has been about from the beginning on their side. he did not have it. well, let us talk about he did not have it. the copd was treated by the united states veterans administration for eight years. to believe the argument that they advanced, you would have to believe that for eight years, the united states veterans administration treating a veteran was treating him for the wrong disease. not a question that during this period of time he took the medications for copd, he was diagnosed with copd. they all agree, their experts, all agree that the single most reliable thing you have to have is a pulmonary function abnormalities test. he had a pulmonary function abnormalities test by dr. ryerson. dr. ryerson does not have a dog in this fight. he is not an expert retained by either side. he happened to have been the man who was at that time working at the veterans administration doing the work for them and he interpreted the test. he interpreted the test and he found it. nobody is paying him. ms. henninger: objection. mr. smith: i'm sure he would rather be somewhere else. the court: sustained. ms. henninger: thank you. mr. smith: dr. ryerson is -- was the treating physician at the time. at the time he made the call, there was no issue of which side are you testifying for. the call was copd then, and no one ever changed the call in all the years thereafter. and think of what he went through. everything that happened to him physically, the deterioration of his physical condition, absolutely consistent with copd. absolutely consistent with copd. now, they argue he had other things that happened. you received an instruction, you read it, you heard the judge read it to you, and you will take it back with you, and that instruction says that it does not have to be only copd that he had, because we know that he had other things, but the question was did copd substantially contribute to the fact that he could not breathe, did copd substantially contribute to the fact that he was unable to walk, finally at the end something like 60 feet with 2 liter -- with 2 liters of c -- of oxygen. could not go 12 steps to the front door of the sister-in-law's house. did copd do that or did it substantially contribute to it? it does not mean that he could not have another condition. it means that if that substantially contributed, we met our burden of proof. and plainly, we did. he did not have it as to laryngeal cancer. wait a minute, we brought a pathologist in. the pathologist, a pathologist who looked at the -- not some statistics. now, it is interesting about statistics the way they argue. statistics apparently do not count if they are favorable for us, but they do count if it has to do with if they are favorable for them. everybody realizes that there is a certain amount of epidemiology involved in the diagnosis of what is going on in these cases. always will be, always has to be. what we know is that he was diagnosed with laryngeal cancer, we brought an expert in who said to a reasonable degree of medical certainty he had laryngeal cancer and its cause was smoking cigarettes, to a reasonable degree of medical certainty. we have brought a person in who said to a reasonable degree of medical certainty, he had copd, and it was caused by smoking cigarettes. they said, well, there has only been two people in this case who testified about addiction. no, dr. ryerson testified he was addicted, dr. cummings testified he was addicted. their other expert testified, dr. nace, that he was addicted using the same criteria as dr. tucker. and, of course, dr. werner, who is over at shands, testified he was addicted. they all used the same criteria. four found he was addicted, one found he was not. one found he was not despite the fact when confronted with the very statements that fit the manuals, diagnostic tests, use your own common sense, you heard it, you saw it, you know the testimony, you have four people, one of which is -- one of which was theirs, four people saying he was addicted, he had copd, and he had laryngeal cancer are all givens in this case. now, once we get there, then we go to the following. he was addicted. the cigarettes caused specific diseases. now, this is not about mr. mack, you are right. this is the case that binds you and the instruction you will hear, cigarettes cause several specific diseases, including laryngeal cancer and copd. that is what engle was all about. the nicotine in cigarettes is addictive. if he is a class member, you must accept, and you do, that nicotine in cigarettes is addictive. now, if you take the nicotine and the cigarettes as addictive and you combine that with the fact that we had four people say he was an addicted smoker, you then go to that r.j. reynolds tobacco company was negligent. that is not a contest. if he is a member of the class, he gets the benefit of the engle instruction, and that is r.j. reynolds was negligent. that is it. we do not have to prove anything else about that negligence to say that negligence was there. we have met -- we have legal causation, which we will address, but r.j. reynolds was negligent if he was addicted and a member of the class. and that r.j. reynolds tobacco company placed cigarettes on the market that were defective and unreasonably dangerous, and that is not because mr. mack said it, that is because if he is a member of the class, he gets the benefit of those findings that took place. and they apply to everyone that were class members. i want to address just a few more things that were brought up that i -- i said the first thing is that he did not have it; i have addressed that. and smoking did not cause it; i have addressed that. smoking did cause it. now, was smoking the sole cause? no. does it have to be? no. could there have been other things? yes. this whole issue about declining risk, apply your common sense, the experiences you have that you bring with you here. you smoke cigarettes at a rate of one to two packs a day for 40 to 45 years, and the argument is, and no one on -- the experts that we have produced agree with this, that you go back to ground zero, it is as if you never smoke? that is not -- that is not what the testimony was of our experts, and it defies common sense. now, what it does is it is better to quit smoking than not, and he did. you reduce your risk by quitting smoking. absolutely. unfortunately for him, the damage is done too long. you remember what dr. ryerson said about copd. copd is an insidious disease that takes a long time. he did not get copd one day in 2000. that is not how it works. copd did not work -- had been working on him for a long period of time. that is what happened. do not be misled on this. the day he was diagnosed, and read the instructions that are given to you, diagnosis is not what happens, it is manifestation. when did he begin to manifest? you know, it is interesting, we know, the family remembers in 1995 at the 50th wedding anniversary, you know, he just was not able to move around like he used to. he was having trouble breathing. in 1996, there is a medical record, not one from the -- not one of the medical records that are later about copd, where he is complaining in one of his initial presentations in 1996, i think it is march, he is complaining about shortness of breath. finally, they go through an analysis, a diagnosis, a diagnostic elimination. they eliminated cardiac heart failure, they eliminated sleep apnea, they arrived at the pulmonary function test, and those results, which were that he had copd that he was suffering from. guys, this is all taking your eye off the ball. if he was a member of the class, you do not -- the negligence and the defective and unreasonably dangerous against r.j. reynolds is already found, then we have to say did that have an effect. well, wait a minute. did the fact that he was smoking a product that contains materials that will kill you for 40 years, that has carcinogens in the cigarettes, and that they knew it since 1953, did that have an effect on what happened to him and his illness? was that part of the cause? absolutely. was the fact that they -- you know, it is interesting, they argue to you, oh, he knew, everybody knew. you know what, if everybody knew, if everybody knew, and it did not make any difference, why did not r.j. reynolds just say, "oh, by the way, we agree with you"? why did not r.j. reynolds in 1953 say, "we have some findings we are looking at, too, but yes, it does appear that it causes cancer"? why did not they in 1964, when the surgeon general -- why did not they come out and say from the 1950s to 1964 when we have seen the internal secret, confidential documents, now, if everybody knew, they would not need to have secret, confidential documents because you know what they knew, they knew internally then what was being said out in the public was absolutely true, but let us create a controversy, a holding action, keep people smoking, give them a reason to smoke, say that it is unproven. remember what mr. klaas says, yeah, i remember talking about the surgeon general's report, and i remember there were folks that believed it and did not believe it. why did not they believe it? because tobacco was saying do not worry about it, we will take care of it. they have been saying it since the '50s. if it did not matter, if what they suggest to you today made no difference, why would not they simply have come out and said we have listened to the surgeon general's report, we have examined it, and we found the same things? oh, no, that is not what they needed to do because they needed to keep people smoking every day one more pack. they say, well, there is no proof that he saw a particular advertisement. you know what, that is true. in voir dire, i asked you, everybody, everybody here believe advertising works? not a sole did not agree that advertising works. and by the way, they do not advertise to rod smith. there are not any rod smith advertisements. they advertise to a community, to a culture, they advertise to change mass behavior. now, mr. mack did not live in a bubble. in fact, he followed, if you will, the very traits when they began to advertise for cigarettes heavily, what did they advertise? camels and lucky strikes. what do we know from his history? he smoked camels and lucky strikes in his early years. by the way, remember his service to his country. what did r.j. reynolds, as a courtesy, put in the k-rations for the soldiers of our country, courtesy of our rjr? ms. henninger: objection. mr. smith: cigarettes. ms. henninger: objection. the court: overruled. mr. smith: that was courtesy of rjr. think about it, if it did not matter, they could have told the truth. it did matter, so they could not tell the truth. if people had known what was really in their cigarettes, if they had come in and said, yes, we agree, think what a -- what would have been the power of the testimonial on their behalf saying we agree? people would say, wait a minute, man, cigarette companies say -- that is a different story. that is not what happened. they kept people smoking, people just like -- he was not living in a bubble. i think the boys said they loved to watch cowboy movies, they loved to watch tv, he liked to watch cowboy shows on tv. some of us can remember there used to be one every night, i'm sure. guess what, television, you heard dr. cummings, the biggest advertiser -- among the biggest advertisers of all the products in the world were advertising cigarettes. now, nobody does anything consciously because of the advertising and promotion. but what kind of promotion did we see up there? we saw things about when pete mack was smoking, they were still advertising "doctors prefer camels." i did not make that up. you saw it. they were still showing it on the tv in the '60s, they were putting it on the flintstones. winston cigarettes, "winston tastes good." guys, it has not been on forever, and when i ask you do you remember those jingles today, almost every one of them stopped -- i said, "winston takes good like a (slaps) cigarette should." everybody knows that. why? they were not advertising to you, but it affected you, it is still there. and that is what it was for pete mack. now, pete mack did quit. i cannot ever understand, are they blaming him for quitting? because i thought that if he did not quit, they certainly would have blamed him, but because he quit, now they are blaming him? i suggest you cannot get it both ways. and i want to end up talking a little bit about the testimony you received in this case, because there is some conflict. and i want you to resolve it the following way, because this case, in my view, may be a metaphor for the larger issues. r.j. reynolds brought in a witness to testify on the radiology. that witness has been paid $200,000 a year for the last two years, and a million dollars testifying for tobacco -- for firms that represent tobacco companies. we brought in dr. sider. he is a 30-year -he has taught at the most prestigious schools, he looked at it, and said i looked at the same thing and said no, i did not see that. i see nothing related to it. pulmonary hypertension, that is a tough call to make, i could not make this from this. this is a man who has taught in some of the most prestigious law schools {sic}, who has published and presented around the country. "i did not see that." they bring in one guy that they have out of their two guys, the one who says he was not addicted. they -- they bring in people, finally dr. fee i think said it the best, dr. fee said, when cross-examined, said to the effect that i do have a concern or he did have a concern that if he did not testify in the way they liked, he would not hire them -- they would not hire him again. now, pete mack probably never heard things like the cycle of addiction. he was born in 1938, went out of high school, went into the service in the 1940s, served until the 1960s, he was a mechanic, he ended up buying his own gas station. so i'm sure some of these sophisticated conversations that they contend would have been natural did not probably take place. but i promise you this, that pete mack quit smoking when he hit rock bottom. and he did know he should have quit smoking sooner. that is why we said we are partially possible. and his wife said he is 25 percent responsible. i think that is a fair figure. that will be up to you. but pete mack struggled and he quit. they say there is no other evidence. do you remember the testimony of mr. klaas, who said i do remember when we came to visit him one time in gainesville -do you have that -- can you pull that up? i remember one time when we came to visit him in gainesville and he talked about wanting to quit. "yeah, that is right, i do not know why, i was thinking it was because" -"what i'm asking, did you recall, if you remember, you are having a -- talking to pete mack about quitting smoking, do you recall if there was something that you discussed? "no, i think it was in person. i think we was visiting one time or something, and it came up all the time because my wife wanted me to quit all the time and it just came up." go forward a bit more, please. mr. telofski: it is a clip. mr. smith: oh, it is a clip. and your memory will dictate what he later says, and i thought i had it up there because -- he said, "yeah, we was talking and i know he was wanting to quit." now, i'm not saying that he -- i know that he did not quit the first day he knew he should have. but he did quit. unfortunately, 45 years of smoking r.j. reynolds products, smoking their filters -- by the way, you know, they have this stuff about people talking about filtered cigarettes. the filtered cigarette never helped anybody, but people thought it did because they advertised it as it did. people thought it did because they advertised. why do you make the word filter? why do you come up with a filter? you filter out what? you filter out bad stuff. well, it did not filter out the bad stuff, but a whole generation thought it did, and pete mack was one of them. this case, i submit to you, is really pretty simple if you keep your eye on the ball. he smoked 45 years, he smoked a product, he finally quit, when he quit, it was too late. he had copd the doctors say, laryngeal cancer the doctors say. it ought to be about damages. and i've already told you. i gave you a number. i do not know if the number is right. it could be greater, it could be less. what i know is this, that i cannot imagine that a man who lived a life like this, at the end of his life, the last years of his life, tethered to a machine, 25 foot of hose, that is what he had, sitting up every night because you have to get comfortable because you cannot lay down, fighting to get the next breath, swallowing still hurts nine years later, but that is not of great value. that is the last years that should be those great years. and pete mack was denied the true enjoyment, look at what it says, the capacity for the enjoyment of life. the mental anguish, the embarrassment, the inability to do the things you always wanted to do, the way you look when you go to the olive garden and it is a grand production just to get you to sit down and have dinner one night with your family. pete mack was a proud man. he played his whole life by the rules. and he decided to fight one last battle. in 2005, and it was right, the engle information had come out, he looked at it and he said -- that is when people really started knowing the information, he said, "i'm in that battle." pete mack filed this lawsuit. pete mack got his day in court this last two weeks. and pete mack stands here being able to say to r.j. reynolds, look, i'm accountable, i'm responsible, i always was, but so are you. i do not blame anybody for everything i did. they blame everybody in the world for every other possible cause. it could have been asbestos, it could have been this, it could have been that. but take your eye off the 45 years of cigarette smoking and what the medical evidence was. there is no evidence in this case of asbestos, there is no evidence in this case of -- by the way, if it is polycyclic hydrocarbons, i promise you where he got that, through cigarettes. it is in them. this case is not that hard, folks. these questions are not that hard. was pete mack addicted to cigarettes containing -- manufactured by r.j. reynolds? yes. was it a legal cause of his laryngeal cancer? yes. he smoked cigarettes and he got laryngeal cancer. you heard the evidence, you heard the testimony. was peter mack addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, and if so, was it a legal cause of his copd? yes. were there other things wrong with pete mack? there may have been, but they did not diminish his life. and by the way, if you cannot differentiate them, read the instruction, then do not. if you cannot do it, you do not do it. that is what it says. if you cannot pull them out and set them aside, the other causes, if they are all stacked on top or inseparable from, then the full amount of damages should be paid. the court: two minutes. mr. smith: thank you, sir. was the tobacco company's negligence a legal cause of his laryngeal cancer? yes. were the defective and unreasonable products placed? yes. they put products out there that contained carcinogens and they did not tell people about it. they put products out that had nicotine. and it is real simple. if the nicotine does not really matter, why would not they just take the nicotine out of cigarettes? well, you heard their own guy say, they could not sell them. you saw what they were saying in 1963, we sell nicotine, we are in the business of selling smoke containing nicotine, that is what they always are, that is what they have always been. i have asked for this amount. i do not know if it is right. i think it is imminently reasonable for what he went through. i think that at the end of his life, he was robbed of what should have been the most glorious years. they are the years you live for. and nobody imagines that you end up like he ended up, tethered to a hose, hooked to a tank, swallowing sore, talking minimally. that is not what he deserved. he deserves justice, and justice should be today for a fair number. we believe that is it. and r.j. reynolds should be directed to pay pete mack for what they did to cause the complete diminishment of the end of his life, which should have been the richest years he ever lived. been doing this a long time. i trust you folks. thank you.