mr. furr: counsel, mr. mack. good afternoon ladies and gentlemen. the jury: good afternoon. mr. furr: there is no possible other way that i can begin this argument other than to join mr. smith in thanking you for your service. we know it is not entirely voluntary. you did not ask to be here and then you get selected. but what we are really thanking you for is, of course, your patience with us, the courtesy you have extended to us all, the attention that you have given the case. it is been a privilege to work in front of you. i thank you on behalf of the thousands of women and men that make up the r.j. reynolds tobac company. also on behalf of ursula, frank, and alecia, so thank you very much. i wanted to come back to your patience, which has been extraordinary. but i actually think you had to be a little bit more patient than you should have, because i think the case took a little too long. i think the main reason the case took a little too long is we spent two or three days at the start of the case on evidence that really just does not fit mr. mack's case very well. the plaintiffs during their case, they called dr. cummings first, and then they showed you some other things. and they really spent two or three days where they -- there is an old expression for it. i think they spent a couple days trying to fit a square peg in a round hole. because when we look closely at their case about r.j. reynolds, it just simply does not fit very well the facts as you all now know them to be with respect to mr. mack. and i think the best way to illustrate that is to first take a look at what their case was about, the conduct of r.j. reynolds. and you heard again this morning, the topic that mr. smith spent all this time on, let us take a look at what they are talking about, and then let us see does that really relate to the case that you are here to decide, which is mr. mack's case. first couple days of the case plaintiff spent trying to prove to you these things: that smokers did not know that smoking was dangerous in the 1950s, 1960s and 1970s; that smokers were confusec by cigarette advertising and other statements by tobacco companies about the dangers of smoking; th nicotine addiction overwhelms smoker's freewill and prevents them from quitting. and by the way, that is the exact way mr. bigger phrased it in his opening statement. and that cigarette smoking causes premature disease and death. they spent a lot of time talking about the number of people who have died in smoking-related injuries. ladies and gentlemen, if we had a plaintiff in this case who never knew that smoking was dangeroi and who had made decisions based upon whether to smoke or not in reliance upon something that r.j. reynolds or some other tobacco company had said about smoking, a smoker who tried but simply was n able to quit, and a smoker who was struck down in early life, we would have a very good case. i'd be the first to tell you, that would be a very different case, but y'all now that is just not the case we have here. let us look at what the facts are as you now know them to be with respect to mr. mack. mr. mack smoked for decades despite knowing smoking was dangerous because he enjoyed smoking i'm going to walk through this evidence for you. we have every reason to believe mr. mack kne that smoking was dangerous in the 1950s. you heard this morning the plaintiffs admit that he knew the surgeon general warning came out the 1960s. we heard from a couple of his co-workers and friends he enjoyed smoking. so we know that to be mr. mack's attitude toward smoking. there has been zero evidence that mr. mack was confused by cigarette advertising or statements about the dangers of smoking made by r.j. reynolds or other tobacco companies. not one witness has said anything even resembling the statement like mr. mack told me that he just was not sure that smoking was dangerous. he told me he heard there were two sides two the story, that he heard an advertisement by a tobacco company or statement by a tobacco company that had caused him to be less concerned about the risk. there is none of that. there is just none of that evidence in this case. third, mr. mack quit and never smoked again the first and only time he was determined to quit and took the simple step of throwing his cigarettes away. i'm going to review with you all what we really know the evidence to be with respect to how mr. mac went about quitting and whether he had ever really tried to quit prior to the day he threw his cigarettes away. but we know, all the evidence is the first and only time he threw his cigarettes away, that was it. done smoking forever, never relapsed. finally, we know that mr. mack lived a long, full and active life until advanced age and multiple medical problems wore him down and he died at age from cancer that no one claims was caused by smoking. these are why i say that the plaintiffs case just does not fit mr. mack very well. this conduct case they have about the tobacco company, they just got the wrong plaintiff because they cannot link that conduct case. this case about the conduct of r.j. reynolds, they just cannot link it to mr. mack. they just have the wrong plaintiff. as you heard, there is going to be a number of issues. you will have a verdict form that you have to work through. you will have some instructions about how you are to weigh the evidence in reaching a conclusion on that verdict form. i'm going to spend the rest of my time walking through that verdict form. now, there are several places in that verdict form where if you answer a question a certain way you are done with your deliberations and you do not proceed to the next question. i will try to highlight those for you. the verdict form instructions will also be the same, but it is my obligation to talk to you about every question on that verdict form, even if you may not reach all those questions based upon what the evidence show i still have the obligation to talk to you about each and every one of those questions, so that is what we will be doing. i want to talk about -- we heard a lot about the engle findings. we talked about this in opening statement. we need to address the engle findings just briefly again. you will see in your instructions that the engle findings become binding on you if you find mr. mack to be a class member, but there is a numbe of things you need to understand about what the engle findings do not do. first, at the most general level, you will see in your instructions that the engle findings do not mean that r.j. reynolds is responsible for smoking-related diseases. even if you find mr. mack has smoking-related diseases, the engle findings do not make r.j. reynolds automatically responsible. mr. smith: objection, your honor. mr. furr: there are other things they have to prove, like legal causation. mr. smith: may we approach? the court: sure. (a sidebar conference was held outside the hearing of the jury as follows:) mr. smith: i think this is once in my life i ever objected in a closing, but that says legal cause of his death. that is not an issue in this case. the court: that is correct. mr. furr: okay. well, that is a mistake. that is a total mistake. (the sidebar conference was concluded, and the following proceedings were held:) mr. furr: okay. there is a word that was pu in here that should not have been put in here, and mr. smith is correct, and i appreciate him doing that. let us go to the first one. the engle findings do not establish that addiction to nicotine was a legal cause of peter mack's death. this is not a wrongful death case, as we talked about throughou the case. it is a case for personal injury. so that should say was a legal cause of peter mack's personal injury, and i apologize for that. it is an oversight. as we talked about, you cannot consider the engle findings until after you decide whether mr. mack was a member of the class. the engle findings do not establish that the actions of r.j. reynolds are a legal cause of peter mack's injuries and i'm going to talk with you a lot today about what the instructions tell you with respect to legal cause and how the plaintiffs have completely and utterly failed to link the engle findings in any way to mr. mack. they failed to make that connection, which is what they had to do for a legal cause. as i say, the instructions provide the engle findings do not establish that r.j. reynolds is responsible for peter mack's injuries. and something very important to understand is that the engle findings do not establish that plaintiff is entitled to punitive damages. even if you get to the question of punitive damages, there are additional considerations for you, additional instructions, a different burden of proof, and some additional evidence for you to consider and we will talk about that today. well, we need to begin again. the first hurdle the plaintiffs have to get over in this case, which if they do not get over, if you find mr. mack not to have been a member of the class, which is what th first three questions on your verdict form deal with, then you will be required to sign the verdict and return it and the case will be over. the first issue is class membership. as we discussed in opening statement, the plaintiff really has three separate showings that they have to make to you to establish that mr. mack was a member of the class. they have to establish that mr. mack developed a disease caused by his smoking. we are going to talk about the proof on that issue. they have to prove that mr. mack was addicted to nicotine. but even if they prove he was addicted, and we will talk about that in just a second, that is not the final hurdle for them. they still have to prove that addiction to nicotine was the legal cause of mr. mack's illness. and i'm going to spend a significant amount of time today talking with you about legal cause. you will see in your instructions that on this issue, that they also have to prove -- another instruction you will get is that they have to prove what we will call but for causation. what that really means is that the plaintiff must prove that mr. mack would not have develope laryngeal cancer and/or copd if he had not been a smoker. we will refer to that as but for causation. you will see in the language of your instructions it will be a standard you will have to apply to the others in the case. well, i'm going to talk with you first about the medical issues in the case. and one thing i want to talk to you about is why we talk about quitting smoking so much. the reason we talk abou quitting smoking so much is because quitting matters. the reason that all doctors tell their patients to quit is because quitting matters. the reason the publish health community advises people in our country to quit is because quitting matters. you heard this morning there is no dispute that every single witness in this case told you that when you quit smoking your risk of developing a smoking-related disease substantially decreases. so i think it is important to remember as we consider this evidence with respect to medical causation, sort of the context in which all this arose with respect to mr. mack. we talked about this a great deal. we do not know exactly when he quit. sometime in 1972 to '8 time frame, although i think i heard this morning plaintiffs state '81 again. but here's what we do know for certain. it was somewhere in the range of 14 to 18 years after he quit when he develops his laryngeal cancer at age 74. at age 74. we know that it was somewhere in the range of 18 to 22 years after quitting at age 78 when he first received that diagnosis of copd in the year 2000. and by the way, of course that diagnosis was made based on a single pulmonary function test, ma by a doctor, dr. ryerson, who read that test but who never actually saw mr. mack. the diagnosis was never made again, as mr. bigger said yesterday, the diagnosis was just carried through on his medical chart. you heard dr. andrews talk about that diagnosis, and we will address that when we talk about dr. andrews' testimony. and final thing we know is that mr. mack died at the age of 85, within a few months of being diagnosed with lung cancer in the year 2008. that is sort of the context in which all this arises. now, plaintiffs proof on laryngeal cancer. first, as we suggested to you in opening statement, what plaintiffs attempted to do is prove to you that as a statistical matter based on studies of other people and mr. mack's smoking history, th smoking was the most likely cause of mr. mack's laryngeal cancer. that was their whole case based upon statistics. but here's what the witnesses told you during the course of the trial. i think we can all agree that mr. mack is an individual, he is not a statistic. you heard dr. barsky explain to you that all of medicine is always based on the individual patient. we treat people as individuals, not as statistics. one of the things he did was he explained to you th way, for example -- one of his passions, obviously, is breast cancer. he is a renowned researcher in breast cancer. he explained to you things doctors do when a mass or a lump is identified in the breast, and how they evaluate that. they do not reach -- they do not jump to a conclusion that it is a matter of statistics it must be a certain type of breast cancer. you have to evaluate things on an individual level. so what do we have beyond the statistics? i guess the point of this is what do we have beyond the statistics? one of the first points, i guess, is you have mr. mack's medical records. you will see that none of his treaters ever concluded that smoking caused his laryngeal cancer. you are not going to see that in any medical records. that opinion has been provided to you only by the paid witnesses who have come here. second, as you heard dr. barsky explain, there was some samples taken from the tumor, but there w nothing in the tumor that showed it was caused by smoking. under examination by the microscope, the was simply nothing there that indicated what the cause was. there was no marker, there was no objective evidence. there was simply nothing there to tell you what caused the cancer. third, you heard from dr. barsky that the majority of smokers who develop laryngeal cancer do so in their 50's or 60's. of course we know that mr. mack developed it at age 74. mr. mack's case just seemed a little different than the usual case. we also heard that -- well, all the witnesses told you that -- how smoking decreases risk, and all of them, including all plaintiffs witnesses told you that at least by 20 years after quitting, former smokers are at no greater risk of developing laryngeal cancer than never smokers. mr. mack developed it before he was quite 20 years after quitting. you heard from multiple doctors there are other studies that show after ten or 15 years you are no longer at any risk. that is sort of the -- if you want to look at the statistical evidence, that is what the statistics tell you with respect to somebody like mr. mack. and finally you heard that although -- you know, you heard some different opinions, but it is clear that somewhere in the range of 5, 10, or even up to even twenty percent of laryngeal cancers occur in people who have never smoked. it has occurred in people who have never smoked. so just knowing the statistics cannot really explain to you what was going on with the individual. the plaintiffs have the burden of proof to prove to you that laryngeal cancer is caused by smoking, and really all they did was bring you statistics. that is all they brought you was statistics. copd. the facts about the copd case finally came to light yesterday when dr. andrews was on th stand, and he finally gave you the full picture about copd, and testified about the whole individua that we know as peter mack, sr. and not just about a single pft test. here's what dr. andrews explained to us yesterday: copd develops in smokers when they smo or shortly after they quit smoking. you know that there is no evidence in this case that mr. mack had copd or any other breathing problems when he was a smoker for over a decade after he quit. basically, plaintiffs are asking you to conclude that something mr. mack quit by 1981 was the cause of his breathing problems in the year 2000, almost two decades later. what really was going on with mr. mack's breathing problems? well, dr. andrews spent yesterday going through the medical records with you and explained to you all of the different diseases that mr. mack had that were impacting his ability to breathe. he explained to you mr. mack had morbid obesity, lung cancer, obstructive sleep apnea, pickwickian syndrome, heart problems, pulmonary hypertension, gastroesophageal reflux disease, mr. mack was losing lung function just like we all will if we are lucky enough to live to age 85, renal failure. and, of course, mr. mack was in a downward cycle, a decline with his health because he was deconditioning. the less active he became, the worse shape he got in, the worse shape he was in the harder it was for him to breathe. all these medical problems wore mr. mack down when he reached the of 85. that is the medical case in a nutshell. those are the issues you have to deal with. but as i told you, that is just the first question in class membership. the second question is whether mr. mack was addicted. you heard dr. nace, the addiction psychiatrist called by defense tell you that mr. mack was mildly addicted or dependent. he explained to you that under the dsm mr. mack did not really qualify as addicted. if you strictly apply the test that psychiatrists apply when they evaluate these issues, he did not strictly qualify, but based upon -- you saw dr. nace. he had been in psychiatry for about 40 years. he told you based on his 40 years of experience his clinical judgment was the right way to think about mr. mack was that he was mildly addicted. he was mildly addicted, and we are not disputing that is what dr. nace's testimony was, and you are entitled to rely on that testimony. but that is really just the beginning of the big question in this case, which is whether or not addiction was the legal cause of mr. mack's injuries. you see, even if you find that he had copd or laryngeal cancer, you still have to ask the question as to whether addiction was the legal cause of those injuries. well, how could addiction be a legal cause of the injury? what would really have to be going on to be fair to say an addiction to something was the legal cause of injury that they suffered? i submit to you what the plaintiffs really need to prove to you is exactly what mr. bigger said they were going to prove to you in his opening statement, because here's what he told you. he told you that addiction to nicotine overwhelmed mr. mack's free will and prevented him from quitting smoking. prevented him from quitting smoking. that is the position they had coming into this case when they were committed to try to prove to you legal causation, nicotine, legal causation in this case. but as the evidence came in -- you have not heard them address this like this any longer. they have now tried to convince you to sort of apply a different approach to this issue, because one thing we know for sure is that addiction did not overwhelm mr. mack's freewill and did not prevent him from quitting smoking. that is the things that we know with absolute certainty now. but this is what they told you they were going to prove. this is how they told you they were going to prove that addiction to nicotine was the legal cause to mr. mack's injuries. let us look a little closer to this. does addiction prevent smokers from quitting? y'all know the answer to that. we did not have to go any farther than the plaintiffs own witnesses to answer this. dr. cummings who spent a long time working wi people to help them quit smoking was asked this ver question during his testimony: you are not meaning to suggest in any way that even heavily addicted smokers cannot quit, are you, sir? his answer was no. because we are going to talk about these numbers a little bit, because i know you know them well, but the fact of the matter is that millions and millions of heavily addicted smokers have quit smoking, correct? yes, that is true. does addiction to nicotine overcome people's freewill and prevent from quitting smoking? you do not have to look any further than dr. cummings, the very first witness. mr. bigger told you the first window down at the box in these cases, they sort of give you the background as to what is going on. this is what dr. cummings told you. but we did not stop. we said let us try to put some numbers on this to help the jury understand what we mean with respect to people's ability to quit smoking with respect to people that are deemed to be addicted to quit smoking, because you heard over and over that virtually everybody that smokes a pack a day is considered to be addicted by dr. werner, by dr. cummings. so these statistics apply to virtually everybody who smokes somewhere the range of a pack a day. so we are really looking at quitting numbers for people who were addicted smokers to people who were heavily addicted smoker here's what dr. cummings told us. by 1965, about 17.6 million people in this country had quit smoking. you recall what dr. cummings told us is that when all those studies began being published in the early 1950s, in the medical literature and were picked up by the media for us by tv and radio and newspapers and magazines, that people began quittin by the millions. this took place in the '50s. so even before, i should say even by the year after the famous surgeon general's report came out. 17.6 million people quit. it only accelerated after that. dr. cummings also told you that in the next 15 years, 30 million more people quit. as we talked about with him, that is two million people a year, or 5,000 people a day quitting, most of whom dr. cummings and dr. werner believe were addicte and ninety percent of them quit cold turkey. so 5,000 -- ninety percent, somewhere in the range of 4,500 smokers a day, addicted smokers a day wert quitting day in, day out, year in, year out for 15 years between 1964 and 1979. and you heard about where we are today. today we have 60 million former smokers in this country, or 60 million people have quit smoking. so one thing that is pretty clear is being addicted does not prevent people from quitting. it does not overwhelm your freewill. this 60 million is a big number. it is a little hard to put it in context, so i'll use one of my favorite subjects to try to put it in context for you, and that is football. i have not got to talk about football lately, but think about the swamp. it holds about 90,000 people. 60 million smokers means that the smokers in the united states who hav quit would fill the swamp 650 times. and, in fact, every month enough smokers quit smoking to fill the swamp. those are the facts about whether or not addiction to nicotine overwhelms smokers' freewill and prevents them from quitting. we talked about people quitting cold turkey. dr. cummings told us that most people quit cold turkey. so the question becomes well, are there just people that cannot quit. so we asked all the experts. can everybody quit? and with the exception of people who have some other type of problem, some other -- primarily some other type of psychiatric problem that simply puts them in a position where they are unable to understand information, act on that information. if you put that population of very sick people aside who have different type of problem, all the experts told you the same thing. dr. cummings, dr. werner, dr. nace all told yo that anyone can quit. that anyone can quit. there was no dispute among the experts on that issue, no dispute. so we said well, try to sort through this. but plaintiffs are claiming that addiction causes disease by preventing people from quitting, but anyone can quit. so we ask how is it people quit? the answer is really pretty simple. they told us about motivation and persistence. they told us that the way 60 million americans hav quit smoking is that a smoker has to want to quit smoking and a smoker has to try to quit smoking. dr. cummings again. i asked him motivation an persistence, that is how people quit smoking, right? his answer was they overcome their nicotine addiction, yes. we are talking about 60 million people, but the plaintiffs are trying to convince you that smoking overwhelms freewill and prevents people from quitting and this causes diseases in people, but their own experts just do not support that. dr. werner was asked: would not you agree whe you were asked, and we know when a person is motivated and committed to make a serious effort h or she will be able to quit smoking? and your answer was: correct. and at that time it was correct, yes, absolutely. so both the plaintiffs witnesses admit if you are motivated to quit smoking and you make persistent efforts to quit smoking, you are going to be able to quit smoking. that is the evidence in their case, and we know mr. mack was one of thost people. well, before we get to that we came back to dr. cummings just to be absolutely clear, because h told you that he has had over a decade of experienc treating thousands of people with his quit line, wh wanted to quit smoking. and he was asked: okay. you tell smokers that the success rate among peopl who really want to quit and stick to it is one hundred percent, right? his answer was yes. his answer was yes. he also told us this, though he told us that when it comes to nicotine addiction, just like to other addictions, really actions speak louder than words. we all know if you ask smokers whether they want to quit, the large percentage of them will say yes. and all of the witnesses explained to you that smokers say yes because a lot of people view it as it would be wrong to say you did not want to quit, or it may be in response to a loved one, significant others asking you to quit and saying yes. but we know dr. cummings told us that even in his program, people call his quit line who say they want to quit, but when he talks to them he realizes they do not really have an intent to quit. you see, there is a difference between -- and it is an important difference in this case, and we will expand on this, but there is a big difference between a recognition you should do something and a real sincere desire to accomplish that. and we are going to talk about that here, because what i think the evidence shows is that there was a clear recognition within the mack famil that everyone should quit smoking. but that simply is different than proving that there was a real desire on the part of mr. mack to quit smoking. because in this instance, actions speak louder than words, so we are going to look at what we know aboul whether mr. mack took actions that demonstrate that he had a sincere desire to quit smoking. dr. werner told us the same thing. she was asked -- this was the very first question i asked dr. werner. you know, again, plaintiffs claim was that mr. mack's freewill was overwhelmed by nicotir addiction, and as a result it prevented him from quitting. so the very first question i asked dr. werner on cross-examination is this: start with the very simple first question. one thing we know with one hundred percent certainty is that mr. mack had the ability to quit smoking, right? answer: absolutely. absolutely. that one simple answer undermines plaintiff's entire claim about nicotine addiction and causation. the facts of this case are that mr. mack was one of the 60 million people who quit, once he decided to quit and was determined to quit. those are simply the facts of the case. now, as i said plaintiffs began this case by suggesting to you that nicotine addiction overwhelmed mr. mack's freewill and left him unabl to quit. obviously the facts do not support that claim. the facts simply defeat that claim. so what happened during the course of this trial? perhaps in recognition of this -- we will skip over this one. perhaps in recognition -- maybe i better not. let us remind ourselves of exactly what the facts were before we go over this, because you heard this several times. i'll go through it quickly. i think -- excuse me. the evidence will show you the first time mr. mack made a serious attempt to quit he, in fact, did quit. he quit by simply throwing his cigarettes away. you know that mrs. mack was continuing to smoke. you know that mr. mack worked at the shel station that sold cigarettes. but after that one day and he threw the cigarettes away, he resisted all that temptation, never relapsed again. it was absolutely clear he never smoked another cigarette once he made up his mind to be a nonsmoker and wa determined to do so, determined to do so. he controlled any desire that he had to smoke for the rest of his life. we asked mrs. mack this very question. you heard her. she was asked on her deposition -- it was played to you -- he was determined to quit whe he threw his cigarettes out the window? her answer was yes. her answer was yes. now, like i said, plaintiffs original theory about how nicotine addiction could have caused mr. mack's disease, really completely unsupported t the evidence because he was able to quit with one hundred percent certainty. so their theory began to change during the course of the case, and they began to argue that well, no, his freewill was not overcome, but his choice to quit became constrained. you remember t phrase constrained choice? that became sort of the things that the plaintiff tried to argue to us. well, is smoking -- does addiction constrain a smoker's ability to quit smoking? let us look at what the surgeon general says. in 1977 the surgeon general described smoking as a category of health problems that are called a personal choice of health behavior. it does not say a constrained choice of health behavior. same thing in 1982, the surgeon general's report, a personal choice behavior such as smoking. not a constrained choice behavior. and finally in 1986, the report that sort of pulled these two concepts together for us that we began talking about all the way back in jury selection. people thought about addiction on the one hand and choice on the other hand. in 1986 the surgeon general explained cigarette smoking is an addictive behavior, and the individu smoker must decide whether or not to continue that behavior. it is not a constrained choice but a choice we make. so we ask the plaintiffs witnesses questions related to this issue. we asked dr. cummings: th choice to try to quit is something that is one hundred percent in control of the smoker, right? his answer: yes. they have to make a -- they have to make a want, they have to make a quit attempt. i'm not sure exactly what the first phrase means, but he agreed yes, the choice to make a quit attempt is one hundred percent within the control of the smoker. dr. werner told us with respect to mr. mack, no one else could make the decision with respect to trying to quit smoking other than mr. mack, you would agree with that? absolutely. that was a choice only he could make? yes. so not only was the choice to become a smoker one hundred percent in his control, i think everybody agrees to that, cigarettes do not make themselves to jump in your mouth, the choice to become a smoker was one hundred percent mr. mack's control. the choice of whether to try to quit was also one that both plaintiffs experts agree was really totally in his control whether he made an effort to try to quit. does nicotine addiction affect people in a way that prevents them from quitting? does it rob them of their motivation to quit smoking? nobody said that whatsoever. does it prevent people from understanding that smoking is dangerous and they should quit smoking the evidence is exactly the opposite. both dr. nace and werner told us this: addiction to nicotine does not interfere with a smoker's ability to understand the dangers of smoking. nicotine would not have interfered with mr. mack's ability t( understand the warnings. so there was no interference with his understanding the danger, there was no interference with his motivation to try to quit. it was one hundred percent within his choice as to whether to try to make a quit attempt. those facts came in. and so let us take a closer look at mr. mack. because i think it is fair to say that there are some people that have a hard time with problems related to addiction than other people. there are people in our society that are addiction prone, that struggle with addictions, that have a difficult time making decisions and following through on those decisions, and they just tend to yield to temptations, and that is just sort of the nature of who they are. but that is not who mr. mack was. we all heard over and over and you heard me agree with them, you know, mr. mack was a war hero. he was a guy who flew 7 combat missions. but we went a lot deeper than that. we asked his family and friends what was mr. mack really like? what was he like as a person? here's what they all told us. decisive, strong willed, independent, a good man, a successful businessman, well informed, smart and intelligent, good provider, brave, a careful meticulous man, a man's man. he simply was not the type of person who was addiction prone. he was not a weak person that had trouble dealing with problems in his life. he was somebody that had -- the point of this is he had all the tools. his makeup gave him all the tools that he needed to quit. all of the tools that he needed. and, again, we asked dr. werner this question: doctor, before i lever that, does nicotine addiction prevent quitting smoking? no, absolutely not. and so first is to abandon the overcome freewill theory. they tried out the constrained choice theory. but it really did not go anywhere because their experts all agree that the choice was still one hundred percent his as whether to quit or not. and so they turned to their final theory of addiction causation, and that was that what really happened was the addiction causation caused him t quit later; that he would have quit sooner but for the addiction causation. and so we saw them spend a lot of time on that you heard over and over that mr. mack struggled t quit for ten years and was not able to quit until the day that he threw his cigarettes out. what i'm going to do now is take a little closer look with you at the evidence about what th real evidence is with whether or not he struggled tc quit for ten years, not statements by the lawyers, not sort of conclusionary statements, but what the facts are with respect to whether he struggled to quit for ten years. we will start basic. what does it mean to try to quit smoking? how do we know whether someone making a serious effort to quit smoking? you heard dr. nace explain to you that that is an issue that has been discussed among people involved in this field, and that a serious quit attempt -- let me back up. a serious quit attempt is frequently defined as whether or not somebody went 24 hours without smoking. if you want to see whether or not someone is serious about breaking their addiction to nicotine, you exam the question of whether or not did they actually go 24 hours without smoking, because you heard the nicotine leaves your body in a couple days. so that is a fair test to see if you are serious or not about quitting. so what we did is we asked the members of the mack family what they really knew about whether mr. mack had made an attempt to quit smoking. not what they heard other people say, not the conclusions they had reached, but what they really knew. and we started off with stanley mack. we aske him okay, before the time that he actually quit, you are not aware of any attempts to quit that he might have had, correct? mr. stanley mack's answer was: i do not know if he attempted to quit or not. i do not know if he attempted to quit or not. peter mack, jr. we asked mr. mack: sir, you were asked do you know if he tried to quit at all until he finally did in 1982? and you testified, i do not know, correct? correct. again, peter mack, jr. under oath who previously testified that he did not know whether mr. mack tried to quit. now, he said some other things so let us examine that. he also told us that despite having worked with his father throughout the '70s, at least part of the '70s, first at his father's shell station, later his, that he had no firsthand knowledge of mr. mac ever attempting to make a quit attempt. he worked with him during the course of those days. he did not have any firsthand knowledge. he said that the only time that he thought mr. mack had made a quit attempt was not in his '70s, but in the early '80s, because some of his employees who mr. mack worked with had told them that mr. mack was irritable or hard to get along with during a period of what they thought was a quit attempt. but we do not actually have that before us. those witnesses did not testify. there is not a single witness who says they saw him make a quit attempt, a serious quit attempt before the final day he did, because peter mack, jr., despite what he heard someone else say about something he did not observe, we see his testimony. he told us that he did not know whether mr. mack made a quit attempt before 1982. let us talk about mrs. mack's testimony. mrs. mack, the time she testified in this case, you all saw her deposition, she is elderly, she seemed like a very nice lady, seemed like a very intelligent lady. she struggled a little bit with the process. she was elderly and had a little hard time hearing some of the questions, but if you look at the totality of her answers that are played to you, here's what mrs. mack told us. she told us that she had seen the surgeon general's report, read the warnings, was hearing and seeing stuff on the news and knew that smoking was dangerous and they should try to quit. she told us that she and her husband tried. both knew that smoking was dangerous and that they should quit an that they encouraged each other to quit. then she said we tried to quit for ten years. we tried to have her explain to us what does that mean, mrs. mack? and she was asked: can you tell us about when your husband was trying to quit? she said: well, we were always going to quit. we were always going to quit. and so we asked her this question: well, he told you he had either been trying to quit or cut back before he threw his cigarettes out the window, right? and my question is: do you recall him ever quitting smoking before he threw his cigarettes out the window? and her answer was no. her answer was no. and so really what you are left with in this case is some sort of conclusionary testimony that he was trying to quit for a decade, but no facts were put in front of you of actual quit attempts. mr. stanley mack, mr. peter mack, jr., mrs. mack they all three said they could not identify a time that he ever tried to quit. you are going to have to sort through that evidence and interpret that evidence for yourself to determine whether or not, in fact, mr. mack was someone who struggled to try to quit for ten years. but there is another key to this. there is another key to this that might help you with this, because we asked dr. werner a series of questions regarding how mr. mack tried to quit. and here's what she ultimately told us: other than changing the cigarettes he was smoking in an attempt to cutback, we do not have any evidence mr. mack trie any other thing to help him quit smoking, do we? no, there is no evidence. so the only evidence we have is that he changec the cigarettes that he was smoking in an attempt to cutback. we asked dr. nace about this same issue. we asked dr. nace: i want you to assume there is been evidence in this case that mr. mack switched brand to filtered cigarettes and low tar cigarettes in his effort to quit. would you make that assumption foi me, sir? yes. do you consider as an addiction psychiatrist, do you consider that behavior to be a serious quit attempt? answer: no, i do not. why not? it is not quitting. it is not quitting. perhaps you might want to think about it this way: think about a person who is drinking whiskey on a daily basis, who knows that they should not be because it is dangerous to their health, whose family is literally begging them to stop drinking whiskey; who has seen warnings in the media with the danger of drinking whiskey, who has seen a label about the dangers of drinking alcohol. and finally instead of quitting they switch from whiskey to beer. would they increase their drinking to get the same amount of alcohol from beer they were getting from the whiskey they had previously been drinking? that is sort of the scenario you are being asked to accept as a serious quit attempt, and you are going do have to ask yourself would that actually be someone seriously trying to quit drinking by switching from whiskey to more beers a day? because you have the same situation here. it is the same type of situation where you are being asked to accept the claim that mr. mack demonstrated he was trying to quit by switching to a different type of cigarette. you are being asked to accept that he was trying to quit smoking by smoking. that is the claim the plaintiffs have laid in front of you. but by virtue of the cross-examination of the psychiatrist, both dr. nace and dr. werner, you knoi that there are better ways to get it if mr. mack was seriously trying to quit smoking, because we asked them both are there things people do when they are trying to quit smoking that indicate they had a serious motivation to try to quit smoking? here are the type of things they told us. i sort of combined their testimony. first they told us people make multiple serious quit attempts and fail. mr. mack did not do that. second they told us that people who are seriously addicted who really want to quit frequently become tormented by their smoking, they complain about their smoking to others, it becomes something that they are very committed to try to deal with. there is no evidence mr. mack ever complained. they told us that people who have addiction problems reach out for help. they come to a point they reach out for help from family, friends, doctors. mr. mack never did that. they told us that one of the things they look for -- dr. cummings told you that when he counse' people about quitting, he asks them on their second day, on their second day to throw away their ashtrays and cigarettes, and that is one of the hallmarks of whether someone is trying to quit. all the evidence from all the fact witnesses is mr. mack never did that until that fateful day he threw his cigarettes out and never smoked again, that is all it took. they told you people attend cessation clinics. mr. mack never did that. as i mentioned, people develop feelings of guilt, they become tormented by their smoking, the share with their family members and friends the difficulties they are having with overcoming things because it beings interfering with their life. never. no evidence of that with mr. mack. dr. werner told us that she treats patients who try 10, 20, and 30 times, never able to quit. she tells us -- she told us that she treats patients who continue smoking up until they get a serious smoking-related disease. she told us that heavily addicted smokers sometimes continue to smoke after they develop a smoking-related disease. that is the type of thing that heavily-addicted people do who cannot quit or do not really want to quit. that is not the case with mr. mack. you know his quitting story. no need for me to talk about that anymore. i guess finally it is a question if the cigarettes he was smoking were more addictive than the cigarettes smoked by the other 60 million people who quit smoking? you know, there is no such evidence in this case. in fact, mr. mack smoked popular brands, so there is nothing different about the product. the only difference is until that day he threw his cigarettes away, mr. mack chose to continue smoking because he enjoyed smoking and never took that final step of throwing his cigarettes away. and once he did, that was it for him. that was it. could he have quit sooner? we asked dr. nace. based upon his 45 years -- you heard he spends more than half his time treating people with addiction problems. based on his education, experience and training, did he have an opinion whether mr. mack could have quit smoking earlier if he had been motivated to do so? his answer was sure. my opinion, i feel very certain he could have quit earlier if he had been motivated and chosen to do so. chosen to do so. if he had been chosen and motivated to do so. of course she was the defense expert, but let us look at the other side of the coin on this issue. we asked dr. werner the same type of question: and you are not trying to suggest it would have been impossible for mr. mack to stop smoking earlier, ar you? no, absolutely not. i think it would have been difficult, but not impossible, as we see. so how did addiction cause mr. mack's injury? how did addiction cause mr. mack's injury, if he had the ability to quit and once he became motivated to quit, quit the first time that he threw his cigarettes out the first time. to answer this question i think we need to look at the legal instructions a little more carefully, because there is a legal instruction that will help you understand this question about what the plaintiffs have to prove to you with respect to whether or not addiction to cigarettes caused mr. mack's injury. the class membership question instruction, you will see it is on page 5 of your instructions. just take a quick look. this is class membership, and i will zero in on what we need to look at here. the first issue for your determination in this case is whether mr. mack was a member of the engl class. to prove that he was, plaintiffs must prove that mr. mack was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, and that addiction was a legal cause of his injury. now, here's the legal standard i wanted to draw your attention to. addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine is a legal cause of injury if it directly and in a natural and continuous sequence produced or contributes substantially to producing such injury. so it could reasonable be said that but for the addiction, the cigarettes containing nicotine, the injury would not occur. so the plaintiffs have to prove to you the nicotine addiction acted directly, in a natural and continuous sequence. so i went ahead and took that, the legal standard you will see on page 5 of the instructions and turned that into this diagram. this is a diagram of the instruction that we just looked at, about the burden of proof the plaintiffs have to prove to you addiction causation. the first point i make is this constrained choice concept that the plaintiffs urge on you, you are not going to see that instruction. it is not in the instructions, it is not on the verdict form, this concept of constrained choice was just one of the theories that plaintiff offered you about addiction causation. what the instruction you just looked at said is the following: plaintiff must prove that addiction directly and in a natural and continuous sequence produced or contributes substantially to mr. mack'; smoking-related disease. direct and in a direct and natural and continuous sequence. well, we asked dr. nace about this concept. he is an addiction psychiatrist. we asked him basei on his education, training and experience did he have an opinion as to whether addiction to nicotine caused illness in mr. mack. and he said no, the addiction to nicotine did not cause illness in mr. mack. and let us look at why he said that. let us pull all this together. based on the instruction, the question for you is whether addiction directly and in a natural and continuous sequence caused mr. mack's injury. but instead of having a direct line between addiction and injury, we all know now that what stood between that addiction and any injury that mr. mack might have had was mr. mack himself. an the choices that mr. mack made in life. and you know what those choices were: you know he chose to begin smoking, to become a regular smoker. you kno he chose to ignore health warnings for about 30 years. you know that he chose the enjoyment he got out of smoking over the risk of smoking, and he chose to not make a serious quit attempt. now, i'll come back to this later in another part of the argument, but you also this morning that plaintiffs have admitted, it is in your instruction, plaintiffs have admitted that mr. mack was negligent in his efforts to quit smoking. so there is not a direct and natural and continuous lines between addiction and mr. mack's injuries, because in between addiction and those injuries stands mr. mack. a smart, decisive, intelligent man capable of making decisions and acting on them, and these are the choices he made. these are the choices he made. mr. mack was the only legal cause of the injuries he had in this case, the choices that he made. let us take a look at the first three questions on your verdict form, because the first three questions on your verdict form deal with the addiction causation. the first question is: was peter mack addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine manufactured by i r.j. reynolds tobacco company and, if so, was suc addiction a legal cause of his laryngeal cancer. again, it looks like one question, but it is all three questions we talked about. he has to prove to you smoking caused laryngeal cancer, he was addicted, and perhaps most importantly they have to prove to you that an addiction causation -- that addiction causation----addiction acted in a direct, natural, continuous sequence in causing his disease. if you do not think the plaintiffs have proven their case to you, then the proper verdict -- excuse me. now, that is not quite as bad as what happened to my math professor, what he thought, but i'll just bet you, especially with that camera going right there that is on me and not y'all, i suspect that somehow, some day i'm going to see this moment again. mr. smith: i think it is fine. mr. furr: like i suspect, i'll see it again real soon. okay. let me be absolutely clear. in all seriousness, i think the evidence in this case is that mr. mack -- the right response to question number one is no. same question for number two, only this one deals with copd. this one deals with copd. agai plaintiff has to prove all three elements of their claim to you: medical causation, addiction, and addiction causation. the evidence in this case, if they have not proven that, then the proper verdict again is no. as you heard there is a different types of questions here. the third question which asks you if your question -- if your answer to question two was yes, did mr. mack's copd first manifest on or before november 21, 1996. so you do not even get tc this question if your answer to the first two is no. if your answer to the first two is no, you just sign the verdict form and that is the end of this case. but if you get to this question, you have to ask yourself when did this copd, if he did have copd, first manifest itself. the date that he was diagnosed with copd is 2000. four years after this question. four years after this question. now, that diagnosis by itself does not completely answer the question, as you will see in your instructions, but think about what was going on at the time. you heard that mr. mack was getting multiple sequential follow-ups with doctors at the va becaus he already had laryngeal cancer, so we know that during that period he was getting one month, three months, six months and year follow-ups and two years, so he was seeing physicians on a regular basis. and there should not be any doubt that those physicians were evaluating his health status. if he had been manifesting signs of copd in 1996, those doctors at the va would have caught tha disease before the year 2000. there is no evidence that anybody thought he was having copd before the year 2000. so, again, the proper answer to this question if you find the plaintiffs have filed to prove that would be no. would be no. i'm at one hour. i think i need to pick up the pace a bit. okay. the next question you are going to have -- the next set of questions you are going to have deals with legal causation, legal causation. the plaintiffs have multiple, different theories in this case. you heard about that in the instructions. they are asking you to find for them on the basis of negligence, on the basis of product defect, and on the basis of concealment. legal cause is defined for you in your verdict form, and i'll take a quick look at the way it is defined for negligence, which you will see on page 9 of your verdict form. on page 9 of your verdict form you will see this legal causation for negligence, this is your instruction on negligence -- negligence is the legal cause of injury if it directly in a natural, continuous sequence produces or contributes substantially to producing the injury, same concept as we were just looking for. so if you find class membership, you now have to determine whether or not the conduct of the companies was the legal cause of the injury. could i have the projector back? that refers to all four diseases. let us take a look at concealment, because it is actually fairly easy so deal with. there is two questions on your verdict form dealing with concealment and conspiracy to conceal, so let us take a look at whether or not the plaintiffs have been able to link any concealment of information to mr. mack. first question: were the risks of smoking a secret? were the risks of smoking a secret? you know the answer to that. i'll go through this fairly quickly. dr. cummings told you the dangers of smoking has been discussed by the media in this country for over 100 years. you saw how the information abou the dangers of smoking developed in the united states. all the way back in 1924 the reader's digest was publishing articles about the carcinogenic nature of tobacco smoke. in 1941, they were just publishing articles about the addictive or dependence, dependence-producing properties of tobacco smoke. you saw that that continued in the reader's digest, life, time, and all types of other magazines. this was no secret. you heard this story. scientists would make discoveries, it would get picked up by the media and made available to the public. i'm not going to review all that evidence with you because we have some shortcuts to help us sort through this really quickly. the first shortcut is dr. cummings himself. i asked dr. cummings: you would agree that virtually everybody knew in 1954 that smoking coulc cause disease? his answer was: yes, heard and knew the same. was it a secret? dr. cummings was not there back then. he has looked at this sort of retrospectively. let us look at what the public health officials who were there then in charge of guarding the public health in this country had to say about whether the dangers of smoking with were secret in the 1950s. you heard dr. burney testify: our position is that we have informed the public through the excellent coverage of the press, radio, and tv. dr. heller, same type of testimony. number one public health authorities in this country had concluded by the late '50s the public had been warned, just like dr. cummings said, everybody had heard. then we move into the 1960s and you heard about the production of the surgeon general's report, 1964 report. a little brown book that literally was heard around the world, including in japan where mr. mack was. you might remember the press covert of the '64 report. (a video clip was played and transcribed by the court reporter to the best of her ability as follows:) "unidentified speaker: this is a cbs new extra on smoking and health. the findings of the surgeon general's committee. announcer: almost from the moment that cigarettes were introduced, they were attacked, but the attacks took a new turn ten years ago and culminated in today's report by the surgeon general's committee. this, in summary, is what the committee says: cigarette smoking is a major cause of lung cancer in men, and data on women smokers points the same wa cigarette smoking is a significant cause of cancer of the larynx, and probably the most important cause of chronic bronchitis. cigarette smoking may be related to other lung diseases. male smokers have a much higher death rate from heart disease, although it is not proven that smoking is the cause. on the question of filters, the committee says there is no evidence that they do any good, but it did not exclude the possibility that an effective filter might be developed. in short, the committee says if you smoke cigarettes you increase your chances of dying early. the sooner you start, the more you smoke, the more you inhale, the worst your chances are. the surgeon general's committee presented its report at a news conference in washington. unidentified speaker: out of its long and exhaustive deliberations, the committee has reached the overall judgement that cigarette smoking is a health hazard of sufficient importance to the united states to warrant remedial action. this overall judgment was supported by many converging lines of evidence as well as by data indicating that cigarette smoking is related to higher death rates in a number of disease categories. more specifically, the committee states on page 61 of the report, and i quote, 'in view of the continuing and mounting evidence from many source it is the judgment of the committee that cigarette smoking contributes substantially to mortality from certain specific diseases and to the overall death rate.' in this kind of a country, it comes down to you, whether you like it or not. no one is going to forbid an adult to smoke, and it is now quite clear that no one is going to tell him it is good for him, either. the decision is his, the decision and the health that may depend on it. this is harry reasoner. good night." (the video clip was stopped.) mr. furr: that is the message the american public was giving you in 1964. that is the message the mack family got in japan in 1964. stanley mack told you that he heard about it on the radio. i believe mr. klaas, who was in the air force with mr. mack told you that. the air force had squadron meetings where they showed film clips abo the surgeon general's reports, in fact just like we saw dr. burney behind the podium, mr. klaas told us he remembers seeing film clips with the surgeon general behind the podium and that everyone was required to attend those meetings. mr. mack, presumably, was there also. dr. cummings told us he already told us in 1954, so maybe we were gelding the lilly a little bit here. he told yes, everybody knew in '64. you know, at that point our society made a choice. we were at a fork in the road in the united states. society could not decide let us ban them, let us legislate them out of existence, let us put the whole cigarette experience behind us. that is not what our society did. our society decided we would require that warnings be placed on cigarettes and that adults would be free to choose to smoke and to take the risk of smoking, if that is what they wanted to do. that is the choice our society made. so people like mr. mack, if he wanted to continue being a smoker, that was the choice he could make because we do live in america, we get to decide how to live our lives. if we want to take the risk, we get to take the risk, and we also have to accept the responsibility of those risks. dr. horn, his famous quote a couple years later, the number one public health official in the country: you could stand on a rooftop and shout smoking is dangerous at the top of your lungs and you would not be telling anybody anything they don' already know. in 1970 you heard the warning label changed. very interesting way to look at how effective all the information was about the dangers of smoking. what i did here was take key events with respect to awareness of smoking and sort of put them on a timeline with quitting, and what you see is that as the message got out, smokers who were concerned about their health quit. if you were a health conscious person who did not want to take the risk of smoking anymore, you quit. as soon as the message started coming out in the 1950s you saw the dramatic number of people wl quit in that decade. then the surgeon general's report came out and we embarked on that 15-year period where 5,000 people quit a day. the information was out there, smokers had the ability to quit. what they had to do was make a choice to quit. that is where we were. you heard a lot about psychological crutch. a suggestion had been made smokers did not quit becaus of the psychological crutch. well, we asked dr. cummings: is not it your testimony that the state spotted companies who provided smokers a psychological crutch to keep smoking, and answer w; yes. and those statements were being made during this time frame between '65 and '79. this psychological crutch certainly was not preventing many people from quitting who wanted to that is when 5,000 people a day were quitting. while dr. cummings takes the position we were offering smokers a psychological crutch, that it confused them and prevented them from quitting, 5,000 people a day were quitting. it just does not add up. does mr. mack know smoking was dangerous? let us turn to what we know about mr. mack. first w know stanley mack told us about the surgeon general's report. mrs. mack told us she was aware of the surgeon general's report. and that peter mack, jr. told us that he knew about the warnings. we were also told there were discussions in the mack family about whether or not they should all keep smoking. there cannot be any doubt that mr. mack, sr. was part of those discussions and thal he knew smoking was dangerous just like his family members did. mr. klaas told us about the surgeon general's report reaching japan. we also know that the military took on itself the obligation of making sure that our servicemen knew about the dangers. remember what mr. klaas told us? pretty interesting. he said look, in the military they were concerned about our health. they told us wha we needed to do and not to do to protect our health, and that was part of this whole process in which our military personnel were exposed to '64 surgeon general's reports. here's something kind of interesting. mrs. mack's testimony. mrs. mack's testimony. sh was asked about what peter mack, jr. said to his parents. she was asked: did he ever suggest to you or mr. mack that either of you ought to quit smoking? his answer was: yes. question: how frequently lee? often. and what was the reason he wanted you to quit smoking? health. so mrs. mack told us there was plenty in this case. frequently, often, told his father that he should quit smoking. and now we find ourselves, th plaintiffs here asking you to award them $5 million because his father did not listen to the advice he received from his son. that is really what this case boils down to. we heard that mr. mack -- stanley mack told us that he had been around mr. mack when the expressions coffin nails and cancer sticks were used, pretty clear. it does not get much clearer than that. i will not review all this. but one thing is for sure, that mr. mack received warnings from his employer. we all heard about the warnings he got at brasington cadillac. now, he was not there the full-time, maybe. it does not happen to be clear how long he was there, but what mr. lockleer told us is that he talked about the dangers of smoking and you need to quit smoking in employee meetings that mr. mack was at whether it was two years or six years, a little hard to tell, but no question it happened. dr. cummings told us that if someone smoked tw packs a day they would have been exposed to thousands of warnings a day -- thousands of warning a year. every time you pick up that pack, you pick it up 40 times a day, that is another quitting opportunity. every time you pick it up, you are seeing the warning. if you are a two pack a day smoker, you see it thousands of times a year. these are all the sources of warnings mr. mack got. it is absolutely clear he was warned and warned and warned. he lived in a world full of warnings. now, the important thing, though, is let us look at an instruction that you are going to get in this case. in your instruction for concealment, and you have a similar instruction for conspiracy or agreeing to conceal. here's what you are going to be told: concealment, it only provides -- the issue for your determination on plaintiffs claim for concealment is whether the concealment or omission of material information by r.j. reynolds was a legal cause of injury. then material fact is defined. and it says: to be a legal cause of mr. mack's injury, the concealed or omitted facts must have been unknown mr. mack. must have been unknown to mr. mack. because if the facts are already knew, the concealment cannot have been a legal cause of his injury, which makes sense because you cannot conceal information from somebody who already knows it. it cannot be the cause of his injury if you already knew it. so if you find mr. mack already knew smoking was dangerous, it could not have been the cause of his injury, so the proper verdict would be to check no on question 6 and 7, which are the questions that deal with concealment. when you get your verdict form you will see those are the questions that deal with concealment. okay. new topic. another one of plaintiffs claim was negligence. plaintiff has to prove that r.j. reynolds' negligence was a legal cause of mr. mack's injuries. let us take a look at plaintiffs case and what they have proven and what they have not proven. they tried to prove to you that somehow mr. mack was injured by advertising. the fact is cigarettes were advertised like other legal products during the years mr. mack was making smoking chok about whether to smoke or not in the 1930s and 40's. there is no evidence whatsoever that r.j. reynolds had any information about the dangers of smoking that they failed to put in advertisements. when you get back and look at the documents in this case, you are not going to see any documents from the 1930s or '40s demonstrating that r.j. reynolds knew something about the dangers of smokn that it failed to reveal in its advertising. it is just not there. so the advertising did not wrongfully cause him to start smoking. we asked every fact witness, do you know why mr. mack start smoking? everybody, mrs. mack, peter mack, stanley mack, the experts in this case, everybody said nobody knows why he started smoking. we asked them is there any evidence he started smoking specific brands because of advertising. everybody said no. there is -- none of them had any information he started smoking specific brands because of advertising. and then we asked mr. mack about conversations he had with his dad, a little bit more about conversations you had with your father. you do not know whether your father made any of his decisions about smoking cigarettes based on the information he heard from tobacco companies, do you? no, sir. remember, peter mack, jr. and peter mack, sr. had conversations about whether this lawsuit should be brought? during the course of those conversations, there was never any discussion about this topic? never any discussion about this topic. never any information that mr. mack had based any his decisions about smoking on advertising or statements made by the companies. so we asked him with respect to those general things, sir, during the course of those ten discussion, you do not have any memory of talking to your father about anything that r.j. reynolds did wrong, do you, sir? answer: i cannot say that specifically, no. so they had ten meetings about whether to bring this lawsuit, but mr. mack, sr. apparently never told anybody anything about what he thought r.j. reynolds did wrong. like i said before, there is this case about corporate conduct, what the companies did. we have the engle findings. they are what they are. we are not here to dispute the engle findings, but they cannot link those findings to mr. mack, which is what the whole purpose of this lawsuit was. there just is not any evidence of linking those findings to mr. mack, which is what this is all about. we asked mrs. mack whether mr. mack ever sai tobacco companies did something to keep him from quitting. he never said that. we asked every witness whether they had any information that mr. mack was ever exposed to any of those things that plaintiffs spent a couple days talking to you about with respect to conduct of the companies, beginning with the frank statement and ending with the statements by r.j. reynolds, you know the answ to everyone of those was no. there was no evidenc in this case linking any of that conduct to mr. mack. remember, what we are talking about is the legal causation, proving, linking the conduct of the companies to mr. mack's injury. it is just not there. they got the wrong plaintiff. they got the wrong plaintiff. this is not the plaintiff that heard and relied on statements by the tobacco companies in making his decisions. there is no evidence of that. they have not been able to prove it to you. exact points i've been making, this whole psychological crutch issue, we will review all this. there is just no evidence of it. if you are not convinced that the plaintiffs have met their burden of proof to prove to you the negligence of the company had a direct, natural sequential impact on mr. mack in a substantial way so you can say but for that conduct he would not have smoked and would not have been injured, then the proper verdict in this case on question number 4 with respect to negligence would be no. i have 40 left. thank you. does that sound about right, your honor? i should ask you actually. the court: she is correct. mr. furr: thank you. okay. let us talk about the product defect thing, because you heard another one of plaintiff's theories in this case is that sale of a defective cigarette was the legal cause of mr. mack's injuries. well, let us talk about cigarettes for a little bit because we asked dr. cummings about all these things, and everything on this board is something that dr. cummings told us. he told us that cigarettes are dangerous and addictive by virtue of the fact they burn tobacco. if you burn tobacco, what is going to happen? numb one, you are going to get nicotine in smoke because it occurs naturally. number two you are going to get carcinogens in smoke. when you burn tobacco leaf they produce chemicals including carcinogens. nicotine is not something the tobacco companies put in, the carcinogens are not something the tobacco companies put in. that is the inherent nature of cigarettes. dr. cummings also told you cigarettes cannot be made safe. they just cannot be made safe. he had a suggestion which was take out all the nicotine. we are going to talk about that next, i promise you. but the bottom line is that cigarettes are basically an agricultural product. they are made out of tobacco leaves primarily. tobacco has nicotine in it. when you burn tobacco you produce carcinogens. nobody knows how to take it out, nobody knows how to make it safe. that is just the nature of the product. it is a legal product, it carries a warning, it is inherently dangerous and cigarette. that is the nature of the cigarette that our society has decided should be allowed to be sole to adults as long as it carries the warning. well, one thing dr. cummings said and, again, at the start of this case you heard a lot from the plaintiffs about the right thing -- what we did wrong, the right thing to have done was to take out the nicotine. you heard a whole lot about that in the start of this case. take out the nicotine, make cigarettes not addictive, make cigarettes safer. you had the ability to take out nicotine but you did not do it when you should have. that is what you heard a whole lot the first couple days of this case. you did not hear it mentioned this morning. you did not hear it mentioned another time, and you all know why that is. because they put that evidence on through testimony by dr. cummings. but apparently dr. cummings had been lying about what he had saic on this very same subject in another case, and i cross-examined him about his testimony in the year 2000 in the neary (phonetic), and here's what dr. cummings had to admit to us that he previously testified under oath in another tobacco trial: he testified that previously he did not advocate reducing nicotine in cigarettes. in fact, he testified previously that maybe the right way to make cigarettes safer was to increase nicotine. to increase nicotine. he told us that it is not feasible to eliminate nicotine from cigarettes, and as long as other companies were selling cigarettes with nicotine, a nicotine-free product would not succeed commercially. would not succeed commercially. so one case dr. cummings says take all out, another case he says maybe you should put more in, it is not feasible, so perhaps that is why the plaintiffs have abandoned that theory. but there may be another reason, because then dr. werner came and took the stand and we asked hi this question: smoking is more complex than just simply the idea of someone wanting to get nicotine, fair enough? answer: yes, absolutely. dr. werner, would not you agree that even low or no nicotine cigarettes can be addictive? yes, absolutely. so much for the plaintiffs theory that what we did wrong was fail to take out the nicotine. neither dr. cummings nor dr. werner supported the theory when they were cross-examined. so what die they do? they moved to their next theory, kind of like they did with addiction, when they ran into an evidentiary dead-end, when their legal theory did not fit what was coming out of that witness stand, they moved to their next theory on addiction, causation. what was their next theory? well, the thing you did wrong was put filters on those cigarettes and create light cigarettes and convince people to smoke those cigarettes. that was the next thing they tried to do. where does that information come from? wher did the recommendation to put filters on cigarettes and for smokers to switch to filtered cigarettes come from? it came from the surgeon general, the american cancer society, from public health authorities. mr. smith: can we approach, your honor? (a sidebar conference was held outside the hearing of the jury as follows:) mr. smith: your honor, again, i apologize to counsel and to this court, but he has been making a argument regarding we have to prove the defectiveness. there is absolutely no question we do not have to prove the defect. he has -- he said absolutely. he indicated we have the burden of proving the defect. the instruction speaks to itself and it is binding. if they are in the class, we do not have to prove any of the defect. mr. furr: your honor, this is completely a mischaracterization. i said they have to prove the detective was a legal cause. that is obviously what they have to prove. that is what the instruction says. number two, this is part of my punitive damages defense. mr. smith: that is why i allowed all the conversation about tobacco, but when he starts saying we did not -- or implying we did not prove the defect, he cannot, your honor, suggest we have to prove the defect. there is a huge difference. the court: i agree. objection sustained. move on. (the sidebar conference was concluded, and the following proceedings were held:) mr. furr: can i continue, your honor? the court: yes, sir. mr. furr: one of the things you heard was th: what we did wrong we should be punished for was producing filtered cigarettes and light cigarettes. here's where the recommendation to do that cam from. let us look at what the '75 surgeon general report said: smokers of filtered cigarettes have been shown to have a lower risk of developing lung cancer than smokers of nonfiltered cigarettes. but the risk remains well above that for nonsmokers. the surgeon general has concluded that filtered cigarettes are a better thing. same thing in '79. there is a substantial decrease in the risk of developing cancer of the larynx with long-term use of filtered cigarettes compared with the use of nonfiltered cigarettes. ex-smokers after ten years of cessation have mortality rates which approximate those of nonsmokers. does the surgeon general stop there? no. here's what the surgeon general's says in '81: smokers who are unwilling or yet unable to quit are well advised to switch to cigarettes having less tar and nicotine, provided they do not increase their smoking or change their smoking in other ways. the surgeon general is telling smokers to switch to filtered and light cigarettes, and now they come here and say we should be punished for producing those cigarettes, just like we should be punished for not taking the nicotine out of cigarettes even though dr. cummings at one point said we should pi more nicotine in. we cannot win no matter what we do. so they argue to you that type of conduct is wrong and bears punishment. let us take a quick look at who else was saying low tar and light cigarettes were better. (a video clip was played and transcribed by the court reporter to the best of her ability as follows:) "the announcer: cancer experts said today the new low tar and low nicotine cigarettes are safer than the regular cigarettes, although people who smoke these cigarettes still have far higher death rates than people who do not smoke at all. this news comes at a time when americans are smok more cigarettes, more than 600 billion of them last year. brian ross has more on the story. announcer: low tar nicotine cigarettes not only account for 11 percent of all the cigarette smoke in the country, and sales have grown in the belief that such brands are less likely to cause lung cancer and heart disease. the american cancer society says today's report is the first (inaudible) proof that low tar and nicotine cigarettes are safer. announcer: the problem with nicotine is it is being further released, and it is far better that people do not smoke. but if they are going to smoke, as many people (inaudible) cigarettes with low tar and nicotine than higher tar and nicotine. i'm hoping that people who never smoke these days, (inaudible) low tar and nicotine cigarettes, by the time they reach 40, 50, 60, that they will not have a death rate of cigarette smokers of my generation. announcer: a cancer society report is based o a 12-year study of tens of thousands of smokers. low tar and nicotine cigarette users had a 26 percent less chance of lung cancer, and a 14 percent less chance of heart disease than those who smoked high tar and nicotine cigarettes. but the study also found smokers of low tar and nicotine cigarettes had definitely much higher than those who do not smoke at all. brian ross, nbc news, new york." (video clip ended.) mr. furr: let us just be straight-forward about what is going on. plaintiffs have a big game of heads we win, tails we lose going on. take the nicotine out, increase the nicotine. develop filtered light cigarettes, do not develop filtered light cigarettes. heads they win, tails we lose. that is what is going on. when you get to the verdict question number 5, if you find that plaintiffs have failed to prove to you the selling of cigarettes, the selling of a defective and a reasonably dangerous product by r.j. reynolds was the legal cause of mr. mack's injuries, if they failed to prove that to you, then the right verdict would be no. if you get to this point in the verdict form and you checked no for questions 4, 5, 6, and 7, again, your job is over. the case is over you do not proceed any further, you sign the verdict form, and you return a verdict. but if you checked -- if you found mr. mack to be a class member and you checked yes for one of those questions, then you will get to question 8, which has to do with you assigning fault for mr. mack's injuries to mr. mack and to r.j. reynolds. this is the part where you would be asked to apportion fault. so let me address that issue with you. first you will see in your instruction that this is not sort of a generalized decision by you as to whether or not the companies did things bad that you do not like or that this generalized conduct of the perfect plan, the stuff i put up first, all the things the company did, it is not about that. it is only about apportioning fault to r.j. reynolds for conduct of reynolds that was a legal cause, a legal cause of mr. mack's injury. that is what you are to weigh here. you are to weigh the conduct of reynolds that was a legal cause for mr. mack's injuries against his actions that the plaintiffs have admitted were a legal cause of his injuries. let us look at some of the evidence. first, dr. cummings. dr. cummings. i asked him let me make sure, though, that before we get there that the jury understands what your opinions are, sir. is not it true that your view is that a smoker is fully responsible for making the choice to quit, fully responsible? dr. cummings answer was yes. you have heard the plaintiffs admit that mr. mack was negligent and that his negligence was a legal cause of his own injuries, that is in your instruction form. what does that mean? what does that mean. i suggest to you that means that mr. mack knew that smoking was dangerous, he continued to smoke that mr. mack had the ability to quit smoking earlier, and that mr. mack's choices were the legal cause of his own injuries because. if those three conditions were not satisfied, the plaintiffs would have never made that admission. they would have never made the admission in this case he was the legal cause of his own injuries if he did not know that smoking was dangerous. they would never adn he was the legal cause of his own injuries if he did not have the ability to quit sooner, that would not make any sense. they would never make t admission he was the legal cause of his own injuries if they were not his own choices they were the legal cause of his own injuries. so when you consider how to weigh the plaintiffs admission i suggest to you you might want to think a little bit through what, what does that admission mean. i believe it means all instances. well, you heard this morning the plaintiffs have urged upon you the position that you assign mr. mack 25 percent fault. 25 percent fault. let us talk about whether that is a fair and just thing to do. we know the decision to begin was one hundred percent his decision. we know the decision to become a regular smoker was one hundred percent his decision. we know the decision as to whether or not to try to quit smoking was one hundred percent his decision. the plaintiffs experts, paid witnesses admitted all those things. we know plaintiffs have admitted that mr. mack's own negligence was a legal cause of his injuries. does that really add up to only percent? does that really add up to only 25 percent? think about this. you are being asked here to weigh the contribution of the parties to mr. mack's injuries. look at what we have on this side of the scale: his choice to begin, his choice to continue, his choice to smoke for about 30 years after everybody knew, his choice to smoke for 40 years even though he lived in a world full of warnings including lately on every pack of cigarettes that he picked up, his choice to smoke for about 40 years before h made that first serious quit attempt where he was determined to quit. we talked about the decision to try to quit was one hundred percent his. he chose never to ask his family and friends for help quitting, which is what we know that motivated people do when they want help. he chos never to seek medical assistance to help him quit. he chose never to ask anyone for assistance in quitting. he we know that he ignored quitting opportunities. every time he received information about the dangers of smoking, it was, in, fact a quitting opportunity. it was a reminder of what he was doing. he had quitting opportunities when he got warnings from the military, his family, the surgeon general, his boss at brasington cadillac and, of course, the media like the rest of us, dr. cummings explained to you that everybody heart and knew by 1954. every time he received information like that it was not an effective quitting opportunity. you heard that he had the ability to quit with one hundred percent certainty, the ability to quit, and he simply chose never to throw away those cigarettes for 40 years because he chose the taste and what he valued in cigarettes over the risk that he was taking. he chose the pleasures he got out of smoking over the risk he knew he was taking. he chose to smoke, even though the plaintiffs experts admitted he could have quit, he could have quit sooner and prevented any health problems he did develop. that is what is on that side of the scale, that and the plaintiffs admission. does that really add up to 25 percent? does that really add up to 25 percent? you know our position is that he was one hundred percent responsible for his choices, because only mr. mack had the ability to prevent his own injuries. if he had a smoking-related disease, the only way it could have been prevented was by quitting. only he could make the choice to quit. only he could make the serious quit attempt. he ha complete and total control of the critical decision in this case, which was whether to quit smoking or not. that was one hundred percent his control. there was nothing r.j. reynolds could do to affect that decision. so, you know it is our position that even if you get to this decision, even if you have found the other findings in favor of plaintiff, that the proper answer on this decision is that mr. mack wa one hundred percent responsible for his choices. one hundred percent. the plaintiffs have asked you for 25 percent. what is really going on here is that is a -that is a tactical -- that is a tactic they are taking in this case. they are asking you for 25 percent thinking you will reach some compromise and only assign maybe fifty percent or something like that. that is sort of they are bidding against what the evidence shows. the evidence shows that he had one hundred percent of his control. they have taken the tactic of asking for 25 percent fault under the hopes you will compromise and give him 50 percen fault. that is what is going on here. let me turn to the next question, which is if you find there is fault on behalf of reynolds then you will get to the damages questions. the damages question. very important to understand this damage question, i believe. first, it is important to understand what mr. mack is not asking for. you have an instruction that will tell you what he is asking for. it is important to understand this $5 million they are asking for, $5 million is not a claim for lost wages. there is no claim for that. there is not a claim for medical bills. i know these gentlemen here miss their father. i know it was painful for them to loose their father. i'm one hundred percent certain they are sincere when they expressed their pain to you. their pain is not at issue. the only pain and suffering in this case is mr. mack's pain and suffering. you know it is not a claim for wrongful death. its how not a claim by mrs. mack that she lost the companionship of her husband. that is not a claim that is being made. it is not a claim for any health condition other than pain and suffering related to mr. mack's laryngeal cancer and/or copd, if you those conditions to be caused by smoking. that is the only claim for damages that the plaintiffs are offering to you in support of this $5 million verdict. like i said that is the claim they are asking for $5 million for. well, your instructions will provide that you are to award damages that are fair and just. i'm not going to suggest an amount to you. i'm not like mr. bigger saying it is your discretion, it is your discretion, by the way how about $5 million. i'm not going to do that. what i'm going to do is review the facts that occurred in mr. mack's life that you will be awarding damages for, and i will leave it to your discretion, because it is your discretion. one of the claims you might award damage for i laryngeal cancer, so let us make sure we know what the facts are we know with respect to any pain and suffering mr. mack incurred because of laryngeal cancer. we know he is 74 years old when he was diagnosed. it was caught early. it did not require surgery. i'm sure radiation therapy was not a pleasant thing, not something pleasant, but look at what we know about the radiation treatments he go he got 28 treatments that lasted about two minutes each for a total of about an hour of radiation therapy as a result of this disease. he was cured. it never came back. it never came back. the family has said that his voice changed, but the medical reports do not reflect that. the medical reports state there were no permanent changes to his voice. the family claims that his pain and suffering resulted in difficulty swallowing, but the fact of the matter is he kept gaining weight after his disease. the bottom line is it was a five-week experience with minimal, if any, effects, and it never recurred, and you will have to decide whether or not that is the type of claim that merits $5 million? when you consider the copd claim, i'm going to ask you to take a look at the instruction you have on page 19 of your instructions entitled: other contributing causes of damages. the instruction you will get from the court is as follows: if you decide mr. mack was injured by laryngeal cancer and/or copd caused by r.j. reynolds tobacco compan and was also injured by another illness, then you should try to separate the damages caused by either laryngeal cancer and/or copd caused by r.j. reynold from other illnesses, and award mr. mack only for those damages caused by r.j. reynolds tobacco company. so on this claim of shortness of breath related to copd, the task before you is going to be to decide what part of that shortness of breath was caused by copd and what part was caused by other illnesses, and award damages only, only for the part caused by copd. well we brought dr. andrews in here yesterday. dr. andrews explained to you the factors that were contributing to mr. mack's breathing problems. he told you that his morbid obesity, his sleep apnea, his pickwickian syndrome, hypoventilation syndrome, his heart disease, receiving a pacemaker, his cardiomyopathy, his pulmonary hypertension, his gerd, his renal failure, his advanced age, his deconditioning and his lung cancer with pleural effusions were all contributing to his shortness of breath, and they come in here and ask you to award them $5 million for mr. mack's medical condition that had all of these other diseases contributing to it. they showed you that video in the first part of the trial where mr. mack, of course, looked very sympathetic. he was on his death bed. he was two weeks from dying from lung cancer. he was very sympathetic, he was short of breath, and they showed you that video in an effort to get you to award them damages for that condition. but what was going on in that period of time? why did mr. mack look so sick? dr. andrews explained that to you yesterday. he developed a pleural effusion that caused fluid. the poor man was trying to breathe with two gallons of fluid in his chest. two gallons of fluid caused by the golf ball size lung cancer that is not attributed to smoking. of course he had a difficult time breathing. who would not have a difficult time breathing with two gallons of fluid in their chest. but they asked you to award him $5 million for cop you have to ask your conscious whether that is the right thing to do or not. but that was not the end of the story. that video you saw reflected -- god bless him. mr. mack was just worn out. he had all these diseases. he was 85 years old. look at what dr. andrews told us he had been through before that video was shot. when he is 78 years old he had to stop working to care for his wife, not because of copd, by the way. i think we finally got that clarified. when he was 84 years old mr. mack had to begin sleeping upright in a chair because of his obesity and obstructive sleep apnea, not because of his copd. dr. andrews explained when he was 84 years old mr. mack was hospitalized and given a pacemaker f his history of heart problems, not because of copd. when he was nearly 85 years old he began to require home health care because his obesity prevented him from caring for leg wounds caused by peripheral vascular disease, not caused from copd. when he was nearly 86 years old we talked about how the lung cancer began affecting his ability to breathe. i believe i heard mr. bigger say this morning in recognition of all this that you may not really want to award them any damages for the last couple years of his life because of all the other diseases he was having causing his shortness of breath. that was basically an admission mr. bigger made this morning. here's where you come out. this is in your discretion. if you award damages, they have to be fair and just. you have to decide whether it is fair to show you a video of mr. mack on his death bed an suggest to you that his frail state was attributed solely to his copd. you have to decide whether it was fair to suggest to you that his breathing problems that he experienced in the 1980s as he was -- excuse me, in the 2000s as he was in his 80's were attributed to copd and, in fact, he had all of these other conditions going on. that is a decision that is completely in your discretion, and i'm not going to suggest a number to you. another very important topic, though, that i do need to discussion, and that is this topic of punitive damages. because in addition to asking you for $5 million, what the plaintiffs want to do is ask you for additional damages unrelated to mr. mack's pain and suffering, additional damages unrelated to pain and suffering. not only do they want $5 million, they want you to answer this question about punitive damages so we can come bac here and have another phase of this trial next week where they can ask you for additional damages unrelated to his pain and suffering. these are damages that can be awarded only to mr. mack's estate. like i said, they are not designed to compensate the plaintiff. if you award damages today on these other claims, your obligation will be to fully and justly compensate the plaintiff for whatever losses he had if it was found to be proven the fault of r.j. reynolds. so that will be done. you will have compensated plaintiffs, but they wan you to come back next week so they can ask you fo: more money because -- for punitive damages. well, again, you will see that the engle findings do not establish plaintiffs are entitled to punitive damages. this is not what this is about. if you get to punitive damages, you will see first plaintiffs have a different burden of proof. now the burden of proof becomes clear and convincing. they must convince you that -- i shoul say clear and convincing standard is defined in youi instructions in this way: in contrast, clear and convincing evidence is evidence that is precise, explicit, lacking in confusion, and of such weight that it produces a firm belief or conviction without hesitation about the matter at issue. so they have to convince you so thoroughly that you have no hesitation, no hesitation about whether additional damages should be awarded. and what they are going to try to convince you of is that the company behaved in a way that merits punitive damages. first of all, i'm not challenging the engle findings in any way. that is not the purpose of this trial. obviously the companies have not been perfect. but you have the engle findings, you have the findings of another jury about prior conduct, but now this is a different issue, because what the plaintiffs are claiming is that not only the companies do the things the engle findings relate to, but that the companies acted with a reckless disregard of human life, that they were consciously indifferent to the consequences, that there was an entire lack of care and that their conduct was equivalent to an intentional violation of those rights. you will see this standard set out for you on page 20 of your instructions which is your punitive damages instructions. they are going to try to prove to you this is the way the company acted, an they are going to try to prove to you this by a clear and convincing standard, in other words, so thoroughly that you have no hesitation after you consider the evidence. well, let us look at the evidence as to whether or not punitive damages is merited. whether punitive damages is merited. first let us think about the ctr and whether or not reynolds should be punished for ctr. reynolds funded $500 million of research. you were told this morning this is a public relations ploy, $500 million in research? by the way, every single one of these admissions, straight from dr. cummings. reynolds funded $500 million of research, there were thousands of studies published. the surgeon generals of the united states has relied on that research about reaching the conclusions about the dangers of smoking. you heard that ctr funded the study in 1963, do you remember that? in 1963, ctr funded a study which included that smoking is addictive and that was published in the peer review literature 25 years before the surgeon general of the united states concluded smoking was addicted. is that conduct that should be punished? remember, the ctr is funded by the tobacco companies. all the tobacco companies contribute money to fund ctr. ctr then uses that money to fun scientific research, including scientific research on smoking and health, about the addictive properties of tobacco. that is what was going on. is that something the companies should be punished for doing? let us not stop there. larson, haag and silvette, the green monster and its cousins or whatever. you heard about these volumes. again, funded by ctr with money from t tobacco companies, including r.j. reynolds and the american tobacco company. 20,000 scientific articles reviewed and abstracted in these volumes. the surgeon general of the united states when they began their project in 1963, they ctr submitted these volumes to them, at that time only the green one existed, and it was so thorough and so comprehensive about the dangers of smoking that the surgeon general used it as the sole resource for all studies prior to 1958, and only had to update research from 1958 on. it was, r.j. reynolds, american brown & williamson through the ctr wh funded larson haag and silvette who funded researc for the surgeon general report. is that conduct that should be punished? does that mean this plaintiff should be awarded money in addition to compensatory damages? by the way, this is in evidence. you can look at the larson haag and silvette table of contents. you will see the larson haag and silvette includes chapters on laryngeal cancer, heart disease, addiction, and copd. it does not stop there. the 1964 report included evidence that part of the report itself where the tobacco companies contributed directly to the surgeon general, and directly provided information to the surgeon general that was used by the surgeon general in reaching conclusions. should that be punished? should that be punished? rjr worked to make cigarettes safer. you heard dr. cummings tell you all the way back in the 1950s, dr. rodgman was trying to take carcinogens out of cigarettes but he just could not do it because there was so many, and dr. cummings told you nobody toda still knows how to do it. you heard dr. cummings also tell you for a ten-year period, ten years from 1968 to 1978, r.j. reynolds through dr. rodgman and dr. sinken (phonetic) at the direction of the president of the company worked with and cooperated for ten years with the federal government, the national cancer institute, tobacco working group, to try to develop safer cigarettes. they tried everything under the sun, and they finally quit because they could not find a way to make cigarettes safer. is that conduct that should be punished? does reynolds need to be punished to put it under control? is reynolds an out of control company that needs punishment to regulate? well, when mr. bigger asked dr. cummings whether r.j. reynolds is regulated, here's what he told you. he told you that cigarette advertising and marketing are regulated; that cigarettes carry warning labels; that cigarettes are taxed; that the food and drug administration has authority over wha can be put in cigarettes and that the government regulates where a person can smoke. are punitive damages needed to control a rogue industry that is out of control and has nobody keeping an eye on it? this is what dr. cummings told you. it does not end there. you heard some of this from mr. bigger this morning. cigarettes have carried warnings labels since 1966. you heard mr. bigger tell you this is not disputed in any way the danger of smoking for over decade. in fact, they maintain a website to warning smokers about the dangers of smoking. all these documents you saw in this case came from the files of r.j. reynolds. those documents are not being concealed. they are available to the plaintiffs. you are being asked to punish a company in a case where mr. mack last smoked an r.j. reynold: cigarette over 30 years ago, 30 years ago, and they are asking you not only for $5 million, but for additional money to punish the company. the court: three minutes. mr. furr: three minutes, thank you. let me suggest to you when you get to the punitive damages question, the right answer is to check no, and put an end to this case. put an end to this case. there is no second phase of this trial. mr. mack had his day in court, he would hav had his opportunity to prove to you -- to prove to you the compensatory damages at some level are deserving if that is what you conclude, but that should be the end of this case. let us think about what a plaintiffs verdict in this case really means, because your verdict is going to send a message. your verdict is going to send a message. first question: would a verdict for the plaintiff in this case make smokers aware of anything they do not already know? would it make cigarettes safer? would it have an impact on whether other people choose to smoke? would it decrease the number of people who smoke cigarettes would it improve public health? a verdict in this case is not going to do any of those things. it is not going to do any of those things. that is not what this case is about. it is simply a case for money. on the other hand, let us think about the other message that a verdict for the plaintiff in this case would send: a verdict for the plaintiff would send a message that it is okay to engage in no risky behavior and then blame others. that would be the message of a plaintiffs verdict. a plaintiffs verdict would send a message that it is okay to knowingly ignore safety warnings for decades and then blame others. a verdict for the plaintiff would send a message that you can make choices without personal responsibility with those choices. that is not what we teach our children, that is not what we expect of ourselves, it is not what we expect of our family members, and that is certainly not the way we hope you would act. personal responsibility is what this case is all about. you know, like i said at the beginning, if we had a plaintiff in this case who did not know smoking was dangerous, who relied on the tobacco companies who was misled and confused by the tobacco companies, who was unable to quit, who was cut dow in the very prime of life, that would be a different case, but that is not what we have. we have the case of peter mack, sr., a man who knew that smoking wa dangerous, had the ability to quit, chose to keep smoking for 30 years anyway, who never relied on anything that the tobacco companies did, and finally after living a long, full life, wore out, like i hope all of us get to live to the ripe age of 85 or 86.