14 mr. freidin: good morning. on behalf of the marotta family, and certainly our team and everybody, and all the lawyers on both sides, thank you for being here, for your sacrifice. it is not that often that any of us get a chance to participate in the american system of democracy. we do go vote. when we vote for president or whatever it is, we are one of millions of votes, and today you sit as part of the function of this democracy, and i cannot -- i think, at this point, you recognize the importance of this case and the significance of it. this is a case where, ironically, in the last or second to last witness that r.j. reynolds put on, dr. benowitz, it kind of explains to you or demonstrates what we are dealing with here. the witness they put on mentioned that between 400 and 450,000 people die from cigarette smoking lung cancer cases and cigarette smoking per year. that is not to mention the untold misery and illness and costs associated with that. that came from a witness they put on. there is no dispute about that number, but that just tells you what we are dealing with here and how important this is. now, there is plenty of room for emotions ranging from sympathy to anger to passion. i'm going to try to avoid all of that. it is really not something that we want to do. we could, but what we want to do is try to talk to you about the law and the evidence and common sense. that is what really counts, and there is a lot, as they say, that people can get worked up over, but your job is to deal with the law and the evidence and common sense, and that is what i want to address. the first thing that you are going to be asked is whether or not -- you are going to have two questions, and i'll talk about them in some detail, and what i'm going to do is just talk about the first two questions, and mr. alvarez is going to talk about the next nine, so i'm going to be shorter than him. but those two questions really relate to class membership, as you have heard. and class membership is basically whether or not the marottas are entitled to be in the class and whether or not the key in the door opens and they can step in here and have their case heard on the merits. that is what it is about. of course, reynolds' position is that the key does not fit and they should not have their case heard on the merits. it should be stopped right here in the first two questions on class membership. when you think about the class membership issues, roughly, there are two questions. one is whether or not this is a smoking-related illness and whether or not mr. marotta was addicted to smoking. we know nicotine is in there and we know that nicotine is addictive, and we know lung cancer comes from cigarettes. if those two things are true, they are class members. i think class membership probably should be denied to somebody who hardly ever smoked perhaps. should be denied to somebody who has a disease that is not -- i learned a latin term in this case, sine qua non; meaning the defining or most important tobacco-related or cigarette smoking disease known throughout the world, lung cancer. and so we are dealing with a heavy smoker for a lifetime who gets lung cancer, and the question for you first is: does this family belong in the class? are they allowed to come into the courtroom and have this case heard on the merits? and that is what i believe the evidence will show quite, quite powerfully, quite simply, and that is what i want to talk to you about in my time. really, what i want to also start to say, the marottas have a right to be here. that really means that they are a member of the class, and i'm going to talk about that. i think we have one that says, what this is not about. class membership is not about fault, because fault comes in the later questions. that was a lot that the judge read to you and -- but you can see that the fault questions and the comparative fault and whether somebody should have or -- should have done this or should have not done that is later. so class membership is not about fault. it is also not about choice, which you will hear i think r.j. reynolds will say, oh, it is all about choice, but it is not. you will hear from the court or you have heard some of the instructions -- i do not think you have heard the word "choice" in any of the instructions that he gave you. and in particular -- you can talk about choice when you get to the other questions. but in this part, this is a very simple clinical distillation of whether or not the marottas belong in the class and whether they are entitled to their day in court. everybody in america is entitled to their day in court. r.j. reynolds is entitled to be here and say that he is not -- they are not members of the class. however skimpy i think or anyone might think or whatever, everybody is entitled to be in court. so let us see if the keys fit and let us see what the evidence was. you had arguments -- we know he died from lung cancer. there is no dispute about that. but somehow or other, certain things crept into this case. you heard about asbestosis, and i think a reasonable person might think, well, i'm sure when the reynolds' case comes up, we are going to hear more about asbestosis and asbestos, but really there was nothing. dr. shmookler even testified, no, i did not see any asbestos on the slides. you heard about family history. and when you break it down, the only family history is that his parents had lung cancer and they were smokers. so maybe that set the table for this in some way or another, but it is really not relevant. he was an otherwise healthy man. there is no other disease process here. he was 46 and he got lung cancer. but the medical records -- and i'm sure you know you would have heard if he had some other underlying disease process, he had nothing. until this was discovered, he was in good health. now, you hear that -- you will hear, perhaps, it is about a choice, but again, as i said, that comes later. but the main defense on number one is, this is bac. so let us look at, first of all -- when i say choice is not involved, that says -- that talks about legal cause. you can read that over a hundred times. you are not going to see the word "choice" in there. mr. alvarez is going to address that part of this in a little more detail than i am. but i'll just say, there is nothing about choice, and i'm going to come back to that when i get to the addiction question. but it says, "addiction is the legal cause if it directly and in natural continuous sequence produces or contributes substantially to producing the loss, injury, or damage," and there is nothing about someone's choice. so let us go to the next. this is the law. you heard it a few times from the judge. we have to prove our case or our part of our case by the greater weight of the evidence, and that is liking to a seesaw or scales of justice, if you can show that, please. we have to prove 51 percent. you have heard a few times, i think, that we do not have to prove our case beyond a reasonable doubt. that is the criminal thing. we hear it on the csi shows and all that. that is not what a civil case is. it will change in some of the later questions, but i'm not talking about those right now. those scales have to tip one way or another. if they tip even the slightest way in our direction, then we prevail on greater weight of the evidence. the judge will tell you it means the more persuasive and convincing force and effect of the evidence when weighed against the other side's evidence. it means also, and you heard the expression used in the courtroom several times with some of the witnesses, "more likely than not." you can say 51 percent is more likely than not. but, really, it is basically just a feeling that you have, which is a little stronger. i'm going to go through what i think is the evidence that you have seen and talk about how these scales should be balanced. let us start with that question. that is really the question that you are going to be answering, number one: was phil's cancer caused by smoking cigarettes? let us go to the first thing. going in. and these are the things that happened right in front of you. i did not pull that big thing over here because it always gets in my way. but this is what i wrote down when i asked dr. fleiter about, what are the odds going in statistically of which is more likely, and i thought it was clever to bring out the pennies, i do not know. there were only two pennies. and really, i could not cut one in half, so there is one-and-a-half pennies out of a hundred. that is the odds that they are telling you favor them. just on this alone, on these numbers alone, this is way, way, way more than likely, way more than 51 percent. if no one testified, this would be the odds, ninety percent are smoking related and 1.5 percent are bac. those are overwhelming odds that it is not bac. so let us put that on the scale. now, there is somebody who testified in this case that you did not meet. his record is in evidence, dr. goscin. dr. goscin, you may not remember him because he was not here, but he wrote a report, a pathology report when he was taking care of -- looking at these slides and advising the doctors for phil marotta when he came in with a terrible disease. and he wrote down that it was, in essence, the kind of cells that are smoking diseases. there is no dispute about that. at that time, he was advising the doctors and he was advising the family and he was advising phil, who had a fatal disease, what he had, and he wrote down large cell, which is not bac. that is probably, of all the things i can tell you, if we just used that alone and put in no evidence of experts, hired nobody to come in, that alone would be the most compelling single fact, because he had no ax to grind, he had no interest in any of this, has no idea this is occurring. he wrote it in the context of doing the best medical care for this family and for this man and for the doctors who sent him the slides, and that alone. but it gets stronger and stronger. so we felt we should bring in a treating doctor, an oncologist. we brought in dr. villa. dr. villa, if you recall, was harvard medical and had six board-certifications, including oncology and pathology. he actually not only looks at slides but he treats patients with lung cancer, and he said, i'm one hundred percent sure this is smoking related. and i have this which was in his handwriting. i said, would you step down, please, and write the reasons why you believe this is smoking related. and this is his handwriting. i do not have handwriting like this. you have seen what mine looks like. first, the overwhelming smoking history. i think the next thing it says is a superior vena cava syndrome, which is how, classically, smoking tumors present and bac does not. he also said -- and then he also said the presentation, radiation therapy, the way it reacted to radiation therapy, the way it reacted to chemotherapy, the fact that he was gone in six to eight months, very atypical for bac, because the prognosis is much longer. i want to talk about that in a second when we get to that article i was trying to ask dr. shmookler about. and metastasis to the brain, bac does not typically metastasize, and to the bones. so this is dr. villa. now, you can say, okay, what did the oncologist, clinician for reynolds say? i'm trying to remember. well, i think it is because nobody came in. you wonder why would not they bring in somebody to contest that? mr. belasic: objection, your honor. the court: overruled. mr. freidin: he could not find anybody, if they could. so you are being asked to decide this -- we bring in a very highly qualified, harvard educated, six boarded very, very strong witness, who also said he read the slides and he said they were smoking related. then we go to dr. fleiter. dr. fleiter also said, i'm a hundred percent sure -- now, everybody remembers dr. fleiter, because he liked to talk about the animals, this is a giraffe, this is an elephant, this cell is this, and apples. dr. fleiter is one of the most renown lung pathologists in the world. he received slides from all over the world. he writes and edits and reviews journals from the best journals in the world and is considered one of the world's leading experts at one of the leading institutions in lung pathology in which they teach, professor fleiter. he said, i'm one hundred percent sure there is no bac here, none. same thing that dr. villa said. same thing that dr. goscin essentially said. and we start with ninety percent versus 1.5 percent. let us put some of that -- i left out probably the most important thing, which is the common sense of this. the smoking history is overwhelming. this is somebody who started at 12 years old and smoked until he was 47, 35 years of smoking, one, one-and-a-half, two, two-and-a-half, three, maybe four, who knows, packs a day, nobody really counted except him. and we heard that people tend to underestimate. but we have two to three packs a day he tells his doctors when he goes in for his final assessment. at this point, we know it is at least two to three packs. that is essentially an overwhelming smoking history with the cancer most highly associated with smoking, lung cancer. that is, by the way, something like 4- to 600,000 cigarettes in his lifetime and it is something like 4 to 6 million puffs of nicotine and of tar and the things that come with it. those are staggering numbers. that is what we have on this side of the scale. over here, we have dr. shmookler. you have to wonder a couple of things about dr. shmookler, who has not done anything in lung pathology since he was a general pathologist. he is not written. he is not taught. he is not invited to speak. in the last 13 years, he is not done anything in his field really, and the last time he saw a bac was at least five years ago. and you have to ask the question why dr. shmookler, why not find a lung pathologist. it is odd. how do they reach out to him. it is odd that -- these dates come up in terms of the disclosure versus when he saw the slide. so let me move to the next question because i think we can answer that one yes pretty easily. the next question is: was phil marotta addicted? and i want to go through those, please. let us just -- robert, if you might, let us put those up. again, the charge you are going to get is whether there is a straight path between the smoking and the addiction and his death, and i do not think anyone could make any other argument except nicotine was addictive. he was highly addicted, severely addicted, and you can see the direct chain. let us go to -- and that is the surgeon general's view of it. it is also -- you do not see the word "choice" in either of those diagrams. you see a straight line between nicotine addiction, the changes, and the lung cancer. (at this time, a video was played for the court and taken down to the best of the court reporter's ability:) "we should also give priority to the one addiction, tobacco addiction, that is killing more than 300,000 americans each year." (end of video.) mr. freidin: we have another slide from dr. koop. (at this time, a video was played for the court and taken down to the best of the court reporter's ability:) "what you do say to the tobacco institute which said in a statement today that smoking is a personal choice which can be stopped if and when a person decides to do so? "well, ask the 43 million people who smoke in this country whether they can stop if they want to, and you will find that 85 percent of them say, i would like to stop tomorrow but i cannot. many of them will say, i've tried five times to stop and i cannot. that is addiction." (end of video.) mr. freidin: there is one more. (at this time, a video was played for the court and taken down to the best of the court reporter's ability:) "i would say it is just as addictive as heroin or cocaine." (end of video.) mr. freidin: so that is the surgeon general of the united states based upon scientific evidence. that is the backdrop of this. we start out with, it resembles cocaine and heroin. that is something that surprised me, but that is the surgeon general of the united states. and in this case, we had dr. difranza -- and as far as i'm concerned, dr. benowitz, who they played, who was our expect originally and they decided to play his deposition, they agreed on everything except one point, which i'll get to in a minute, but here is what they agreed on. pretty much everybody agrees that between 80 and ninety percent of daily smokers are addicted. pretty much both of them agreed with that. the surgeon general agrees that 85 percent are addicted. now we have phil marotta, who is a heavy smoker, and under every single test, the fagerstrom test, the dsm test, we went through all those, every single test, they both agreed -- dr. benowitz did not agree about mr. marotta himself because he did not involve himself with mr. marotta. every one of those criteria are the same. there is no difference. they both agree that it is highly addictive. they both agree it resembles alcohol, heroin, cocaine. they both agree that this is something that is extremely powerful and extremely hard to quit. they both agree that a small percentage can quit -- dr. difranza is -- i think that is the one difference, dr. difranza took the position that, i do not think mr. marotta could have quit. he did not try anymore. he kept turning on the light switch and it did not go on, and he did not continue to turn on the light switch because he could not do it. and perhaps dr. benowitz would disagree with that, but they both agree with all the other things. by the way, that is the secret documents from tobacco where they compare nicotine to opiates. that is not us. that is their statements. so we put on dr. difranza. they put on dr. benowitz, who basically said almost everything identically to dr. difranza, except the one point about maybe someone can quit or more people can quit. but in every respect, they were identical about the power of addiction from nicotine, and in every single respect, they agreed that it is almost or pretty much most regular and heavy smokers, and they both agreed about the fact that nicotine gets in the brain, especially with children. this was a 12-year-old boy, a boy who was not in a fair fight with nicotine. that is what it was. he got hooked on nicotine and, by 15, he was already hooked, and they both agreed that the brain changes permanently. so what is the evidence on the other side when we weigh the scales? dr. benowitz went through all these points. every single one of them, number of cigarettes smoked per day. dr. benowitz said if you smoke ten cigarettes a day for ten years, you will be addicted. well, phil marotta smoked maybe 40 or 50 or 60 cigarettes a day for 35 years. dr. benowitz said, if you smoke one pack a day for 20 years, you will be severity addicted. well, phil marotta smoked two to three packs a day for 35 years. he said, how soon after you wake have your first cigarette? bam. first thing in the morning, that is the first thing he did. if you wake up in the night, bam, every night he is up looking for a smoke. you talk about history of failed quit attempts. they tried on lent. they tried on new year's. they tried any number of times, probably a lot more than anyone remembered. he tried gardening. he tried tea. he tried yoga. he tried music. he tried long walks and, finally, prayer. and none of it worked. and this was at a time when really there were no medications. that is important. there was gum. it was controversial, dr. difranza told you that, during that time period. concerned about using too much gum and getting addicted to the gum. the bottom line is that we have, on our side, dr. benowitz, dr. difranza, and we have all the criteria of the dsm; every single one of them was seven out of seven. the fagerstrom test, he scored nine out of ten. ten being the highest. one of them was not checked because they could not possibly know whether he smoked more in the morning than the afternoon, as i recall. and what is -- and then let us go to the next one. these are the facts that really underpin all of this. the earlier you start, both benowitz and difranza said, the more impact on your brain, the more addiction, the harder. the more cigarettes you smoke. he smoked an enormous amount of cigarettes. the length of time, the chain smoking. this is 10 -- i'll get to that. first thing in the morning, middle of the night, he kept extra packs in his car. remember the hiking in the mountains, you heard that, and gasping for air and they light up, and they realize we are addicted. and everybody agrees he was addicted. smoking sections in movies and leaving the restaurants because he has to go smoke or not being able to make it through the movie when they did not have smoking sections. 10 out of 16. that means that, out of 16 waking hours, if you take 10 minutes per cigarette, and you are smoking 60 a day, that is 10 hours a day. what a preoccupation that is, 10 hours a day smoking, and their position is he is not addicted. after he was diagnosed with lung cancer, he continued to smoke. that is another hallmark finding that dr. benowitz and what dr. difranza said shows someone is addicted. again, i said no medications and all the quit attempts. everybody in the family, the dsm, dr. difranza, and the fagerstrom test, and i would suggest that dr. benowitz, with all his criteria, would tell you the exact same thing because every single one of the criteria he mentioned are the same that dr. difranza mentioned. he just did not examine mr. marotta. so what did r.j. reynolds put on, what evidence do they have on the other side of these scales? is it 51 percent or is it more like 90? all we have to do is prove 51 percent. they put on no evidence. am i out of time? the court: two minutes. mr. freidin: okay. one last thing i want to talk about. it is important -- these statements, i asked dr. difranza about these statements. i put them up on the screen and i said: do you agree with this? "a person could be addicted to cigarettes and eventually quit. that does not mean he was not addicted. you can be addicted to a substance and not try to quit." basically what that is saying is addiction and the ability to quit are not mutually exclusive. in other words, whether you quit, could have quit, inability to quit is not the issue of addiction. if it were, then all the millions of former cocaine and heroin addicts have to be pronounced never addicted. they would not have been addicted. these things are not interrelated, but the defense, i think, is attempting to mix them up. that is the last point i want to make, which is the second question: was he addicted and was it a legal cause -- notice the word "a." we made a big "a" and bolded it because it does not have to be the only legal cause. now i'm going to turn it over to mr. alvarez, and i thank you so much for your attention. mr. alvarez: may it please this honorable court, counsel, counsel. one of the things i talked to you about during opening statement is that this case was about choices. one of the things that is key in this case is about choices, about good choices and about bad choices. so let us examine some of those choices and when they were made and who made them and under what circumstances they were made, because what we are really dealing with here are the choices that were made by a 12-year-old little boy in queens, new york who was hanging out in front of a candy store. and how did his life change, what are the two things -- how did r.j. reynolds and the tobacco industry, how did those two things, how did those two forces collide and change his life forever, and those of his children, how did that happen? and it was not by accident. it was purposely done, intentionally done. the whole purpose of the tobacco industry and r.j. reynolds is to get young people smoking. that is what they want. they want young people to come in and start as young as possible and smoke as much as they want so that they become addicted. that is their purpose. look at these documents. "school days are here and that means big tobacco business for somebody. line up the most popular students. summer school is starting. get your young men intensely interested in lining up these students as consumers." "it may be well to consider another aspect of our business, that is, the factors which induce a presmoker or nonsmoker to become a habituated smoker." that was their purpose. that was their intent. that is what they wanted and that is what they got. this was their plan from the beginning, to hook them as young as possible. here are some more industry documents. this is from the ftc report of 1967. it says, "many youngsters consider cigarette smoking to be an acceptable and socially desirable activity. because the health dangers of cigarette smoking are not brought home to them in an effective and meaningful way, many teenagers take up the smoking habit. once they start, they may never be able to stop." how did that happen? did one day phil marotta, 12-year-old little boy, just wake up and say, i'm going to smoke today? they created that culture. they created that world. they wanted young people to think that smoking is cool so that they could idolize all the people they saw on tv, all the people they saw in the movies, their favorite athlete. they created that for a purpose. and they spent a lot of money doing that from 1940 to 2010 -- 2004, the surgeon general report says that 250 billion, not million, billion dollars was spent by the tobacco industry on advertising, $250 billion to advertise this product and mainly to young people, because they know, they know that the younger you get them, you got them for life. they know. they created this culture through advertising, tv -- robert, why do not you play some of these. (at this time, a video was played for the court and taken down to the best of the court reporter's ability:) "there are thousands of doctors, doctors in all parts of the country, in every state of the union, doctors in every branch of medicine are asked: what cigarette do you smoke, doctor? brand name most was camel. yes, according to the survey, more doctors smoke camels than any other cigarette. "do you inhale, then you are better off smoking philip morris, and here is how you can prove it. light up a philip morris, take a puff, get a good mouthful of smoke and slowly let the smoke come directly. "hang some on your christmas tree. they are easy to give, so good to get, give camels. "go with the smoking, pleasure, with pall mall. "mickey mantel, what do you say, mickey? it is not hard to see why most folks enjoy camels than other brands. "i got a better idea. let us take a winston break. that is it. winston is the one filter cigarette that delivers flavor 20 times a pack. winston's got that filter. yeah, fred. "why do not you settle back, settle back, and have a smoke. "cigarette manufacturers had something to do with that? "yeah, i think. "cigarette manufacturers do not make movies. "but what do you think, that the movie maker just chose marlboro on his own. "perhaps the movie maker was a marlboro smoker." (end of video.) mr. alvarez: they knew what they were doing. they knew it. they knew that cigarette smoking caused cancer and other very serious diseases. they knew that from the beginning. they knew it as early mid-'50s and they omitted that, they concealed that from the public, and we are going to talk about some of the things that they did purposely, intentionally to hurt phil marotta. look at these documents. this is their words. "carcinogens are found in practically every class of compounds of smoke. obviously the amount of evidence accumulated to indict cigarette smoking as a health hazard is overwhelming. the evidence challenging such an indictment is scant. "cigarettes have certain unattractive side effects." they call it a side effect, a side effect. they cause lung cancer. they knew. look at the dates, '61, '62, '63. we can show you more. this is what they did. they created this whole body of science so that scientists would come out and make it seem like they were unbiased, when the whole time they were in their pocket. they bought and paid for these people so that they could continue to sell cigarettes to young people so they could get addicted for the rest of their life, because they did not care whether they died or not. they did not care. this is what they cared about. "if this committee had not been formed, the cigarette industry by now would have been in a deplorable position. the tirc has been a successful defensive operation. we must in the near future provide some answers which will give smokers a psychological crutch and a self-rationale to continue to smoke. "obviously the key word is confusion. our basic position in the cigarette controversy is subject to the charge and may be subject to a finding that we are making false and misleading statements." they knew it. that is their own words. "the most important type of story is that that casts doubt on the cause and effect theory of disease and smoking. doubt is our product. it is the means of establishing a controversy." this was a plan, a deliberate plan. before you play that -- the documents show you what they know, which we did not know, which phil did not know, but look at what they were telling the world between 1953 and 1970, and this is a medley of some of those statements. (at this time, a video was played for the court and taken down to the best of the court reporter's ability:) "if it was found by somebody working under the tobacco industry research grant, it would be made public immediately and just as broadly as we could make it, and then efforts would be taken to attempt to remove that substance or substances. "if we do find any that we consider harmful, and so far we have not, we will remove these from smoke and still retain the pleasure of your favorite cigarette. "we want to be the detective just as much as the surgeon general, and we will cooperate in every way. well, obviously a filter takes out certain tar and nicotine. i do not think the industry admits there are any bad elements. if there are bad elements, through the laboratories, through the surgeon general, through the ama, through acts of god and luck, we hope we may find them. and if they are found, they will be removed. "we do talk to the question of whether or not cigarettes are hazardous. we do not believe that cigarettes are hazardous. we do not accept that. because when, as, and if any ingredient in cigarette smoke is identified as being injurious to human health, we are confident that we can eliminate that ingredient. "do you believe that cigarettes are safe? have they been proven to be safe, mr. culman? "i believe they have not been proven to be unsafe." (end of video.) mr. alvarez: every one of those statements was false and misleading, and the evidence of their falsehood is in those internal documents. they knew exactly what they were doing. they purposely mislead the public and phil marotta. they did it on purpose. here are some more documents. "ctr and the industry have publicly and frequently denied what others find as truth. let us face it, we are interested in evidence which we believe denies the allegation that cigarette smoking causes cancer. "for nearly 20 years, the industry has employed a single strategy to defend itself on three major fronts; litigation, politics, and public opinion. "while this strategy was brilliantly conceived and executed" -- by the way, that is business for patting yourself on the back. look, we were smart, we got one over on these people. look how brilliant this thing was. look how brilliant this thing was. "over the years, helping us win important battles. it is only fair to say that it is not nor was it intended to be a vehicle for victory." they want victory. they want to be able to continue this life forever and people smoke forever. "on the contrary, it will always be a holding strategy consisting of creating doubt about the health effect, health charges without actually denying it. "ctr began its organization called the tirc. it was set up as an industry shield. bill shinn, a lawyer, feels that special projects are the best way that monies are spent. on these projects, ctr has acted as a front. "cigarette smoking is more addictive than using heroin, hooking two-thirds of the people who ever smoked." look at that. they know. they know that two-thirds of all their customers are going to get hooked and they compare it to heroin. "we cannot defend continued smoking as free choice if the person was addicted." so it is not about choice, and they know that because, if you are truly addicted, it is not about choice. and their own internal secret documents admit that. they just do not stop. it is a machine that does not stop. it is a pr machine that does not stop. when you have hundreds of millions of dollars to spend on advertising, to spend on getting your message across, that is a very powerful machine, and that is how you shape public awareness. the way you shape the public is by creating the atmosphere and then having people doubt the health effects of smoking, and this is how you do it. think about this. if you have an addicted smoker who is truly addicted and he hears two competing messages. he hears from public health officials that smoking causes cancer and other diseases, he hears that. and then he hears from the product manufacturer, well, there is a controversy, we are not sure, it has not been decided, there is controversy over this. there is a lot of doubt in whether it is true or not. if the smoker is addicted, which one of those two messages will the addicted smoker accept? and they knew that, and that is why they created this whole campaign about doubt and confusion. they knew all they had to do is give people, smokers, a crutch, a rationale, a reason to doubt the health officials and then nicotine would do the rest. they knew it. it is a perfect plan. it is a perfect plan. it is perfect, except for millions and millions of people, like phil marotta, who die. (at this time, a video was played for the court and taken down to the best of the court reporter's ability:) "the cause of lung cancer is, as yet, unknown. in fact, no one knows what causes lung cancer. "and as far as i'm concerned, the bottom line is that we simply do not know. "the case is still open. the jury has not come in. "it may not be harmful. you are not convinced. "it may be or it may not be. we do not know. "it is not known whether cigarettes cause cancer. it has not been casually established. "do cigarettes cause cancer? "i do not know if they do or not. "i'm not in a position to give you a does or does not answer. "we do not know what causes cancer in general right now, so i think that we may find out what causes cancer and we may find out some relationship, which has yet to be proven." (end of video.) mr. alvarez: that is more evidence of their plan, just keep it out there, keep it going, keep that controversy going, just keep it going because, as long as you keep it going, we know the effects of nicotine will keep people addicted. and as long as that controversy is out there, the addicted smoker will choose us, will choose us. this is from the federal trade commission report to congress in '67, "cigarette smoking is, without question, the greatest single public health problem this nation has ever faced. the cost to society of cigarette smoking in human terms is staggering. it is the number one cause of preventable death in the united states" -- the number one cause. the third question that you are going to get on the verdict form is dealing with negligence: did they act like a reasonable, prudent manufacturer should act? very simple, did they act that way? well, we know by the engle findings, if you establish that he is a class member, you have to accept the fact that they have already been found negligent. they have already been found negligent. the question is: was it the legal cause, was it the legal cause. but for the negligence, but for the carelessness, but for them hooking him when he was 12, would he have smoked for 35 years two to three packs a day and gotten cancer. would a prudent and reasonable corporation not tell the truth? by the way, there is 13 questions. we think every single one of them should be yes, every single one should be yes. it is time for good choices and bad choices. so what is it that they do? because the next question has to do with strict liability, has to do with them putting a defective cigarette on the market. the law in this case has been established, if you find he is a class member, these cigarettes that mr. marotta smoked were defective, were defective. there is thousands of chemicals in smoke. there is thousands of chemicals. there is over 70 carcinogens, those are cancer-causing agents. if you are a regular smoker, 10 or 15 percent of them will get lung cancer, but nearly half of them will die of another smoking-related disease, either copd, other types of cancer, bladder, esophageal, many, many other cancers. so half of the people who regularly smoke will die of a smoking-related disease. these are the nicotine documents. "without the chemical compound" -- this is their documents. "without the chemical compound, the cigarette market would collapse." this is a philip morris document, "would collapse and we would all lose our jobs and our consulting fees," because that is what they care about. that is the only thing -- these guys only care about one thing, and it is not phil marotta and it is not the 15-, 16-, or 17-year-old kid that starts smoking. they only care about one thing, and that is their profits. that is all they care about. that is all they care about. "however, we must never be comfortable selling a product which most of our customers would stop using if they could. that is to say, if the exit gates from our market would suddenly open, we would be out of business almost overnight." so these guys get it. these guys are not stupid guys, they are scientists, phds, they hire people, they got a lot of money. they know what to do. they get it. listen, if we continue to make this thing addictive, people are going to continue to smoke. and if we do not make it addictive, guess what, people will not smoke, and i'm going to be out of a job. so would i rather be out of a job or am i going to continue doing what i'm doing and get people hooked and give false and misleading information? "moreover, nicotine is addictive. we are in the business of selling nicotine, an addictive drug. for the typical smoker, nicotine satisfaction is a dominant desire. therefore, in designing any cigarette product, the dominant specification should be nicotine delivery." these guys get it. this whole thing about -- this whole thing about, well, if you get a little bit of tobacco from the ground, it is going to have nicotine in it. nicotine naturally occurs in tobacco. yeah. but they manipulate it, because you could raise or lower the level of nicotine in cigarettes so that you do not make it addictive. "tobacco product and deliver nicotine, a potent drug with a variety of physiological effects. our industry is based upon design, manufacturer, and sale of an attractive dose form of nicotine." there is no dispute. they are not selling the pleasure. that is what the market is because what they really want to do is hook them because they know what they are really selling is a drug. and this is the easiest count. question four, which is strict liability, i told you at the beginning, that is the easiest one for us to prove, because all i have to prove is that he smoked their product. and it is undisputed, there is no evidence he did not smoke an rjr product. there is none. he smoked winstons. they made winstons. there is no issue, okay. that is the easiest count, the easiest one. and the engle finding is, if you except that he is a class member, the defendant placed cigarettes on the market that were defective and unreasonably dangerous, and all i have to prove is that, but for him smoking two packs a day for 35 years, he would not have died. that is it. so that is the easiest one to get past. strict liability. if the product is defective, engle finding says that, you have to accept that. it is the easiest one to prove. let me talk to you about apportionment and fault, because this is important. this is where you get to decide choice. this is -- not in class membership. this is where you get to decide choice and fault. state the percentage of responsibility for phil marotta's death that you charge to r.j. reynolds tobacco company? and then it will have a percentage, and then phil marotta. this is where you do that analysis, not in class membership. class membership is about the science, it is about the medicine, did he have a smoking-related disease, was he addicted, did he meet the classical definition of addiction. when you want to start looking at who should have done what to when and where, this is the question, this is the question. so we accept some responsibility for his smoking. he could have quit. he could have tried harder. everybody could quit, okay. but let us put that in context. by the way, you may have an urge to put a zero there under phil marotta, and i'm telling you, no, do not do that, because we come in here and say we have admitted some responsibility so, please, do not do that, do not do that. now, we are accepting responsibility for the negligence claim and the strict liability claim, but not for the fraud, the concealment claim, and not for the conspiracy claim. because there, they lied and they concealed information and they were in cahoots with other tobacco companies and other organizations who did the very same thing. so these are not the same. they are not on the same footing with us on negligence, okay. so let us talk about that. how do you assess responsibility, because that is what you are doing, who is more responsible? well, this is the tobacco companies, r.j. reynolds, versus a 12-year-old kid. put that in perspective. r.j. reynolds versus a 12-year-old kid. and what did dr. benowitz, an expert, who is very well credentialed, who they played in their case, no problem, play him. what did he say about that? he says, look, here is the thing with adolescents and smoking, they at 12 as a teen, you do not understand the magnitude of the decision that you make to start smoking, you do not understand. you do not understand that you run a risk of 45 percent that you will die from that decision that you make at 12 years old. and when they start as teens, and he was a preteen because he was 12, they think they can stop. they think they are going to be able to stop. that is what dr. benowitz said, and that is because their brain is forming. as an adolescent, your brain starts to continue to develop and form. the other thing he said was, the earlier you start, the more likely you are to be addicted. what else did he say about that? he said tobacco companies purposely, purposely manipulate the levels of nicotine to keep smokers addicted, and he is not the only one, by the way. dr. proctor, who was the historian, our very first witness who came in, said two things about that. he said, look, they designed this cigarette very carefully. they did two things to it to make it sellable and to have them keep selling their product in perpetuity, which is the legal word for forever. what do they do? they made it inhalable. they lowered the ph so they can make it inhalable. if people just wanted to look cool with a cigarette in their mouth and just put it in their mouth to puff the smoke back out, they could adjust the ph level so that people do not inhale it. they can do that. but why would not they do that? because the only way you get the nicotine into your lungs and into your bloodstream is by inhaling. that is why. so on balance, on balance, what is the percent of negligence, how much of it is his fault, is he responsible for, and how much are they responsible for? how much does a 12-year-old boy who started smoking, who makes a decision to start smoking in front of a candy store in queens, new york, really know the magnitude of that decision that he makes and how it is going to play for the rest of his life and for his family? and i think it is 90/10, r.j. reynolds should be ninety percent and phil marotta should be 10. let us talk about choices again. you heard the whole conspiracy story, how it was hatched in 1953, how the heads of all the tobacco companies got into a meeting at the plaza hotel in new york city and said, look, we are not going to let this stand. what we are going to do is we are going to fight this. we are going to continue to sell our product. we do not care. and this document to me is the most flagrant, the most -- this is a mirror into their soul, this document is a mirror into their soul. look what they say, "in validation of some reports in the research department, we do not foresee any difficulty in the event a decision is reached to remove certain reports from research files. "once it becomes clear that such action is necessary for the successful defense of our present and future suits, we will promptly remove all such reports from our files. as an alternative to invalidation, we can have the authors rewrite those sections of the report which appear objectionable."does this look like a corporation who wants to tell the truth, who cares about phil marotta, who cares about anybody? and this is a memo right after that meeting. "it is fortunate for us that cigarettes are a habit they cannot break. boy, would not it be wonderful if our company was the first to produce a cancer-free cigarette." this is december of 1953. they went to the year 2000 before they finally admit it. then they did this whole frank statement that they -- hundreds of newspapers all around the united states, 43 million people, viewers, readers, got this, and they told people the exact opposite. "there is no proof that cigarette smoking is one of the causes. we accept an interest in people's health as a basic responsibility, paramount to every other consideration in our business. we believe the product we make are not injurious to health." but you got to understand in 1953, the world was a different people. you say that now about a corporation, after a recall or something, and people would go, i do not know, i do not know if i'm really going to believe you because we are much more aware. but in 1953, it is not the world we lived in. so let us talk about this filter thing, because these -- you got to give them credit. these guys are sharp. these guys are smart, very, very, very smart, okay. in 1950, less than 1 percent of all the cigarettes sold in the united states had filters, that is from the ftc report. in 1975, 87 percent of all cigarettes sold in america had filters on it. why? why? why did they do that? because that fit into their whole scheme about convincing people, if we put a filter on it, it will take out all the bad stuff, when they knew the whole time that it did not do it. look at this. june, 1966, "the illusion of filtration is as important as the fact of filtration." the ftc -- let us go over here. "in most cases, however, the smoker of a filter cigarette was getting as much or more nicotine and tar as he would have gotten from a regular cigarette. he had abandoned the regular cigarette, however, on the ground of reduced risk to health. "the belief appears to be widely held that filter cigarettes are less hazardous to health than regular cigarettes, that many of the most popular brands of filter cigarettes contain as much or more tar and nicotine as many brands of non-filter cigarettes." and the surgeon general report 2010, "by the 21st century, it was apparent that five decades of evolving cigarette design had not reduced overall disease risk among smokers, and the new designs were used by the tobacco industry as a tool to undermine prevention and cessation efforts." so that was just another tool. what they did was they said, look, we will fight this battle with controversy and doubt and then we will put filters on cigarettes and say, if we are wrong about this, do not worry, the filter will keep you safe, when all along they knew it was not true. and you heard from dr. proctor why, because it does not filter out any of the carcinogens. in fact, it is worse for you because you end up inhaling more because the filter compresses the smoke and you end up smoking deeper and longer, so you end up getting more carcinogens in your body. is it a coincidence that the brand that mr. marotta smoked, phil, when he started smoking in 1959, when he was 12 years old, was a filtered cigarette? when he made a choice in 1959 to smoke, he could have chose anything, right, could have chose anything, yet he chose a filtered cigarette. this is about addiction and it is not a free choice. 1967, "there is no indication in any advisement that after a person smokes cigarettes regularly for a while smoking is no longer a matter of choice. for him, it becomes a matter of need." that is the ftc report. this is another internal document in 1980, "cigarette smoking is more addictive than using heroin, hooking two-thirds of the people who ever smoked. we cannot defend continued smoking as a free choice if the person is addicted. "the two factors refuting the argument smoking is a matter of free choice, most smokers start smoking as teenagers and then become addicted." that is the surgeon general. the court: ten minutes. mr. alvarez: thank you. so from 1953 to 1994, these guys just continued their whole propaganda machine, it did not stop. and the evidence of phil marotta, he continued to rely into the 1980s and '90s, phil trusted reynolds, he trusted what he was doing, he trusted, he believed. in fact, he told one of his partners, "do not worry about me, i'm not going to get lung cancer until i'm 80." phil believed his parents died from asbestos, not smoking. you saw that from the medical records. he rationalized his failures. he did exactly what dr. benowitz -- if you listen -- dr. benowitz did not even know anything about phil marotta. if you listen to his testimony and you look at the criteria about smokers and how they rationalize, it is phil marotta to a t. he smoked filters to keep him safe. rjr concealed that, understanding about the addiction, and when he started smoking as a child. phil did not know that they were manipulating the nicotine levels to keep him addicted. he did not know. no one knew. they knew. and this is what they do. these are the statements that they make. this shows you who they are. (at this time, a video was played for the court and taken down to the best of the court reporter's ability:) "throughout your tenure with american, it was not only american's position but your position that cigarettes were not injurious to health; is that accurate? "through my tenure? "yes. "yes, that is so. "that is something american tobacco wanted the public to believe; is that correct? "yes. "it is a statement that american tobacco takes great reliance on? "we issued that statement, yes. "and as far as you are concerned, a person is justified in relying on that statement? "yes." (end of video.) mr. alvarez: that is the president of american tobacco company and that is part of the rjr company. "when we say those things, we want smokers to believe it," and he did. look at the evidence, this worked on phil. phil told -- this is 1989 to '90. this is where phil said, look, my dad came up to me and said, do not do drugs, do not drink, and do not smoke, okay, because it is very, very addictive, okay. what he did not tell him was, it is going to cause cancer and you are going to die. he never told him that, and you know why he did not tell him that, because he did not believe it. he did not believe it because he was an addicted smoker and he rationalized. he did exactly what they wanted him to do. phil told his daughter when she was at the beach, remember the story, that she was at the beach, and he went off with the sister and she started smoking. and when they got back, the lady next to them on the beach said to phil, hey, your daughter was smoking. well, that happened in 1985. and these dates are important for a second and i'll tell you why. and he says, do not do that, it is very addictive. once you start, you cannot stop. it is bad for your teeth. it is bad for your hair. it colors your teeth. he never once said, this caused cancer, you are going to die from that. marie says, 1985, that she still believed the controversy. they are both two peas in a pod. they grew up in the same neighborhood, heard the same things. they were married for a long time together, and they remained friends afterwards. phil told his partner, mr. denunzio, about the controversy. they discussed it. they talked about it between 1984 and 1987 when they lived together. that is evidence that he knew and he relied on the controversy. he believed it. that is evidence of it and they wanted him to believe it. they wanted him to believe it. (at this time, a video was played for the court and taken down to the best of the court reporter's ability:) "american disagrees with the warning does not it? "we certainly do. "you do not think they harm smokers so there is no reason to put any warning on? "we believe our product is not injurious to health. "as far as you are concerned, is the surgeon general simply wrong in concluding that cigarette smoking causes lung cancer? "i would use the term "misguided." "okay, if he is misguided, then i take it that your opinion is he is wrong? "i was simply trying to be polite about it. "but not being polite about it, in your opinion, he is wrong? "dead wrong. "congress is wrong in requiring these warnings, correct? "we do not think they are justified. "so they are wrong? "they are wrong." (end of video.) mr. alvarez: they are wrong. as much as they published these warnings, it is on the pack, it is on the pack, they were not embracing those warnings, telling people do not smoke, this is bad for you. they were saying the opposite. the court: two minutes. mr. alvarez: i'm going to eat into my... the court: that is fine. mr. alvarez: the law in this case is, the engle finding is that, "they concealed and omitted material information, not otherwise known or available, knowing the material was false and misleading, and they failed to disclose a material fact concerning or proving the health effects and/or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes." and the other engle finding is that, "they entered into an agreement to conceal and omit information." so these guys -- this is a finding, you have to accept this in this case. this is the law of this case, if you find he is a class member, okay. and so those are whatever questions those are, i think they are nine and eight -- eight, nine. so questions six and seven should be yes and yes. and let me tell you, this 1982 -- you guys are wondering, why is this may 1982. there is no evidence in this case about anything that happened in may of 1982, so do not look for it in the record, but it has legal significance for us. so what we have to prove to you is that, after 1982, he relied on the controversy. he still believed in the controversy, whether because he kept smoking because of the filter or those statements that you heard, those conversations he had with other people, his family and his friends and his partners, but that is there. it is in the evidence and the answer to that is yes. and the same thing for the conspiracy count. basically the same counts and the answer to both of those are yes. and i call this the hypocrisy of their position because for 50 years they said smoking does not cause cancer, we doubt it, there is no science, there is no this, we cannot believe. you heard it, you heard it over and over and over again from them, right? right, you heard it. but then they come in here to court and what do they do. no. no. everybody knew. phil knew. everybody knew. this was -- come on. everybody knew. think about that for a second. for the first 50 years, while he is smoking, buying their product, he is telling them -- telling him, it is okay. it has not been proven, go ahead. but then they come into court and they say, no, no, no, he should have known. that is the hypocrisy. they take a complete 180 degree change in position so they can win a lawsuit. i want to show you this video in a second, but let me prefix it. this is april 1994. this is seven months before he dies. (at this time, a video was played for the court and taken down to the best of the court reporter's ability:) "raise your right hand. do you swear that the testimony you are about to give is the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth? "i do. i do. "please consider yourself to be under oath. "let me begin my questioning in the matter of whether or not nicotine is addictive. let me ask you first, and i'd like to just go down the row whether each of you believes that nicotine is not addictive. i heard virtually all of you touch on it and just yes or no. "do you believe nicotine is not addictive? "i believe nicotine is not addictive, yes. "mr. johnston? "congressmen, cigarettes and nicotine clearly do not meet the classic definitions of addiction. there is no intoxication. "we will take that as a no. and again, time is short. if you can just -- i think each of you believes nicotine is not addictive. we would like to have this for the record. "i do not believe that nicotine or our products are addictive. "i believe nicotine is not addictive. "i believe that nicotine is not addictive. "i believe that nicotine is not addictive. "and i, too, believe that nicotine is not addictive." (end of video.) mr. alvarez: seven months before he died, they were still denying it, and they denied it to the entire world, to the american people and congress. and they lied, and they knew what they were saying was a lie when they said it. so the last question, by the way, is going to be about punitive damages. are we entitled to punitive damages? this case screams for punitive damages. "our basic position in the cigarette controversy is subject to the charge and may be subject to a finding that we are making false and misleading statements to promote the sale of cigarettes." so the answer to that last question is yes. now, here is a photograph of phil marotta and his three kids. to the left of it is the plaza hotel, 1953, and to the right of that are the executives going before congress and lying. what happened? how has this affected this family? because he is not there anymore and one of the questions you are going to be asked is to evaluate damages in this case. and let me tell you there is three separate -- there is three separate claims here. there is three separate individuals; there is phil and his two sisters, jill and andrea, so each one of them has a claim, each one of them. it is not one claim, it is three claims. so what does it mean to lose your parent? well, it means different things in different parts of your life. when you are a child and you are growing up, right, you need a parent to protect you, to raise you, to guide you, to nurture you, to teach you, many, many different things that you need a parent for, okay. he was not out of the woods. your job as a parent -- first of all, your job as a parent is never done, it is never done. whether you are 17, 20, 24 when your dad dies, okay, you still need your dad. you still need him for a lot of different things. you may not need them to pack your lunch and drive you to school. but at 17, losing your dad at 17, at 20, and 24 is too young. and look how they turned out. look at these kids, look how they turned out. one is a successful business owner, two of them are nurses who decided to help people. the number one rule in nursing is to be a patient advocate, number one rule, to help others, to speak for the patient because they cannot speak -- two of them basically went into public service. did that happen by accident? all three have college degrees. did that happen by accident? they were a product of a loving, caring family environment of which phil was a part of and he helped nurturing his kids. and a person's sexuality has nothing to do with what kind of a parent you are going to be. it does not. so there is a certain -- i want you to evaluate, when you are evaluating damages, you go, okay, well, when they were 17, when they are 17s and teens and 20s, you know that adds a certain aspect to it, but now they are older, so now it does not matter. now it is less work, what is the difference? now they are in their 30s and early 40s. what is the difference? now is where it counts. let me tell you why. because at the core of this case, the damages in this case, it is about family. it is about family. no one -- they each got children, all of them, all the kids have kids. no one can understand how much a parent loves his child. no one can understand that. but think about this. one of the things that helps you love more is when you watch your child go running to his grandparent and just lunging himself in his arms. just watch their eyes, both of them, the child and the grandparents, when that child just squeezes his grandfather. that is what they miss. that is what is lacking. that is their loss. not only when they were 17, but they still need their father today because that is what they are suffering. now, you are going to be asked, "please state the total amount of damages sustained by phil marotta, which this is phil, jill, marie marotta, andrea bacener for the loss of their parental companionship, protection, and the pain and suffering as a result of phil marotta's lung cancer and death," and each one of them has an award. you can do whatever you want, as long as it is reasonable in light of the evidence. you guys decide that. i'm going to suggest a number. you may think it is too low. you may think it is too high. you are the judge. you are the judge. but just think, just think, this is not about losing your father at 17. this is about a family. think about a little pebble that you throw into a pond and that ripple goes out. and every time there is something with your child that you want him there, it is like keep throwing another pebble into that pond and that ripple effect, and they are suffering every day when that happens. so i'm going to suggest a figure, and like i said, you may think it is too low. you may think it is too high. it is up to you whatever you think is fair and reasonable. and we think $9 million for each of the children is fair and reasonable in light of the evidence. thank you, your honor. mr. alvarez: i'll be brief because i know you are all tired. mr. belasic just said that i took responsibility for my client, which we did, and that the surgeon general says that smokers should take responsibility. but you know who has not taken responsibility? r.j. reynolds. they have not taken responsibility. they are the only ones in this courtroom that has not taken any responsibility. zero responsibility for what happened. in the 50 years, they have never taken responsibility. he showed you this and said, look, no one 2748 believed us, no one believed us. only 3 percent of the people believe the tobacco industry. that is why they went and bought scientists. that is why they went and bought the american medical association for $10 million. that is why they did that. because they knew they had a credibility problem and that is why they spent their millions of dollars influencing these groups of people to get the message out. he said, look, it is not illegal to sell this product, we are allowed to do it. but you know what the instructions tell you about that? you cannot -- "however, false, misleading or deceitful statements and misrepresentations made as part of the public debate regarding smoking and health issues are not protected free speech." that is the problem. the problem is that they lied. that is why they are in court today, because they lied. they were deceitful. they gave false and misleading statements about the health effects of smoking. that is why we are in court today. put up the surgeon general. he said, 2749 "there is no evidence that filters were dangerous." well, look what the surgeon general said about that. "by the 21st century, it was apparent that five decades of evolving cigarette design had not reduced the overall risk among smokers and the new designs were used by the tobacco industry as a tool to undermine prevention and cessation efforts." that is the 2010 surgeon general report, and that is what they are talking about. they are talking about these low tar filters and all these things that they claim make cigarettes safer and they do not. they are just gimmicks. they said that mr. marotta made no effort to quit. first of all, that is not true. he did make efforts. but you know what, that is exactly what they wanted. they wanted smokers like mr. marotta not to quit. that is exactly what they wanted. but now they come in here and they criticize him for his quit attempts when all along they do not want him to quit. he said nothing they did, nothing they did 2750 caused his death. so this young man wakes up one morning and decides he is going to smoke, for no reason, for no reason. that is what they want you to believe. for no reason. none. ask yourself this question. if everyone knew, if it was so pervasive and everybody knew, even kids in high school, if everybody knew, why would they spend millions and millions and millions of dollars on a campaign of doubt, if everybody knew? i mean, these guys were bright. they are very intelligent and they are scientists, executives, very smart, they know how to make money. why would they throw money away like that? why would they throw millions of dollars away like that if everyone knew? now, they said that there was no evidence of post 1982 reliance. we went over it. there is. you heard it. you heard it. that is how you get to punitive damages, by answering those questions yes. now the pathologist, he made a big deal about the pathologist, that he would not come in and testify. 2751 the report, dr. goscin's report said it is large cell carcinoma, large cell carcinoma. ninety percent of all large cell carcinoma is caused by smoking. they talked about the bac, this whole thing about the bac and they showed you this slide. well, bac goes all around the air sacs. this one is mr. marotta. i circled all the areas around the air sac where there is none. he said, oh -- by the way, we do not have to prove that it is bac, we do not have to prove that. but if they wanted to prove that it was bac, they had the pathologist, they had the slides, he looked at the slides and said you can do special staining to these slides to find out if there is bac. okay, so why do not you do it? if you want to prove that it was bac, you want to confirm your diagnosis, then why did not you stain them and come into court and say, here are the stained slides, that is how i know it is bac. talked about the family history. the family history only makes the smoking more 2752 prominent. the fact that they are predisposed to cancer means that their body is unable to fight off the toxic effects of smoking, which makes smoking even more dangerous, five times more dangerous. they read, they did not read it, they just said dr. messinger, who was the radiologist that we hired, could not rule out bac. well, actually, let us see what he actually said because we read it. "could a bac that has progressed and spread become more aggressive present this way, doctor?" "answer: i think it is best that a pathologist tell you that. but i mean, we do not see that many bacs. and those that i have seen are generally more isolated and not aggressive. so i think probably it is best. i mean, theoretically" -- theoretically -- "i would think probably the answer is true, yes, but i do not know that for a fact." you know anything is possible theoretically, but we are not talking about theoretics. we are talking about probability, the greater weight of the evidence and they 2753 did not prove that. the last thing i want to say, judge, and i'm wrapping up is, they showed you this slide and they said that dr. benowitz said that, within 72 hours of quitting, all the nicotine is gone from the body. that is true, but you know what does not go away for months, and sometimes years, are the cravings. the craving, the desire, that never goes away. on behalf of phil and the sisters, we want to thank you very much and we will accept whatever verdict you render.