10 mr. belasic: thank you, your honor, and good morning, counsel, mr. marotta. ladies and gentlemen, i also want to thank you. every lawyer in this room, we volunteered for this case. we were not called in. when you got your summons in the mail, you were, in effect, drafted, and i thank you for stepping up to the call of duty. without your participation, this great principle of democracy called jury trials would not exist. now, throughout the seven or eight days of evidence in this case and for the overwhelming majority of time that mr. alvarez spent speaking, what you have seen is an attempt to retry those findings, the findings that they talk about from that other lawsuit, from engle, 2664 findings on concealment or negligence. but as the judge instructs you in the jury instruction, this case is not about re-litigating that case. this case is about mr. marotta and why mr. marotta died. all of the key questions on the verdict form are about mr. marotta, not are tobacco companies bad, not are we mad at tobacco companies. they are about mr. marotta. now, the judge is going to instruct you as follows: "the manufacture and advertisement and sale of cigarettes are lawful activities." everyone knows they are. it is legal to make them. it is legal to advertise them. even if it makes us mad when we go 50 years back and see an ad that mr. marotta never even saw, it is legal to advertise that. the warning labels that are on the packs comply with federal law. there is no claim in this case that r.j. reynolds broke the law, that they did not comply. and after 1969, because of those warnings, cigarette advertising cannot be the subject of any claim that the advertising undermined or neutralized those warnings. 2665 now, why do i mention that? when we started this case, i put up that date, may 5, 1982. i was the one who talked about it in opening. now, at the time, you probably wondered, what is it? it is not somebody's birthday. is it a significant moment in tobacco history? no. i told you that that was the date which the law requires, and which judge tuter has instructed you, that is the date after which they have to prove that mr. marotta saw a statement, that that statement was false, and that he relied upon it, that it caused him, in effect, to develop lung cancer. and i told you, i challenged the plaintiffs, when the first witness took the stand, dr. proctor, the historian from california, i told you that he would not say anything, anything about the plaintiff or mr. marotta, the smoker, seeing a statement after 1982 and believing it and changing his testimony, and that is exactly what he admitted. that is the cutoff date. and here it is. this is the verdict form. you are going to be 2666 asked: did phil marotta rely on a statement by r.j. reynolds. the date was after may 5, 1982. the next two questions: did phil marotta rely to his detriment on an act taken by r.j. reynolds or in agreement with other companies? and look what the date is. this is what you have to decide. was this act taken after may 5, 1982? did phil marotta rely on these statements after 1982? this is an easy question for you to answer, and you do not have to believe me. you do not have to believe any tobacco company, because it was their witness. they hired and they paid an expert named dr. difranza, remember him, he was the man from massachusetts. they paid him to review, and he said he had reviewed every single deposition, all of the testimony by phil marotta, and everyone whose testimony was in this case. i asked him about his opinion, having reviewed everything, was mr. marotta somehow tricked? what did he believe about lung cancer? and look at what he said. "there is not any dispute that at that time, based on the tragic death of his parents, 2667 that he personally believed that smoking could be -- could cause lung cancer at that point?" he agrees, "yes. "and that was in the late '70s? "right." that is their expert. at the very beginning of his testimony, he says that mr. marotta personally believed by the late '70s, that it caused lung cancer. so of course, your answer has to be no on this question. now, dr. proctor also came up. remember what he did. he testified on a monday and he talked about a hundred years back, smoking machines, world war i, things before mr. marotta was even born. and then on tuesday, dr. proctor got all the way up to the '30s, '40s, and '50s. some of that, before mr. marotta was even born, but almost all of it before he even started smoking. and then, finally, on his third day of testimony, at ten minutes to 10 in the morning, because i wrote the time down, dr. proctor finally, finally got up to 1982. he wasted 2668 your time. the judge is instructing you that the finding here has to be about statements after may 5, 1982. we did not have to sit here for three days to hear all the things -- remember what he admitted about the advertisements. he said the lawyers picked out the advertisements. he said he had been paid one million dollars total to testify in cases brought by lawyers who sue tobacco companies, and he said the lawyers in this case picked out the ads for him. he admitted they were before he started smoking or they were for brands he did not smoke, and there were only a handful of winston ads. you know what, nothing after 1982. i asked him, are you claiming that mr. marotta relied after '82? you saw what he said. i'm not making any claims about his life. i'm here to talk about the industry. well, that is not relevant, because judge tutor tells you it is after may 1982 and it has to be something that mr. marotta relied on and changed his behavior. i tried to sum it up. you are not 2669 claiming, are you, that any of the information that you have talked about or that you have put up on the screen is proof that mr. marotta was influenced by something that a tobacco company said. and he said, that is correct. and that is for everything that he talked about. within five minutes -- after two days on the stand being questioned by plaintiff's lawyers. within five minutes, dr. proctor said, the lawyers picked out the ads and i'm not claiming that mr. marotta saw anything. i'm not claiming it influenced him at all. and he admits it was not proof of that. now, mr. alvarez spent about one minute telling you that he thinks the evidence supports the fact that mr. marotta was somehow confused. here is the rest of the story. you heard a tremendous amount of evidence about what mr. marotta knew. in 1959, they say that was the year he first smoked a cigarette. in 1959, harvard did a study and found that ninety percent of junior high students had already heard that smoking causes cancer. 2670 in the 1960s, his best friend from school, mr. gelfano, said that in the 1960s when they were in school, they were using the terms "cancer sticks" and "nicotine fit," and he said that mr. marotta would have known that, that the cigarettes he held in his hand were called, by ordinary people, by young people, "cancer sticks." denunzio, his partner, asked him and said that he knew smoking caused cancer as a teenager. you did not hear that today. mr. denunzio said that marotta told him that, when he was a teenager, that he believed smoking could cause cancer. we know that the surgeon general's report on cancer came out when he was in school. we know that just right after high school, the pack warnings came out, and we know he ignored those warnings. we know he ignored those warnings. he did not try to quit. we know that in the late '60s and the early '70's, his father died of lung cancer. we know that his mother died of lung cancer. and his own expert says that, because of that event -- remember what dr. difranza said, there 2671 is no dispute that he did not rely on something after 1982. there is no dispute that mr. marotta personally believed that smoking could cause lung cancer. that is the expert that they paid to give you the opinion, to look at everything, and to sum it up. he agrees with us. you have seen the pack warnings and they try to belittle them throughout, but there is no question that, before 1982, every single pack that mr. marotta was smoking contained those warnings. now, was there any proof at all that mr. marotta died because of something that r.j. reynolds said or that if r.j. reynolds had not said something, that he would have instantly quit smoking, that he would not have gotten lung cancer? we know his parents smoked and he copied them. we know his friends smoked and he followed them. here is what the witnesses said. we asked each of these witnesses whether they had any evidence or whether they were claiming that mr. marotta relied. phil marotta, junior, the plaintiff, his 2672 wife, marie, andrea, jill marotta, roberto pinto, and all of them said there is no evidence he relied. now, jill marotta said that her father told her in the hospital he remembered back when he started smoking and he remembered something about a santa advertisement. i specifically asked her: did he tell you, are you claiming that he relied on that, that somehow that is what caused him to start smoking winstons? and she said, no. and she said the same thing for the doctor ad. and i think you saw when i asked jill marotta, no one else in the family had ever heard that story. she had never shared it with anyone. no one else in the family ever said that phil marotta told them why he started smoking. and you will have to judge the credibility of that statement. but even jill marotta agreed that her father had not relied on a santa ad or something with doctors and she agreed that she did not even know if they were from r.j. reynolds. and of course, their expert, dr. difranza, 2673 knew all this and he admitted, there is no reliance. now, you heard a story about giacomo denunzio, mr. marotta's partner, when he testified on the stand and we read his deposition, he was contacted by plaintiff's lawyers, a woman named laura damiani, she is one of the lawyers for mr. marotta. she is not here today. but that is what he testified to. she asked him if he would sign an affidavit. that is sworn testimony that you write down on a piece of paper. she asked him if he would sign it. she called him on the phone. they mailed the affidavit to him, and, sure enough, he signed it. and what did it say. he signed an affidavit that said, "mr. marotta told me that he relied on some things." you heard his testimony. what happened? at deposition, when we got the chance to ask him the questions, he said, under oath, the information in the affidavit that the plaintiff's lawyer mailed him was not true, was not true. that is the only attempt by the plaintiffs 2674 to prove that something after 1980 was actually seen, seen by mr. marotta, actually believed. and it was based on an affidavit that a lawyer wrote that the witness said was not true. denunzio said he heard the statement, not mr. marotta. he said he saw a tv show, not mr. marotta. it was not r.j. reynolds. he said mr. marotta had no great reaction to it. and when we asked him, did mr. marotta tell you when he first learned or believed that smoking could cause cancer? he said, since he was a teenager. you are going to have to decide whether you believe his sworn testimony or some piece of paper that one of his lawyers got him to sign. every witness we ask questions like this: did mr. marotta rely on the frank statement? everyone agrees he did not. ctr, tirc, the tobacco institute statements, no one has any evidence that he even saw this stuff, let alone relied on it. and his own expert agrees that there is no evidence of reliance. if you believe dr. proctor -- you do not even believe me. you believe dr. proctor and you believe 2675 dr. difranza, then your answer on these questions -- actually, no, no evidence of reliance, no evidence of reliance. question eight: no evidence of reliance. question nine: no evidence of reliance. their experts admit that, and they brought them into court to admit that. you heard some evidence about him smoking marijuana. now, who cares if he smoked pot, right. well, in a lot of ways, we do not care if he smoked pot at all. but consider this, he smoked marijuana for enjoyment. cigarettes were not the only thing he smoked. he also smoked pot for several years. but there was not any advertising for smoking marijuana. there was not a marijuana institute. there was not a marijuana conspiracy or a marijuana council for research. he smoked marijuana because he liked it. now, dr. fleiter was asked about marijuana, and he actually said one puff might cause lung cancer. you remember his extreme views? he is the doctor who came in that -- the pathologist they picked. they picked a doctor 2676 who said that one puff of a cigarette can cause lung cancer. do you see any evidence in the world that that is true? is that credible based on the evidence and your common sense? and then he said, well, i guess one puff of marijuana can cause lung cancer, too. does not make any sense. but the fact that he smoked marijuana for enjoyment proves there is nothing to do with the conspiracy here. it is a man who lived for the moment. he did what he enjoyed. he was not being deceived, and he certainly did not rely. let us talk about the medical case. i think you ought to take a look at the death certificate when you go back to the jury room. you can ask for any document. you can ask for the death certificate. but here it is. this is the official record of what caused his death, and all it says is lung cancer and then it says spread to the bone. lung cancer. you see the place where it says, what is this lung cancer due to? what is this lung cancer caused by? they left it blank. they left it blank. 2677 that is the official determination of death. lung cancer, no reason, no cause for the lung cancer. take a look at the death certificate when you go back. now, why did they leave it blank? why did they not reach a determination of what caused his lung cancer? why did not they say what kind of lung cancer it is? because, notice, it does not say the cell types that dr. fleiter said or the different cell types that dr. villa said. why? well, none of his doctors testified, not one doctor in this trial that actually saw mr. marotta came to court, and ask yourself why is that. if it was so obvious that his doctors believed that, would not one of them come in? could not they have found one of them to say it? none of his doctors testified that he was addicted. and none of his doctors testified that addiction caused his cancer. none. now, the medical records themselves also have a complete lack of proof. there is not a single medical record in this case that says smoking causes lung cancer. there is not a 2678 single medical record in this case that says addiction causes lung cancer. so i was surprised to hear mr. freidin say -- talk to you about a doctor named dr. goscin. have you ever heard of dr. goscin until mr. freidin mentioned him? and you can ask for this record as well. g-o-s-c-i-n. that is the doctor that mr. freidin claimed reached a determination that it was a smoking-related cancer. how can that be? because i'm telling you the evidence is none of his doctors, none of his doctors determined that. well, one of us is right. let us look at the facts. of course mr. freidin did not show you what he was claiming, did he? this is the pathology report, phil marotta. look who signed it, that is the dr. goscin. dr. goscin that mr. freidin was talking about. look what he says. the diagnosis is a needle aspiration biopsy, we know that. he says, large cell. there is not anything on this record, see, nothing that says smoking. nothing that says 2679 smoking is the cause. and even if it was large cell, does he reach a conclusion of what caused it? mr. freidin told you that this dr. goscin had somehow decided it. the facts say that statement just was not true. and you can ask for any medical record, and you will not find any doctor, that is why they did not come in here, that is why the death certificate is blank. everyone agrees that he got lung cancer at an extremely unusual age. right off the bat, we knew this was an unusual case, and their experts agree. it was so unusual, they did a study on a million men and women, about a hundred thousand of them were male smokers. they found out about 1,772 died of lung cancer. only 31 were men under the age of 50. biggest study done, less than 2 percent of the people get lung cancer at such an early age. all the experts agree it was unusual. but the plaintiff's expert, dr. villa, who they brought in, good doctor, a very nice man, he talked about his charity. he admitted, though, right off the bat, the first thing you think 2680 about in a case this young is a family history, a family history, something in their genes. he said it raised a red flag that something other than smoking was involved. that is not our expert. that is their expert who they paid to testify. this was his testimony. he used this phrase, the family has genetic abnormalities. the family has genetic abnormalities. that is their expert. he said that these genetic abnormalities, the family history is very significant, very significant. those, again, were his words, their expert. he said it could increase the risk of lung cancer five times even if you smoke, and he had to say that because that is what the surgeon general has decided. if parents have a history of lung cancer, it is a five-fold increase in the lung cancer risk and look what they say, after cigarette smoking. so what that means is you look at smokers, and smokers have a higher chance of getting cancer. if they have a family history, it is five times that, five times that of the smoking 2681 risk. there was not any evidence to dispute this. five times. so the risk from smoking is over here. the risk for family history is five times greater. and dr. villa admitted that even if he had never smoked, people with this kind of family history can get lung cancer, and that is why you will have to decide. that is why his doctors never found that cancer was caused by smoking. one of his doctors thought, not mr. marotta, as mr. freidin said, one of his doctors thought it was the family history of asbestosis, because his parents did not just have lung cancer. both his mother and his father had asbestos-related disease. this is his own doctor's record. where was this doctor? did he come in to testify? no. they hired people from philadelphia and a doctor from miami who had never seen him. this doctor thought asbestos was contributory. now, is that why the death certificate is blank? is that why there is no official cause of death in the record? is that why none of his doctors concluded that smoking 2682 had caused his cancer? that is for you to decide. but everyone agrees that the cell type, whether it is genetics, asbestos, everyone agrees that if he had bac, it is not caused by smoking. one of the things we learned, that it was not just 1 or 2 percent of the population that gets bac, it is actually up to twenty percent. and how do we know that? well, the very last questions that mr. freidin was asking our expert, he pulled out the study and he showed him a study of bac. this was picked by the plaintiff's lawyer. and when dennis got the chance to redirect, to ask some questions, they pointed out that that study said, the american cancer society had looked and done a series of investigations on bac in the late '80s, just a few years before mr. marotta got lung cancer, twenty percent -- so all of this stuff about the pennies, it is silly. twenty percent of lung cancers are bac. but no matter what the statistics are, we are not talking about all the pennies. we are talking 2683 about the penny that is mr. marotta, that is the penny we are talking about. his doctors never determined the cause of his cancer. we know it occurs in younger people. everyone agrees it is out on the periphery of the lung, and that is right where his cancer was, and it can be invasive and spreads early. why do we say that? what was the proof? the world health organization, the leading experts on classifying these tumors, there is no dispute this was the classification of bac at the time that mr. marotta got his cancer. there is no dispute, this was the classification of bac at the time that mr. marotta got his cancer. and you see the bacs, they are peripherally situated, at the edge of the lung, everyone agrees, and look what they say, bacs tend to spread early, both within and outside the chest. that is the world health organization. they do not know the tobacco company. they are not hired by the lawyers, like their experts were. that is what the world health organization says. 2684 now, right off the bat, the pathologist that they brought in and that was dr. fleiter who writes articles and textbooks. he goes to conferences, no one denies that he is an expert before, but look what he admitted. they only had a small sample. they only had a tiny fraction of the tumor. the tumor was about 2 centimeters. that is about three-quarters inch wide, a little smaller than a golf ball. and the only part of the tumor that they took was a tiny fraction that could fit in a needle. he admits that. he says that there is something called interobserver variability. that just means two guys can get it wrong, two women can get it wrong. people can disagree. well, how often do they get it wrong? he said, in forty percent of the cases, when you do an autopsy, you find out that the cell type that the doctors thought, that the doctors guessed at was wrong. so if i was going to use the coin analogy again, this is what their own expert said. it is almost like flipping a coin, because if 2685 you do an autopsy, forty percent of the time they are wrong. well, we know it is true, because none of the experts, none of the evidence that they rely on agrees. you saw that one of the records said large cell, but dr. fleiter who they hired to come in, he did not agree. he said it was a different type of cancer, adeno. and then dr. villa, who certainly has great experience. we do not doubt that. he has great experience, look what he said. he said, well, i think it is fifty percent large cell. it could be 25 percent adenocarcinoma and then, right at the end of his testimony, he said i also see some squamous. so none of them agree, dr. villa thinks, well, it could be three different kinds of things and everyone agrees, you just had a tiny sample. their own experts do not agree with each other. if they cannot convince each other, i submit they should not convince you. as you saw from experts on both sides, the 2686 issue of whether his cancer is a bac turns on whether the cells lining these air sacs are cancer. dr. shmookler who is looked at hundreds and thousands of cases of cancer, he is the head of pathology of one of the largest hospitals in the country. they like to make fun of him and say, oh, he had the nerve to get a skin cancer pathology certification. they do not tell you he was board-certified as a pathologist for 35 years, both in anatomical pathology and in clinical pathology. just like dr. villa, their expert, he also got a certification in another area. but he ran one of the biggest hospitals in the country, their pathology department, and saw hundreds of thousands of cases. here is what dr. shmookler showed you from the slides. on the right -- sorry -- on the left, you have mr. marotta's lung. everyone agrees, both experts, that is an air sac. that white space are the air sacs and, here, look, you do not have all these cells and all these unusual cells on the periphery, away from this, but right along the air sacs. clustering along the air sacs, you see this. 2687 now, here is a textbook, what both sides agree is a type of stock photo that doctors use. this is a textbook photo of bac. look at this. compare it to this. notice the size, very similar. notice the shape, very similar. notice where they are located. on the air sac. on the air sac. you know, the plaintiffs' lawyers talked a lot about our guy wrote a textbook. but this is the textbook and, in the end, you have two experts saying, i think these cancer cells are cancer, i think these cells are just the result of inflammation. you have to decide. but when you do that, remember, none of the doctors that actually saw him ever reached the conclusion that it was smoking and that is why the death certificate is blank. here is another textbook photo of what bac looks like and here is an actual photo of mr. marotta's lung and notice the similarities in the pattern, notice the similarities in the size and shape of the cancer cells. here is an air sac. it looks like a lake. you can see the cancer cells, again, clustered 2688 around the edges. same thing if you look at the textbook. now, should not the experts have done some tests that were available. should not you at least have the right to hear whether tests were done? we asked dr. fleiter: there are tests today that can determine cell type, were they done? no. there are tests that can determine asbestos? he says they were not done. there are tests that can determine if cigarette smoking was the cause? he talked about various tests on genetics. none of these tests were done. there is no actual test proof. what they are saying is these doctors who they hire and who they come in can disagree with the death certificate, can give a contrary opinion to every doctor that saw him. that is what they want you to base their proof on. but they did not do any of the tests that might have supported that. dr. fleiter said he did not see anything under the microscope that could say that the cancer is a tobacco cancer. but look what he admitted. 2689 he freely admitted, if they had actually gotten the whole tumor instead of just a tiny fraction, it could have been bac, he admitted that. remember when they wrote one hundred percent certainty on the board? well, dr. fleiter was not one hundred percent certain because he said, if we got the rest of the tumor, it could have been bac. he said if we got the rest of the tumor, it could have contained asbestos and, of course, he do not do any tests and no one else did to determine whether that is true. the last thing i want to say about the medical evidence is that we called another one of their experts. dr. neal messinger is a radiologist. that means it is a doctor who looks at x-rays and ct scans. he was hired by plaintiffs. you heard the testimony that he met with laura damiani, a lawyer for mr. marotta again, and bob schack. he said they met with him, they brought the reports to him. pretty much similar to what they were talking about with dr. shmookler. they did not call him. so we read his sworn testimony. this is the plaintiff's 2690 expert on x-rays and cts. he says he looks at how many x-rays and cts a day, a hundred, a hundred a day. he is seen hundreds, who knows, if not thousands of lung cancers. he was asked, can bac present the way mr. marotta's tumor did? and he was asked, this was a tumor that grew, it blocked that superior vena cava, that vein that they talked about and he said yes, it can. can bac grow enough that it blocks this big vein? and he said yes, i think it could. he also said that bac can be an aggressive tumor. well, they did not call him and you will see his testimony contradicted - contradicted what dr. villa said. so their own radiology expert says it can be bac. no doctor ever determined this. your honor, is this a good breaking point? the court: keep going. mr. belasic: both sides have talked to you about the burden of proof. we have already discussed this first part. it is their burden to prove phil marotta had a type of lung cancer caused by smoking. 2691 it is their burden to prove that their conclusion, which is different than the doctors who saw him, is supported by evidence. now we have two interlinking issues. you have to decide if phil marotta was addicted, and you have to decide whether addiction was the legal cause of phil marotta's death. now, you heard a lot of talk by mr. freidin this morning, about addiction. what you did not hear very much of is this part: was addiction a legal cause of phil marotta's death? well, they brought dr. difranza to the stand and he talked all about addiction, but one thing he did not testify to was that addiction was a legal cause or addiction was a cause of mr. marotta's cancer. their own expert never said that. we know that none of the actual doctors who really saw mr. marotta reached that conclusion. we know there are no medical records that say addiction was the cause of the lung cancer. we know the death certificate does not even list a cause of cancer. it does not say smoking and, obviously, it does not say addiction. 2692 you have heard this, that in order for the plaintiffs to prove that addiction caused lung cancer, it has to involve at least three things. it has to be a direct cause, not indirect. it has to be continuous, continuous addiction, causation of lung cancer, and it has to be substantial. at the very beginning of this case, mr. alvarez said, we want you to know that we take responsibility for mr. marotta causing his own injury. he quickly said it was just partial. but they said that from the very beginning, and if you look at the jury instructions, judge tuter instructs you that the plaintiff is legally responsible for causing his injury. you have to decide the percentage, if you reach it. but let us think about what does that mean. why on earth would phil marotta, the son, admit that his father was legally responsible for causing his own cancer? well, first, it has to mean that mr. marotta knew that smoking was dangerous. it has to mean that he chose to continue to 2693 quit. because if mr. marotta did not really know any of the dangers, they would never say he was legally responsible for causing his own injury. they would say he is blameless. it has to mean, when they admit this, that mr. marotta had the ability to quit. because if he did not have the ability to quit, why on earth would the plaintiff in this case and the lawyers tell you that he caused his own injury, at least in part. they would not. he would be blameless if he did not have the ability to quit. and it has to mean that mr. marotta had the ability to quit smoking at a time that would have prevented his death. because if he could not quit, or if it was too late, then how could they admit that he was legally responsible for causing his injury? that is what they said off the bat and that is what mr. marotta said when he took the stand. but that is not what you heard in this trial. they call experts to say the exact opposite. they brought an expert, difranza, that said, well, no matter how he tried, he 2694 could not quit. how can that make sense? they tell you on the one hand, he is legally responsible for causing his own injury, and you heard judge tuter's instructions, because he basically did not try hard enough. you will read the instruction. and then their expert comes in and says, oh, no, he could not quit smoking. well, which is it? their expert says that nicotine addiction controlled mr. marotta, that he was caught in some cycle. he had no choice. he said there was nothing more he could do. remember dr. difranza, nothing more he could do. you have to decide, does that make sense? you do not get to choose, though, whether they should be bound by their admission. you do not get to choose that, because judge tuter's instruction is clear. the plaintiffs have admitted, and you are required to find that mr. marotta caused his own injury. sure, if you get to the question, you can decide a percentage. but you are not allowed to say he did not cause his own injury. and 2695 that means that he was able to quit, and we know that from the experts. that means that he could have quit and avoided his injury. otherwise, they would never have admitted it. you will have to decide why they then called experts to contradict almost everything they said on this issue. now, we are going to show, and we are going to review some of the evidence, that addiction was not a direct cause of his death and, of course, none of their experts said this. they did not even ask -- dr. difranza did not even testify on that issue. that it was not continuous. there is not continuous evidence of addiction, let alone that it was caused. we know his own doctors did not say this and we know that the plaintiff is admitting, in effect, that mr. marotta could have quit and, therefore, he is responsible for his own death. now, there was a lot of talk about dr. benowitz and it is true, he was the plaintiff's expert. you saw him. he is no friend of the tobacco industry, obviously. he talked about the dangers of smoking and he 2696 talked about nicotine. but we called him in our case because, as he told you, he has done more research on nicotine than anyone in the world. he was the scientific editor for the surgeon general's report on addiction. so the surgeon general, the doctor with the beard, when he comes out and talks about it, the man he hired, the man who was the top scientist, who wrote the report and who did more research than anyone, that is who we called. do not let them suggest that, hey, r.j. reynolds did not call anyone on addiction. we called the most qualified person in the country, according to the plaintiffs. we know mr. marotta could have avoided his cancer if he had quit. the surgeon general tells us. "after ten years of quitting, your risk begins to approach that of one who has never smoked." after ten years of quitting, your risk goes almost all the way down to a person who has never smoked. 2697 he got his cancer in 1994. if he quit in 1984, his risk could have gone back to normal. if he quit in the '70s or the '60s or the '50s, all of the times where he never even tried to quit, he could have avoided his injury. i'm not going to say a lot about addiction. you are going to use your common sense. the issue here is whether addiction was the cause of his cancer. but dr. difranza came in, and it was a little surprising. he used this psychiatric manual. and i asked him, have you ever used it before in your practice? no, not once. they brought a guy in who had never used the psychiatric manual. why? well, because he is not a psychiatrist. he is not licensed to practice as a psychiatrist. he came in here basically pretending to be a psychiatrist. the very book he used says you cannot do that. it is important that dsm-iv not be applied mechanically by an untrained individual. and he said, you know, the only time i use this dsm-iv is in cases where the tobacco 2698 plaintiff lawyers hire me to do it. he is not qualified on that issue. you will have to decide why they even tried to do that. but what we do know, because i asked dr. difranza, is that even if there is a diagnosis under this psychiatric manual, it does not mean you cannot control your behavior. it says, "the fact that an individual meets the criteria for a dsm-iv diagnosis does not carry any necessary implication regarding the individual's degree of control over his behavior." you know, i showed that to dr. difranza and he did not know. he said -- i asked him, did you even read the book that you relied on? and he said, well, i read the introduction. and then i had to point out that that is exactly where it is from, the introduction. so i do not know what was up. you have to decide what he was doing when he was making those claims under oath. he said, well, you know, everyone can quit except the heavy smokers. he made a big deal out of it. he said in my 32 years, i've never 2699 seen a research study that said heavy smokers can quit. i said, is that really true. i showed him what took me a half hour to find, remember those questions, and he said, i think you are trying to trick me. i asked him, well, wait a second, you said in 32 years, you have never even seen it. well, here it is in probably the most obvious source available, the national cancer institute and american cancer society study. their expert apparently had never heard of this. they followed a million smokers and of the people who smoked two packs a day or more, 54 percent had quit. now, look at the period, 1959, the exact year that mr. marotta smoked his first cigarette, from '59 to '72. that is only about 12 or 13 years. mr. marotta smoked for more than 30. in just 12 years, more than half of the people who were heavy smokers, who smoked two packs a day quit. do not let anyone here tell you that there was evidence that it is impossible to do it because dr. difranza was not even aware of the evidence. 2700 they can quit. half of them quit in just 12 years. we know the government says, and the studies suggest, that everyone can quit smoking. that is the official position of the experts at the united states government. it is not a tobacco company issue. this is what the antismoking experts at the government said, everyone can quit. dr. benowitz, he wrote the book. he literally wrote the surgeon general's report on addiction. he was the scientific editor and reviewed it. he said any smoker can quit. 60 million people have quit smoking. ninety percent of the people who quit did it without any help. you know, gum was available. nicotine gum was available. and i suppose if mr. marotta really wanted to quit, he would have at least tried it. and if mr. marotta really wanted to quit, he would have taken five minutes and saw his doctor and asked for help. we know he did not do any of those things. that is not an excuse. ninety percent of these people, 60 million people did it without any help of any kind, including those two pack a 2701 day smokers. dr. benowitz, he wrote the surgeon general's report on addiction which said, even if a smoker is addicted, it does not mean he could not quit. the government says that the people who do quit, are they less addicted, is that the reason that they quit and the addicted people cannot? no, it is not true. the people continue to smoke, they are not more addicted than those who stop. it is not addiction. it is the people who make the choice to quit. now, what about that choice? does nicotine stop it? dr. benowitz, done more nicotine research than anyone in the world says, nothing that nicotine does prevents a smoker from understanding that cigarette causes disease. it does not affect your thinking. it does not affect your mental abilities and it definitely does not prevent you from understanding all of the warnings, all of the warnings that mr. marotta received. he said that within a few weeks of quitting, the number of receptors in the brain 2702 are normal and within days or up to a couple of weeks, withdrawal symptoms, like irritability are gone. sure, we know mr. marotta reported that he was irritable, we know he told people that. someone said he was uncomfortable. someone said he was frustrated. it goes away in a few days and that is the plaintiff's expert. we called him to the stand, but he was the plaintiff's expert. this is what the american cancer society and dr. benowitz said are correct. "do you have what it takes to stop smoking?" three questions and think about whether mr. marotta could answer these. "do you want to stop smoking?" they say, well, he did. "are you willing to make some changes in your routine?" they say, well, he did. "are you willing to put up with some uneasy moments after stopping? "if you answer yes to all three questions, you can stop smoking." and dr. benowitz who wrote the surgeon general's report says that is true, that is true. those three questions. 2703 now, you heard the evidence, mr. marotta was not willing to put up with some of the uneasy moments. he did not like the irritability and the frustration and, after a few hours, he picked up his cigarette again and then he would wait another year and he would quit for a couple of hours, and then he would wait for lent or new year's. all of those days in between, he would do nothing to try to quit smoking. that is what his family members said, a couple of times a year. dr. benowitz said there is two keys to quitting. motivation, it is obvious. if you are not motivated, you cannot quit. persistence means you have to make a serious effort and you need to be persistent. you do not take a year off, like mr. marotta did. now, was he really motivated to quit? here is what his son said. never really tried. i asked him that. he said, oh, he tried and then i had to pull out his sworn testimony from before the trial -- sworn testimony that the plaintiff said that he was reading during this 2704 trial, and his sworn testimony was that his father never really tried. i asked him, you think your father was motivated? he said he did not know. now he is suing and you found out that they are suing for $27 million. and the lead plaintiff says, under oath, that his father never really tried and that he does not even know if his father was motivated to quit, and he wants to be a millionaire nine times over for the choice that he is now second guessing. marie, mr. marotta's wife, said that they stopped for a few hours for lent and new year's and that that was stupid. and she said it was just something we did. it was not a plan like you would make a diet plan and you would stick to it. it was just something that they did every year and that they knew they really were not going to quit. that is why she called it stupid. now, ask yourself, what did mr. marotta do the other 364 days of the year or the other 363 days of the year? there is not any testimony that he made any effort to cut down on his smoking or to even try to quit. once a year, at lent or new year's, for a few hours. 2705 his partner, mr. denunzio said he did not know if he was motivated or he wanted to quit. these are the people who loved him. these are the people who knew him best. it is not some tobacco company doctor. these are the people who knew him. these are the people that you could trust to tell the truth about him. they did not even know if he was motivated. in fact, andrea bacener, the youngest daughter, took the stand and said -- she was 17 when her father died. in all that time, she said she never, never saw her father try to quit smoking. pretty startling when you consider the claims that they were making in the beginning of this case and how her testimony contradicts that of her brother, phil, and contradicts that of the testimony of her sister, jill. andrea said she never saw her father try to quit. well, why did not he try to quit or why was not he motivated? well, he lived for the moment and we know, everyone agrees, that he told his partner, "do not worry, by the time i get lung cancer, i'll be 80 years old." 2706 he knew the risk of lung cancer. he was not relying on something that he never saw, on all of the things that dr. proctor said were not relevant. he was not relying on that. he knew. well, how persistent were these efforts. i mean, dr. benowitz said the scientific definition of a serious attempt to quit smoking is 24 hours. we know that he never made any effort until 1977. remember this chart. i showed it to dr. difranza. 1959, first cigarette. 1977, the year daughter andrea is born. his wife testified that the very first time he ever made any effort to stop smoking was down here around 1977. and i showed this to dr. difranza. remember how dr. difranza and i disagreed on almost every part of the facts. he actually claimed the daughters lived with mr. marotta after they were divorced and he was dead wrong. he actually claimed that mr. marotta and his wife tried to quit together after the 1980's. we had to show him the testimony. he was wrong again. 2707 but what he agreed with is that this is true. all of these years, from '59 to '77, thousands and thousands of days, mr. marotta made no effort to quit smoking. and after that, he stopped a few hours a year, less than once a year in the '80s. i asked dr. difranza -- all of us make new year's resolutions and a lot of people, it is a diet, i'm going to go on a diet, or maybe the spouse says, honey, i think you need to lose a few pounds and the spouse says, sure, i will. use your common sense. if someone went on a diet for a couple of hours new year's morning and does not diet for the rest of the year, would any of us say that person was making a serious commitment to lose weight? if you get on the treadmill or if a friend of yours gets on the treadmill one day out of the year for a short period of time, the other 364 days does not exercise, would anyone say that they were making a serious commitment to exercise? would any of you say that they really wanted to lose weight or that they really wanted to exercise? but that is what 2708 mr. marotta was doing. but that was his choice. i'm not second guessing him and neither should you, because the evidence does not second guess him. this is what the people who loved him actually said under oath: a couple of times a year, once a year, a few hours a year. the rest of the time, no effort at all. never told a doctor that he wanted to quit. never asked for help. the people who knew him the most did not even know if he was motivated. that is what his ex-wife said. we tried to quit a couple of times. never went further than a few hours. it was stupid. she said it was not a real plan. she said they knew they would be smoking shortly thereafter. now, in the end, did you see any evidence that mr. marotta is different than all the 60 million people who quit or all of the heavy smokers who quit? because this includes everyone, the people that start at 12, the people that start at 15, the people that smoke two packs a day. the cigarettes that he was smoking was not 2709 more addictive. there was not any evidence that there was something in his brain. certainly he did not see any different advertising. we know he did not see any tobacco company statements, period. their own experts say he did not rely on anything the tobacco company said. did he smoke more than the smokers that quit? we saw the evidence, millions of the heavy smokers were quitting. what his partner says is he lived in the moment. he did not get serious about quitting. his own son said, under oath, when i showed him his testimony, he never really tried. you have to weigh that evidence and decide whether he should be responsible, like the plaintiffs say, for his own choice to continue smoking and to not try to quit. we know you can, if you make the decision. look what the surgeon general said, no one can make you quit and no one can make mr. marotta quit. no one could do it for him. but the surgeon general says that, even if cigarette smoking is addictive, the individual is still responsible. look -- this is surgeon general koop, look what he says: "the 2710 individual smoker -- even though cigarette smoking is addictive, it is the individual smoker has to decide whether or not to continue that behavior." they make fun of the common sense notion that smoking is a choice. how can they? it is a legal product that people can choose to smoke. we have a right to sell it. they have a right to make that choice. and 60 million people choose to quit. they are now second guessing the decisions of this smoker and saying that they should each get a 9 million-dollar check because of what their father -- and i understand. everyone in this room is going to face the tragedy of a loved one dying, maybe all of us already have. and we all have sympathy. no one does not have sympathy for mr. marotta and for his sisters. but ask yourself, why do they get $9 million because of a decision that the surgeon general says the smoker is responsible for. dr. benowitz wrote that report. he wrote the surgeon general's report. he said, smoking does not cause a smoker to lose the ability to 2711 be responsible for their own actions. and they can say, you are a bunch of liars. it is a bunch of conspiracy. it is fraudulent, et cetera. but you know the truth from his own loved ones, that he knew from back when he was a teenager it could cause cancer. from his own experts, that nothing a tobacco company said influenced him. we know from their own experts that smokers are still responsible and we know from their own position in this case, he could have quit smoking. he could have avoided his cancer. that is why they say he is responsible for causing it and that is what judge tuter will instruct you. your honor? the court: you can keep going. mr. belasic: dr. koop, they showed his videotapes from back in the '80s and the '90s. here is what he said in the 2000s. "ultimately the smoker, you are the one that has control over your behavior. we know the cigarette will not light itself. no matter how much you have smoked, the choice is always 2712 yours." you know, he did not say if you smoke two packs a day, you are not responsible for your behavior, like their expert did. the surgeon general says, "no matter how much you light up, the choice is always yours." and for those reasons, you should find no on question one. none of his doctors reached the conclusion that their paid experts say. the death certificate did not find it. they told you that dr. goscin found it and now we know that that just was not true. you should answer no. addiction was not causing this cancer. addiction was not forcing him to have no choice. he was not tied to the wheel of a car with no brakes. he was not hurdling down a highway with no ability to stop the car, like every movie we have all seen. every smoker, according to the surgeon general, every smoker, according to the man who wrote the surgeon general, has the responsibility and the ability to choose to quit. he was not in a runaway car. he could get off the highway. he could stop. 2713 now, they talked about negligence. well, we already know, from their own experts and from the testimony of all his loved ones, that he did not rely on anything a tobacco company said. that is what dr. difranza admitted. that is what dr. proctor admitted. so nothing a tobacco company said caused his death. what is the negligence? well, r.j. reynolds sold cigarettes that caused cancer, but you cannot find -- judge tuter's instructed you, that you cannot find liability based on the fact that smoking is dangerous. r.j. reynolds agrees, smoking can cause lung cancer. smoking can cause those diseases. the government knows that, society knows that, and, yet, cigarettes are still a legal product. and judge tuter instructs you, you cannot hold the tobacco companies liable for lawful activity. well, what is the negligence? what is the negligence? mr. alvarez: objection, judge, engle. the court: overruled. mr. belasic: mr. alvarez did not give a 2714 specific example of negligence. he kept talking about the same thing. you said something that was misleading. that is what he said. but we already know, his experts already said he did not rely on anything a tobacco company said, and his best friends and the people that loved him say that he knew, as a teenager, it could cause cancer. he saw his own parents die, and he did not try to quit smoking. what is the negligence? is there any connection between the advertising? we know that is not true. is there something that a tobacco company -- that some tobacco could have done that was not advertising or that was not a statement? where is it? sure, they could go out of business, and i think that is the suggestion of dr. proctor. he is, like, well, do not sell or take all the nicotine out. look at judge tuter's instruction. it is legal to sell cigarettes, even though they have all the nicotine that is in the plant. well, dr. benowitz, their expert, admits, actually, 2715 when they make the cigarette, there is actually less nicotine than it is in the plant. you cannot find negligence on that. they did not make a connection between these engle findings. i mean -- sometimes i envy the plaintiff's lawyers. it would be great to come in and say, hey, another court found these things, and you can put up all those statements and they can make you mad. but, in the end, what they have to prove is that something in the engle findings, some of that conduct actually was the legal cause, the reason that mr. marotta died. and nothing that the tobacco company said had an affect. their own experts admitted that. we know advertising did not. their own experts admitted it, and they have not shown an act of negligence that, but for, that if it would not have happened, he would not have gotten cancer, that he would have suddenly quit and avoided it. they never specified that. it was a failure of proof, and you have to find no. well, the other question is were the defective and dangerous cigarettes, were the 2716 cigarettes, the defect, a legal cause of his lung cancer? well, they brought dr. proctor. he is not an expert on cigarette defects. he is a history professor, but they brought him to talk about that. and he said no cigarette is safe. you cannot light tobacco on fire or any other plant and suck smoke into your lungs without exposing yourself to the chemicals that are in the smoke. he said you cannot make a safe cigarette. where did they show that it is the defective product that caused it? what defect? dr. proctor said there were ingredients, he talked about ingredients, and he admitted, i'm not claiming that any special ingredient caused his cancer. he says he does not know. he is not claiming that winstons are more dangerous than any other cigarette. there is no evidence, in this case, that winstons are any more dangerous than the thousands of other brands that 50 million americans continue to smoke because the government says they have a right to. there is no evidence of that. where is the connection to mr. marotta? 2717 if you ask yourselves right off the bat, how did the defect cause the cancer, and you know you cannot find -- judge tuter tells you -- you cannot find the companies liable just for selling ordinary cigarettes. ask yourself, what is this defect? what was the evidence? was there an expert that connected the engle finding on defect to the smoker? and, of course, that assumes that his smoking was caused by cancer in the first place, and we know all of the reasons why they have failed to prove that. so you should check no on number four. your honor, can i ask my remaining time? the court: you still have 30 minutes. mr. belasic: okay. the next question is question five, and that is, what was the percentage of fault? now, as mr. alvarez correctly explained, you find no on these questions, you are not even going to reach this issue, not going to reach this issue, and based on what we discussed and the sworn testimony from their experts, not ours, from their experts, and from the loved 2718 ones, the people that knew him and cared about him. we did not bring in tobacco company hired guns to say, we found something out about what he knew. these were his family, the people that loved him. they are the ones that confirm our story. so you should not even be reaching this issue. but if you do, let us talk about it. they talk about comparative fault, and mr. alvarez says this is the story of a 12-year-old against a giant corporation. well, no, it is not, ladies and gentlemen. he did not smoke and stop when he was 12. he smoked for 30 years. he made decisions as an adult. and he unquestionably made decisions, when he knew, even when he was in school, that it could cause cancer. they want to act like you take one cigarette at 12, and you are never again responsible for your smoking. and, yet, they said -- i mean, i thought they promised you in opening, we are taking responsibility. he was a legal cause of his own injury. i mean, imagine if you applied this 2719 standard to drinking. i suppose some of us in this courtroom had a beer before the age of 18. i suppose some of us in this courtroom, you know, had a drink of liquor behind the junior high before the age of 18. would anyone seriously claim that, from that moment on, you now avoid all responsibility, you are no longer at fault because you were not 18? that raises another issue. when he started smoking in new york, it was a crime to sell cigarettes or furnish them to a minor. dr. proctor agreed. the legal age was 18, and, yet, he smoked anyway. and now they are trying to say he does not have any responsibility or what, he only has ten percent. how on earth did they come up with that number? well, he only has ten percent because his first cigarette was at a certain age. so i guess when he was 18 years old, or 21 or 25, he had no responsibility. that is their theory. and all i can ask is that you look at all the evidence from the people who loved him, and that you make a fair and open-minded decision 2720 based on that evidence, not what some lawyer says. all throughout school, "cancer sticks", "nicotine fit", his best friend said he would have known those terms. he knew smoking caused cancer when he was a teenager. the surgeon general's report, these pack warnings, they came out when he was in school or right after school. then he sees his parents die, and he does not even try to quit. he does not even try to quit. he waits until his daughter is born in 1977, and that is -- dr. proctor admitted that that kind of personal tragedy is one of the most potent sources of awareness of the risk. and dr. difranza, their expert, admitted there is no doubt that, by the time his parents died, he believed smoking could cause lung cancer, and he did not even try to quit then. i guess he waited until the next new year's, according to his wife. he quit for a couple of hours, and she says, at one in the morning, we are smoking again. how can he have only ten percent responsibility when, in 1966, every single day, 2721 every single 10, 15, 20-minute period, he is seeing the health warning? is he trying to quit in '66? no. his wife says almost 20 years, he makes no effort whatsoever to quit. that is her testimony. in 1970, the warning is even stronger and, again, he makes no effort, according to his wife. even in '85, when it says smoking causes lung cancer, no effort to quit smoking. his partner, denunzio, his partner, pinto, say he quit less than once a year. those were the men who lived with him for ten straight years. he quit less than once a year. now, when they take responsibility and they tell you it was his actions, his failure to make sufficient efforts to quit that caused his death, it does not mean that he is ten percent responsible. because, according to their theory, he was capable of quitting. it is not a percentage thing. you know, if two cars crash and both people are looking out the window, both people are on cell phones or, god forbid, there is a 2722 three-car pileup, sure, there is a lot of shared responsibility. not everyone is responsible. those kinds of accidents, where they have multiple causes, that is not an all or nothing. but this case is a simple decision. could he quit or not? the plaintiffs say, when they accept responsibility, that he could have quit, and that is a reason that he caused his own cancer. this is not like those car crashes. either he could quit or he did not. mr. alvarez said in opening, everyone can quit smoking, and that is why we take personal responsibility. you hold him to that promise. you hold mr. marotta to his testimony, that his father was responsible, and review the surgeon general's evidence, that everyone can quit smoking. they say, well, he is not responsible because he tried so hard. and dr. difranza says, there was not anything else he could do. all i ask you to do is review that testimony in your mind. the people that loved him said he would fluff me off, he would placate me. that is what his partner says. 2723 marie says it was stupid. his son says he never really tried. we are not writing up that evidence. those are the people that knew him, and that is what they say under oath. the same testimony that tells you that addiction was not the cause of his cancer, even if he was addicted, pick whatever definition you want, you find he was addicted, the same evidence that you reviewed that says addiction really was not the cause, his wife, you should not find a percentage of fault here. it is an all or nothing question. either he could quit or he did not. if he could not quit, then they mislead you from the beginning with this testimony. if he could quit, then the surgeon general says the smoker is responsible. notice the surgeon general did not say, because of addiction, the tobacco company is responsible. he said the smoker has to make the choice. dr. benowitz, the leading expert in the world on this, says the smoker is responsible. they are the only ones who can quit. 2724 no one from r.j. reynolds could fly to his house, take all the cigarettes out of his house and force him to quit. his own wife could not force him to quit. his partners who loved him could not force him to quit. he had to choose and he had to do more than just a couple of hours a year. he had to try more than one day out of 365. now, on question ten, that is damages. you have probably waited throughout the trial to wonder what are they suing for. you did not hear it in opening and, obviously, phil, jr. and his sisters did not say how much money they wanted, and now we get the answer. $9 million apiece. there is no evidence, obviously, in this case, that each of these children deserves to be a millionaire nine times over, because of the choices that they now second guess, the choices that make all of us have sympathy for them. but there is no evidence supporting the 9 million. you have got an arbitrary number pulled out. the lawyer tells you a number. there is no basis. does not explain it at all. immediately says, you can reject it, you could 2725 go lower, you could go even higher. but why on earth, why 27 million? what is this magic number that is being pulled out of a hat here? it defies common sense that the children, no matter how much they love their father, no matter how much they miss him and, of course, they do, we did not dispute that, it defies common sense that they get to be millionaires nine times over for their father's choices, especially given the testimony that they, themselves, said about whether their father was making serious efforts to quit. now, they are not asking for medical expenses here or even funeral expenses. they are not claiming economic damages. they are not saying that their father was giving them money. it was the other way around. phil, jr. was paying his father rent. they are not claiming lost services, that he was providing anything, he was providing some sort of service. what they are asking for is their own pain and suffering and companionship, and i understand that, but where is the basis for 2726 $9 million? i submit to you it defies common sense. they have never laid any basis for this. now, the very last question that you are going to answer is punitive damages. your honor, could i ask how much time i have left? the court: you still have 15 minutes. mr. belasic: 15 minutes? the court: yes. mr. belasic: this is the last question you are going to answer: is the plaintiff entitled to punitive damages under the circumstances of this case? what are punitive damages? well, they can only go the plaintiff, phil marotta, and to his sisters. they are not going to go to these organizations. they are not going to be awarded to a public health agency or a stop smoking clinic. they are not going to anyone else in the class. so they want $9 million each. and then if you decide punitives, they are going to ask you for more. we will have to wait to find out. i do not think you should even get there. but 2727 $9 million, they say, is not enough, 9 million apiece. they want more. well, what would happen if we pay this? i mean, is it necessary? is it necessary? you have to decide, is it necessary to deter future bad acts, to deter something, is it necessary to punish? well, paying that money is not going to help anyone stop smoking. it is not going to improve public health. it certainly will not make cigarettes safer. and when they talk about, well, all these bad things the tobacco company did, and they do not connect them to mr. marotta, remember what the judge tells you, those findings do not establish that the plaintiff is entitled to punitive damages. i think it is page 9, but you will see the instructions on punitive damages and the instructions on these engle findings. and judge tuter commands you that, under the law, you cannot base punitive damages on the findings by that other jury. this evidence has to be clear and convincing. their burden of proof on punitives 2728 is even greater, and it has to be intentional, that they intentionally did something to kill phil marotta. why would they want to kill their own customers? does it make sense? you cannot award punitive damages for harm to others. all of this talk about youth marketing from 1927, i do not know who they are talking about. i do not know who they are talking about when they show ads for lucy, desi and all the ads that their expert admitted, the plaintiff never even saw or that mr. marotta never even saw. they are trying to get you, in their argument, to say, well, what about all these other smokers. but the judge is going to command you, and already has instructed you, you cannot award any punitive damages for harm to others. it is only evidence that actually shows that it harmed the plaintiff. but what is that evidence? their experts have already agreed, nothing the tobacco companies said was relied upon by mr. marotta, either before 1982 or after. 2729 their experts already said you cannot make a safe cigarette, and admitted that r.j. reynolds tried to. he said they spent up to a billion dollars to try to make a cigarette that would not burn tobacco. he said they worked with the national cancer institute to try to make safer cigarettes. would a company that was trying to kill its customers intentionally do that? would they bet the company on a safe cigarette? would they go to the labs and work with the government to redesign? that is the instruction that says the findings are not relevant to punitives. now, the purpose of punitives, and you will see in the instruction, one of the purposes is to deter future misconduct. you have to decide: is there something reynolds does in the future, that if we award a whole boatload of money on top of the 27 million that they are asking for, that will change the world, change the way r.j. reynolds will act? consider this. it is a different world now. r.j. reynolds agrees that smoking causes cancer, agrees that it is addictive. nobody 2730 disputes that. there are not any more statements. cti, tirc, ti, they did not show you anything. died off in the '90s. no one is making those statements. it is a different world. we have got a warning right on the pack that says lung cancer. the advertising is restricted. you know, this kind of agreement to talk about causation or addiction, using these words, it would not even be possible today. all of the companies have agreed that smoking causes these diseases. and, most importantly, why there is no need to award punitives to deter is -- the tobacco industry is regulated like a utility. they are regulated like the electric company, and they are regulated by the fda. "the food & drug administration now has the authority to regulate the manufacturing, marketing and distribution." i got to ask you a simple question. what else is there? the fda controls the manufacturing, how the product is manufactured. the fda controls marketing. that means 2731 advertising, what you tell consumers. the fda controls the distribution, how the cigarettes are distributed. from the beginning of the process, when they make it, to the very end of the process when it hits the store, the fda has authority. it is a different world. the government controls the actions, and no amount of money, whether they ask for another 50 million in punitives or whether they just want their 9 million each, no amount of money is going to change that. the government is in control of the tobacco companies right now. look what it says in the most recent surgeon general's report. the fda could also establish product standards for nicotine yields. in other words, the government now actually has the legal authority to say how much nicotine is in the smoke. that is what they call nicotine yield. now, no amount of money paid to mr. marotta's children can equal the regulation and the control and the safety measures that are already in effect. the government controls 2732 what is in the cigarette. they say, if we look again, "the fda could also reduce or eliminate other constituents." and i asked dr. proctor about this. you know, the fda is in charge of all the ingredients now. they can make any ruling they want. they can say, hey, if you get vanilla as a flavor, you take it out. if you got that licorice that he was talking about that makes some cigarettes taste better, you can take it out. he agreed. they have absolute authority over that. they can take it out if they make a finding that it is dangerous. and then i asked him, you know what, they have never done it. and he agreed. the government is in control of the ingredients in cigarettes now. all that stuff that you heard about that was so bad, and the government has not said, change the way you make your cigarettes at all. there is no evidence that the fda has said take anything out, do not use an additive, but they could if they would. and they are now regulating the tobacco companies like they would the electric company. 2733 not just reduce, but also eliminate. they can say take anything out they want to. the court: nine minutes, mr. belasic. mr. belasic: now, you heard about this conspiracy, and it seems, at this point, and i'll go over it, but it is a little silly to claim that, at a meeting in a hotel before mr. marotta ever started smoking, somehow influenced him, when we know, from their own experts, that mr. marotta did not rely on anything. dr. difranza and dr. proctor told you that. and we know, from the family members, that he did not rely on anything. i asked dr. proctor, i said, you got any proof that this frank statement actually tricked smokers? has there ever been a survey? he said, well, no. i said, well, what about the one that hill & knowlton did? what about the one that the people that put out the frank statement did? he said, he did know that. and what they found was that the frank statement scared people into cutting down, and, in some cases, stopping their use of tobacco 2734 entirely. and they put it up on the board, and they will say it is horrible. they want to get you mad. mr. marotta never read it, and their expert agrees the evidence is that it scared people. he also admitted that the surgeon general found that way back when there was some health claims, and he said the health claims stopped in the mid '50s, and i thought that was interesting when dr. proctor said these health claims stopped in the mid '50s, because that was before mr. marotta even started smoking. when he was showing you the more doctors smoke camels, he said those were advertisements from the '30s and '40s. and i asked him, but you knew, coming in, that those ads were for a brand that he did not smoke, those ads were before he started smoking. and i asked him, you knew, when you came in, that those ads were before he was even born. and he just said, yeah, i knew that, but it is just to show some general things. then we find out that it is the lawyers that picked those ads, not dr. proctor. 2735 if you are going to claim that this massive conspiracy changed the landscape of america, you have a legal burden to prove that somebody relied on it, in this case, mr. marotta. we know he did not. their experts admit it. the family members admit it. but look what the public thought. did anyone in the public rely? only 3 percent -- this is the year he started smoking, 1959. they did a roper survey, one of the largest survey groups in the country. only 3 percent of the people said they would be most apt to believe the tobacco industry council. the public was not looking for the tobacco companies to tell them whether it was safe to smoke or not. what they were believing was the american cancer society, the american medical association, the u.s. department of health. you bring a fraud case -- and the instructions judge tuter will give you -- you have to prove that it has some affect. their own expert says it did not. their own expert says they did not believe it. 2736 here is the 1970 roper study. would you believe the tobacco companies? 3 percent. now, we know that mr. marotta is not even in that 3 percent. but how effective, how horrible is a conspiracy when the amount of sales, the number of people who smoke plummeted. remember the chart? dr. proctor put up the chart. it starts way up here. he says, then the conspiracy begins. and what happens? more people smoke? no. it drops down to, he said, the lowest level since the 1930s. so during this whole conspiracy, they talk about, right now in america, we have a lower percentage of people smoking than at any time since the 1930s, 80 years ago, almost a century ago. one of the reasons is, as dr. proctor admitted, nobody was listening to the tobacco companies. and the surgeon general said that when they made health claims, all it did was scare people more. now, are cigarettes more addictive? they did not put any proof. they put a surgeon general's report in that said that it had the 2737 potential to. let us look at the real evidence about smokers. in summary, there is little evidence to suggest that there is an increasing level of addiction. now, should we be worried that people today are more addicted, that the cigarettes are somehow different? national cancer institute says, no, there is little evidence the new generation of young smokers is more heavily addicted or even less likely to quit. in fact, look what they say below. "the higher percentage of occasional smokers is a change consistent with less, rather than more addiction." so you go to real life and see how people are smoking today, and the government, not a tobacco company, says cigarettes are less addictive today. i covered this. dr. proctor did not say there was some defect that you could have removed or that you were negligent in not changing the cigarette, and he specifically said that he was not going to claim that anything in winstons or the brands that 2738 mr. marotta smoked caused his injury. so what we do know is that when the surgeon general would look at things like filters, he would actually look at the death rates. they would actually look at the mortality tables, that the government said, here's how many people smoked, here's the nonsmokers. they would look and they would see, are the people who are smoking filters, are they dying at a higher rate or a lower rate? so this was not some speculation. this was the government is actually looking at, the number of deaths. and the government repeatedly said that, when they did that, the people who smoked filters had a lower rate of lung cancer. today's filters produce lower rates of lung cancer. 1989, studies show smoking filtered, lower tar cigarettes, reduces the risk of lung cancer. 1990, a lower risk of lung cancer for smokers of filtered cigarettes. so what they do is they show some papers from some ad guys who say, hey, let us talk 2739 about filtration. filtration is a good way to sell the cigarettes. but do they actually tell you what the surgeon general was out there measuring? and when they say, well, slapping a filter on a cigarette is bad. look what dr. proctor said. i said, really, is anyone in the country saying you should rip the filter off? that is the best way to smoke. did the surgeon general say take the filter off? this is what the surgeon general was saying: how is this reprehensible, discussing the kind of behavior that mr. alvarez, he could not believe, how is this the kind of behavior that entitles the marottas to get even more money than the $27 million? the surgeon general looked at the real people who smoke and, at least at the time, they were saying that, when you looked at it, the people that smoked filters died at a lower rate. so why was it reprehensible to sell a cigarette with a filter? they do not say. and, of course, there is no evidence in this case that mr. marotta was saying should i smoke a 2740 filter or an unfiltered. there is no evidence that he chose winstons for any ad and, in fact, dr. proctor admitted the winston filter, about taste, "winston tastes good like a cigarette should." it did not say "winston's filter makes it safe like a filter should." they talked about taste. but it does not matter because their own experts agree that advertising had no effect on mr. marotta. dr. proctor admitted that reynolds' president in 1968, managed his employees, to push the work concerning tobacco and health in cooperation with others and prepare a plan to foster a good relationship with the government. look what he says. does he say, if there is a safer cigarette, let us deep six it and try to kill our customers? no. he is directing them, if there is a safer cigarette, let us continue and increase our efforts in this program. please prepare a plan to carry it out. is that a company trying to kill its customers? and their own evidence showed that 2741 the companies knew, if they actually could make a cigarette, they could still burn tobacco and be safer. they had a profit motive to do it. dr. proctor admitted they actually worked with the government for about ten years to redesign their cigarettes. could i ask what my remaining time is? the court: about three or four minutes. mr. belasic: okay. there was no dispute on this. i mean, i asked dr. proctor, is not it unusual that a private company that makes a legal product would be called up by the government and they say we want to change the way you make your profit. there was no law. the government had no legal authority. the tobacco companies had a legal right to say, no, we do not care, we are going to make whatever we want. but they did not do that. dr. proctor agreed, they spent millions of dollars on this program. they went to the government and they worked hand in hand with the government scientists. i was wrong. i asked dr. proctor if it lasted five years. he said it was longer. you 2742 can see from the evidence here, it went from 1968 to 1977. everyone, the largest tobacco companies worked with the national cancer institute. r.j. reynolds sent the head of r&d to work on it. for ten years, they researched, they made every different kind of cigarette -- and remember what dr. proctor said. they looked at cigarettes where they could try to reduce nicotine to see if that was safer. sometimes people would smoke more and it would be less safe. they looked at cigarettes that would increase nicotine. remember dr. proctor said there was a theory that people smoke for nicotine, give them nicotine but not tar. they looked at all kinds of different ingredients. they looked at different chemicals that maybe could change the way smoke reacts. and dr. proctor agreed they did all of those things. they did that voluntarily with the government. now, is that the way that a company, is that the way that an industry that wants to 2743 kill its customers would act? for a while here in this case, you probably thought it was a battle of who could put up the most magazines and newspaper articles. and dr. proctor admitted that there were thousands of reports in magazines and newspapers that said about the risks of smoking. was it really secret? no, it was on the front page. it was in every magazine. that is the newspaper where mr. marotta lived. dr. benowitz said we have known that nicotine has an effect on the body for a hundred years. for a hundred years, we have known it could be difficult to quit. they were warning about addiction a century ago in this very state, the florida department of health. ninety percent of the people, before mr. marotta even picked up a cigarette, had heard that smoking could be a cause of cancer. the surgeon general said that the public had been informed by this mass media coverage. the harvard study says the very year, this is the year that mr. marotta supposedly picked up 2744 his first cigarette. 95 percent of the high school students had heard, but even down here, the junior high student, ninety percent of them had heard and they are saying it was a secret. when the surgeon general's report came out, there was massive, massive coverage. all of these are in evidence, if you want to look at it, massive coverage. the florida department of health said nearly everyone, nearly all floridians heard about the surgeon general's report. mr. marotta was in high school when that came out. now, am i making this up? how can we say that he knew about it in high school? well, his best friend said that they were using cancer sticks back then and that mr. marotta would have been well aware as far back, he said, as elementary school. that is mr. gelfano. as far back as potentially elementary school they were doing it. but we knew in high school that the cancer scare was known to -- that is mr. marotta. this is his high school yearbook. it references the cancer scare. you can look at his yearbook. 2745 it is in evidence. you can look at the pictures of the prom and the people on the basketball team. but it has this page where they make it clear that the cancer scare was being noticed. and here is the priest in his school where you heard the testimony, smoking was prohibited. dr. proctor admitted in poll after poll, that huge majorities of people thought that smoking cigarettes was harmful to their health. but in the end, it does not come down to a survey and it does not come down to statistics. in the end, r.j. reynolds made a legal product that is legal even if it causes cancer, that is legal even if it is addictive, that the judge tells you cannot impose liability merely for its sale. and in the end, mr. marotta chose to smoke it. like millions of people, he made that choice. you have seen he made a different choice when it came to the efforts to quit. that his wife, that his loved ones, that his partners say it was a couple of times a year. his partners say it was not even once a year. 2746 none of the evidence permits you to second guess his decisions. you have to evaluate it based on the evidence that you have heard from the people here. everyone agrees, including their two experts that nothing that r.j. reynolds said caused him to die. no one claims that if r.j. reynolds had said something differently, he would have quit like that and avoided his cancer. and the plaintiff told you from the very beginning in this case, and we know it because it is what the surgeon general and the top expert in the world says, everyone could quit smoking. that is alex alvarez in opening saying everyone can quit, so we take responsibility. that is the surgeon general saying that smokers are responsible. that is the man that put all the science together, dr. benowitz, who we had to call to the stand saying that smokers are responsible. it is been a long case. as i told you, much of the reason for it being long is that the evidence did not have anything to do with mr. marotta. 2747 i thank you for attention for every one of those eight days and you should answer "no" to the last final question. thank you, again, for everything you have done.