mr. belasic: good morning, ladies and gentlemen. thank you for your service in this case. as mr. loehr said, thank you for all your attention in what i know has been a fairly long trial. this is the last chance that i'm going to get to speak to you. plaintiffs have the advantage of getting to go first and last, and i'll ask when i'm done and mr. loehr gets up and uses his remaining time to make arguments, that you will think about what i might have said, that you will think about what i'm going to tell you now, but most importantly you will think about the evidence that has been presented in the case. and when mr. loehr gets the last word, think about the evidence on the issues that he is talking about and what you have seen here today. now, as mr. loehr told you, the plaintiff has the burden of proof in this case, but he used the sports analogy. he said he does not have to win the case 48 to nothing. neither do we. he covered a lot of issues, spoke for about an hour and 15 minutes. he covered a tremendous number of topics. i hope you will bear with me if i try to respond to those topics, but we do not need to win this case 100 to 99. we do not need to convince you or to prove issues on every topic that they raise. i think this case comes down to a couple core issues and a couple core topics and on those the evidence is undisputed. now, when i gave opening statement a couple of weeks ago i made a promise to you. i promised that the evidence would show that mr. martin made a choice to smoke. he made choices to continue to smoke, but that when he really wanted to quit, when he was sufficiently motivated by himself, making up his own mind, not relying on complaints from his family, he did quit. i promised you that the evidence would show that at every point in mr. martin's smoking career or smoking history, he was able to quit, and i promised you that at no point did he ever lack the ability to quit. he could quit when he wanted to. now, as i understood mr. loehr when he started out in maybe the first half hour of his closing, he seemed to agree with that. he said it was not a big deal. of course, everyone knows everyone can quit. of course, mr. martin could have quit earlier. that is our fault. but when he wound up, i heard him say in just the last few minutes of his speech that mr. martin was caught up in addiction, and it was something that mr. martin did not understand, he claimed, and it was something that he said that mr. martin had an inability to control. well, that is not the evidence you saw. from the very beginning, even before we presented our evidence, the plaintiff's expert, dr. burns; the plaintiffs expert, dr. cummings; the plaintiff's expert, dr. benowitz, who you saw on video, admitted that all smokers have the ability to quit, that addiction does not mean that a person cannot control their behavior, that addiction does not mean that smoking is not a personal choice. and when it came to mr. martin, the only two plaintiffs witnesses, dr. burns and dr. cummings, admitted that right off the bat. remember when i asked dr. cummings is there any point, at any point in mr. martin's smoking history where he could not have quit if he wanted to, dr. cummings had to agree. there was not any, if he wanted to make the serious commitment. if he had made the same type of commitment that he made in 1994 when he threw his cigarettes away, when he decided for the first time to quit for himself and not in response to family, he could have quit at any time. dr. cummings did not dispute that. we asked dr. burns the same questions, and he agreed that mr. martin could have quit smoking at any time in his career. now, what i've heard for the past hour is mr. loehr saying, well, that is not important. all that matters in this case is whether we can call mr. martin addicted. but that is not the issue in this case. that is not what you are going to be asked to decide. what you are going to be asked to decide is cause, not whether mr. martin was addicted but whether addiction caused him to smoke. now, when the plaintiffs experts admit right off the bat that mr. martin could have stopped smoking at any time, if he chose to do so, if he made a decision to do so, there is no way you can say that addiction caused him to smoke. if you can decide to stop behavior, your behavior is not being forced. your behavior is not being caused by anything other than your own decision. and that is why all those admissions by the plaintiff's experts that mr. loehr says, well, they are not important because let us talk about addiction or what a definition is, those are the issues you are being asked to decide. those are the critical issues. we do not have to win this case 100 to 99. we can win this case one nothing and that is the issue i'm going to talk about today when we begin looking at some of the evidence. let us look at what you did see from plaintiff's own witnesses. could we put up demonstrative 67? now, this is dr. cummings, their expert. this is what the american cancer society uses. you have seen these three questions. it says, if you can answer yes, you can stop smoking. do you want to stop smoking? are you willing to make changes in your routine? are you willing to put up with some uneasy moments? dr. cummings admitted that was true. he said everyone who answers yes to those questions can quit. he admitted that mr. martin could have quit. let us think about these questions though when it comes to mr. martin. was mr. martin willing to make some changes in his daily routine before 1994 when he did quit? was mr. martin willing to put up with some uneasy moments after stopping before 1994 when he did quit? well, the testimony from the family members is undisputed. when he did quit, all that happened was they, in their words, he was irritable and he was grumpy. he did not go into convulsions. he did not have physical withdrawal. he did not have cold sweats. he did not have agonizing cravings. in their own words, he was irritable and he was grumpy. well, that is exactly what dr. cummings admitted. that is exactly what the american cancer society says. these are some uneasy moments. we know how difficult our daily lives are. we know how difficult the times that we are facing now are. everyone is irritable and grumpy at times. irritability does not mean that you are being caused to smoke. grumpiness does not mean that you have lost the choice to quit. i asked dr. cummings those questions. you saw dr. seiden, the only psychiatrist you saw in this case, the only person that actually works with issues of personal behavior and control and they both agreed. irritability and grumpiness does not mean that a person is being caused to smoke. it did not take away his choice. we know in 1994 that when mr. martin was willing to make changes, was willing to put up with uneasy moments, he quit cold turkey and he never went back. it is undisputed that he did not relapse when he made a serious commitment to quit in '94. all of this testimony about some other smokers may have relapsed, some other smokers in statistics may have shown relapse. that does not apply to mr. martin. when he wanted to quit, he quit for good. his wife agreed, the medical records agreed, and he never went back to smoking. now, dr. burns came up and he said some of the exact same things. again, this is plaintiff's witnesses, plaintiff's witnesses are admitting this issue that mr. martin could control his smoking, he was not being forced to smoke, his smoking was not some involuntary act. let us look at what dr. burns talked about. you remember dr. burns was one of the people who first was involved in setting up a california stop smoking program. dr. burns said he was on the expert committee that did the evaluation for this california smokers help line and that dr. burns had determined that it was successful and accurate. remember i asked him, do you vouch for this; is this accurate and true information and he said, sure, it was. look what is on the smokers help line that is run by the very medical center that dr. burns works at. this is his own school's program for the state of california. they tell smokers, it is not about ability to quit smoking. you can do it. it is more about having solid motivation. chris, let us look at the next one. the same information that dr. burns told us was true and accurate. everyone has the ability to quit, quitting is about motivation, not ability. so when mr. loehr said in the last couple of minutes of his closing that mr. martin had an inability to control, that is not the evidence. his own expert witness that he chose, that he put on the stand admits that the opposite is true. quitting is not about ability. everyone, including mr. martin, had the ability to quit. quitting is about motivation. it is about a decision. remember when dr. seiden talked about the difference between a decision that comes from within yourself, self-motivation and a decision that comes from others. he said, look, i'm overweight. i need to lose weight. my wife tells me i need to lose weight. but the only way i'm going to lose weight is if i decide for myself, not whether my wife decides for me. remember what you saw mrs. martin say on the videotape? she said that her husband had to decide for himself. she said, in her own words, the decision has to come from the smokers themselves. she said, in her own words, that they have to make up their own mind to quit and then she said, that is what he did. that is what her husband did when he made up his own mind. let us look at the last one. and again from the california smokers help line that dr. burns said is true, there is really only one thing that will make you quit. you. when you are asked to decide did addiction cause mr. martin's smoking, not was he addicted, not did he meet any definition of addiction or dependence, but did addiction cause his smoking, remember this. the only thing that could make him quit was mr. martin. the only thing that can make a smoker quit is the smoker themselves. and when the smoker decides to quit, then suddenly that addiction is not an impediment. they can quit. that is why every expert that came up told you that 50 to 60 million smokers, most of them would be classified as addicted under some definition, but 50 to 60 million smokers have already quit. now think about that. if we had a nation of 100 million current and former heroin addicts, do you really think that 50 to 60 million would quit and the rest would go around about their jobs? if we had 100 million cocaine addicts? of course not. it is not the same thing. dr. burns admitted it. dr. cummings admitted it. those were their two witnesses. at the end of their case, they had already conceded the core issue, that it was mr. martin who decided whether he smoked. not addiction, not some outside force. he was not being caused to smoke. he was deciding to smoke. you can take that down, chris. let us look at the verdict form, question one, and you will remember mr. loehr showed you this. if you could just blow up that first question, chris. you have already seen it so you know what it asks. was addiction a legal cause of the death of benny martin? i want to point out a couple of things it does not ask you. it does not ask you, was benny martin addicted. yes, no, case is over, because that is not what you are being asked to decide. you are not being asked to decide if mr. martin was addicted. we saw it on many definitions. he certainly did not meet the definition of addiction dependency under the psychiatric manual, the dsm-iv. if he said addiction was difficult to quit, maybe he meant that. if he said addiction, as their expert said, everyone who smokes ten cigarettes a day, well that does not require much proof. so maybe he could have meant that. you are not being asked to decide was he addicted. you are being asked to decide was addiction the legal cause of his death. was addiction causing him to smoke, or as their experts admit, and mr. martin's own quitting in '94 proves, could he have quit whenever he made a serious effort to do so. at the same time mr. loehr talked about the evidence on whether smoking caused his cancer, and this question does not ask if smoking caused his cancer. i think we both agree that if smoking did not cause his cancer, then certainly the answer to this question would have to be no. but it is not enough for the plaintiffs to say, well, smoking caused his cancer or he met some definition of addiction. you are being asked very specifically by the court was addiction the cause of the death of mr. martin. now, we looked at evidence on whether addiction and cause are even in the same boat and some of the best evidence came from the surgeon general's report that dr. burns himself reviewed and edited. can we put up that surgeon general's report? this is the first of three surgeon general reports that i showed you in opening. you can see again, cigarette smoking is clearly a health problem, but it is called personal choice health behavior. not something that is involuntary, personal choice. it is not the tobacco companies that made up this idea. it is the plaintiff's own expert, it is the office of smoking and health, the surgeon general's office. if you look at the next surgeon general's report. again, the surgeon general, a report that dr. burns himself worked on, smoking is a personal choice, behavior. and finally when we look at the '86 surgeon general's report. do you remember back that dr. burns actually testified twice? before he came live and he talked about mr. martin specifically, he testified for, i think about five hours on videotape, and i got to ask him questions on the videotape presentation. and i showed him this from his own surgeon general's report. "cigarette smoking is an addictive behavior. the individual smoker must decide whether or not to continue that behavior." now, consider what they are saying here. cigarette smoking is addictive. it does not say, and therefore it causes people to smoke, it causes their death if they ever get cancer or heart disease. no, it says, cigarette smoking is addictive, but they say it is the individual smoker's decision to continue that behavior. they do not say addiction is causing the smoking. they are saying that because of addiction the smoker's decision still remains to continue that behavior. that is not consistent with what dr. burns and mr. loehr want you to believe about question one. this statement by the surgeon general shows why the answer to question one, did addiction cause his death is no, because cigarette smoking may be addictive, but it is the decision to smoke that determines whether or not the smoking continues. now, i asked dr. burns flat out, this is your surgeon general's report, do you agree with this? he had a one word answer, one word. he said, absolutely. and that is on the videotape. when you go back to the jury room, if you want to see that testimony, you are allowed to call for it. you can see dr. burns say absolutely. that is why at the end of their case because of what dr. burns and dr. cummings had admitted, the issue was one nothing. addiction did not cause mr. martin's behavior. you cannot say that when he could have chose to quit and successfully quit at any time, and their own experts admit it. now, dr. burns and dr. benowitz and even dr. cummings admitted it was not just a smoker's personal choice, but dr. burns said, and dr. benowitz, that the smoker is responsible for that behavior. i think we just saw an example. it says that even if it is addictive, it is up to the smoker. dr. burns agreed that the smoker is responsible for that behavior, not that there is some outside force or that addiction causes the smoking so that there is no responsibility or no ability to control, he admitted. i think at this point we need to step back for a moment. if you have a behavior, in this case it is smoking behavior, but if you have a certain behavior and everyone agrees that behavior can be stopped, you have the capability to stop that behavior if you make a serious effort and if you really make up your mind. no one could say then that you were being caused to engage in that behavior because of some outside force. if everyone agrees that you can stop that behavior, that is up to you. you are causing the behavior. you are making the choice. you are making the decision. now, let us say that behavior was risky or dangerous and if you kept doing it, you might get harmed. if that harm came and you suffered that injury, as long as everyone agrees you could have stopped at any time, that you were in control of the behavior and that you were the one who continued it, no one would say you were caused to suffer that injury, there is some outside force. that is the issue here and the plaintiff's experts, as you could plainly see, say what is causing the smoking is still the smoker's decision. you can say the smoker is addicted. you can talk about nicotine and its effects. but in the end, the only thing that is deciding whether the person goes to the store or lights up that day, rather than stopping for good, as mr. martin did, is the smoker himself. as we will see, it was not just the experts, it was mr. martin and mrs. martin who both agreed on that as well. now, there are a lot of doctors in this case in the medical records. there were not a lot of mr. martin's doctors that actually testified at the trial. i think in the medical records that were shown to you on the screen, i counted maybe a dozen doctors. but as you learned there were 500 to 1,000 pages of medical records in this case. and if you read, i do not know why you would want to, but if you read all those medical records, you would see several dozen doctors. not one, not one of mr. martin's doctors came to court and testified that addiction caused his death. mr. loehr said it was really easy. he said it was my burden to disprove that, i should have brought someone. we will talk about what dr. seiden said, but it is their burden of proof. this is a complex medical case. i think the least we can expect is that one of the plaintiff's physicians would come in and, if it is so obvious, would tell you that addiction caused his death. not one. in this entire case, only one doctor who had ever seen mr. martin testified and his name was dr. bray. if you remember, he did not come live. that was one of those reenactments where the deposition is read into the record. mr. hill was asking questions and there was somebody playing -- there was somebody playing dr. bray. and you can call for that testimony. you can look at the testimony that was presented to you. dr. bray did not say a thing about addiction. he did not say that mr. martin was addicted, and he certainly did not say that mr. martin's death was caused by his addiction. when it comes to the plaintiff's doctors, dozens to choose from, you have a complete failure of proof in this case. they could have called any doctor they wanted who had actually seen mr. martin instead of calling people who write articles for a living, or instead of calling people who've testified 100 times, make a living off tobacco litigation. they did not call those doctors. the only doctor that actually testified by deposition said nothing about addiction. you do not have to believe me. you can look it up for yourself. see what dr. bray says. there is nothing in there. they did mention that there was a record, and we saw it. there was a medical record from september 23rd, '94, two weeks before mr. martin quit smoking and there was a dr. olsen. mr. loehr said that dr. olsen is dead. i do not know that. i accept his representation. and dr. olsen wrote two words, hypertension and then he wrote nicotine addiction. there is no finding obviously that nicotine addiction caused his cancer. there is no record that nicotine addiction caused his death. but what is most important, two weeks later mr. martin quit and never went back to smoking. the evidence is undisputed. two weeks later he made up his mind to quit. now, whether dr. olsen wrote habit or this is a man who really likes smoking or dependency or addiction, it did not change mr. martin's ability to control his smoking. two weeks after he wrote those words, mr. martin quit for good. i think when you look at what the admissions were from dr. burns, from dr. cummings and from dr. benowitz on the video and consider that not one single doctor who ever treated mr. martin came in and told you that addiction caused his death, that even before we started our case, plaintiffs had failed to meet their burden of proof, that even before we put on evidence, the answer to question one, did addiction cause his death is no. now, on october 4, 1994 mr. martin got the horrible news. he got the diagnosis, and you have seen the medical records multiple times that say he quit within two weeks of diagnosis, another record that says that he quit at the time of diagnosis. so think about that first day that he stopped smoking and he never went back to it. can anyone, using our common sense, say that addiction was causing him to smoke that day? he was not smoking. he had made up his mind to quit. mrs. martin said that he made up his own mind to quit smoking, and she said that is what he did. so addiction was not causing him to smoke on that day. the next day, he did not smoke and the next day after that and the few months after that and the 11 months after that before he passed away, and all the time he was on the golf course with his brother after the diagnosis, he was not smoking. addiction was not causing him to smoke. back up, back up to the day before he was diagnosed. was addiction causing him to smoke then, knowing what we know now, that he could have stopped, as he did the very next day? back up ten years. was addiction causing him to smoke then, knowing what we know now, that he could have quit, knowing what we have seen from dr. burns, dr. benowitz that smokers can quit at any time they seriously choose to, that the issue is motivation and not ability? if you look at the evidence on his actual quitting, which the plaintiffs tried to downplay, the answer to that question, did addiction cause his death, the answer has to be no. and i think we made a traumatic point with dr. burns when we asked him, wait a second, if he can quit at any time and if you are telling us that there is no time when he could have stopped smoking, well, if he had quit at 64 when the surgeon general's report came out -- we know he saw it. his sister, mary martin, said it. if he had quit in '66 when the package warnings came out, we know he saw those. his wife said he did. would he have gotten cancer? dr. burns went through the statistical probability, et cetera, and bottom line if he quits in '64, according to their own expert, he would not have developed cancer. i asked about '69, same answer. he would not have developed cancer. what about '74 or '79 if he had quit then, more likely than not he would have avoided getting any cancer. i asked dr. burns, when is the last time he could -- when you could say that he would have avoided his cancer, and he said somewhere around ten years. he was diagnosed in '94, so ten years would have been 1984. now, when plaintiff's experts admit that he could have stopped at any time previously and they admit he would not have gotten this cancer if he had, there is no way you can answer question one yes. did addiction cause his death when he had the ability to avoid any later injury and plaintiffs admit it could be done, the answer under our common sense and the plaintiff's testimony has to be no. now, i think mr. martin's own words answer this question probably better than all of the evidence. so let us look at number 74. in this case the evidence from what mr. martin himself said during the conversations that he had with his family suggest that mr. martin took responsibility for his choices to smoke. when he learned he had cancer, he did not say, well, it was caused by addiction, i had no ability to quit. he did not say, as mr. loehr suggested, that he was only twenty percent at fault or that it was eighty percent the tobacco company's fault. he did not say that. he said, i brought it on myself. now, we have talked about this since opening. i told you his sister mary martin would testify to that and she did. she said at trial, well, maybe he meant the smoking caused his cancer. she said, there is no doubt that is what he told her. i brought it on myself. mr. loehr suggested that this was on his deathbed. that is not what his sister, mary martin, said. she said it was after his diagnosis that he told her, not lying on his deathbed. when we asked mary martin what he meant, she talked about it might have meant his smoking caused his cancer. then mr. hill had to take out her sworn testimony that she had given before the trial and show her the sworn testimony where she said, no, she understood her brother, mr. martin, to be saying that he took responsibility for his smoking. you can decide for yourself what he meant. but ask yourself would a man who thought he could never have quit or that the only way he could have quit was in '94, would he have said, i brought it on myself? would a man who thought that he did not have the ability to avoid that disease have said, i brought it on myself? mr. martin in a way answered that first question. did addiction cause his death? this was his answer, and that answer is no. benny martin, jr. is obviously mr. martin's son. he lives out of state so he could not come here live and the parties both designated some portions of his deposition. so you got to see mr. martin's son testify and the deposition was read, and he said that after his father was diagnosed, his father told him, well, that is what you get for smoking for 47 years. and he said without prompting by the lawyer, he knew he was responsible. mr. martin knew he was responsible. that is the testimony. and if you want to see this testimony when you are back in the jury room, you can call for benny martin, jr.'s deposition. you will see exactly what he said his father told him and what his accepted. benny martin, jr. said that mr. martin accepted the consequences of his smoking, not that he said, well, i'm not at fault, or i was caused to smoke by an outside force. he did not say i'm only twenty percent responsible. we heard from hoyt martin, mr. martin's oldest brother, the brother who was the closest to him in age and really the closest to him period. he was the brother that went with him into the service in the 1940s. and mr. hill asked hoyt martin some questions about, it was really in the last days when mr. martin was in very bad shape, and he said that mr. martin was very reflective and they talked about his life, and what they knew was happening to him. hoyt martin said that his brother thought that he was at fault for the cancer. hoyt martin said that his brother did not blame a tobacco company. and hoyt martin said that like every other witness that we have heard, that mr. martin did not say one word about let us sue the tobacco companies, they are the ones who are at fault, i was caused to smoke. you know that i asked mrs. martin that question. i think it was probably the last question that i asked her when she testified for the first time. and i asked her if mr. martin had ever said, let us sue the tobacco companies, and the reaction she gave me was one of surprise, i do not want to read more into that, but it can be fairly described as surprised. she said, oh, no. i ask you here today, is there anyone who seriously believes that benny ray martin would have filed this lawsuit? is there anyone who seriously believes that benny ray martin thought that he was not responsible, could not control his own smoking? does anyone seriously believe that mr. martin would have approved of this lawsuit? you will have to decide that. let us put up demonstrative 75, and i told you about, i think, both mr. martin's own words and mrs. martin's words. mrs. martin took the stand. we showed you a video clip and, you know, she testified in the video clip that she thought the decision had to come from the smokers themselves and she said, she was very animated about this point, very direct and clear, if i had told him to quit smoking, he was not going to do it. she said, i thought the decision had to come from the smokers themselves. i think what is most important about what she told you and what you saw on that videotape and she said, that is what he did. because in september of 1994 when he was diagnosed or when he went to the hospital, when he got that diagnosis, on october 4th he did quit. he quit within a short period of time. there was nothing that was different about nicotine or about the cigarettes. what was different at that point was his motivation. what was different at that time was his choice. it was not anything that a tobacco company did that was different on that day. nothing that a document said or somebody said, made a stupid comment on video 50 years ago, it was not anything that changed. it was mr. martin's decision that changed, and that is why, using our common sense, and her own testimony from mrs. martin, the words of mr. martin, the answer to that first question has to be no. we talked in opening statement and obviously when you were being asked questions during jury selection about sympathy and there is no doubt that from what we saw, everyone in mr. martin's family loved him and they were a very close family. there is no doubt that the death was a tragedy, like every family death. i respect mrs. martin and the loss that she had. i hope you feel that we have treated mrs. martin with respect and we treated her family members with respect. but all of you agreed that you could put aside your feelings, take an oath as jurors to decide the case only on the evidence. judge terrell will specifically tell you you cannot decide this on natural sympathy we have whenever we hear about the death of a loved one. we might look at this case from the outside and say, she really loved her husband and she could have had "x" number of years with him, why do not we give her some money? and that would be a natural feeling. but that is not what you said you would do and that is not what you are obligated to do. that is not what judge terrell will tell you that you can do in this case. our natural sympathy, our natural respect, our concern for what has happened to any person, especially mrs. martin in this case, it cannot erase one simple truth because we boiled this case down. mrs. martin wants money for her husband's choice. mr. loehr just told you mrs. martin wants 4.2 million dollars because her husband chose to smoke, and chose not to quit until october 4, 1994 when he did quit. mrs. martin wants 4.2 million dollars because she says, in hindsight obviously now, that he made the wrong choice. but you heard her testimony on videotape when we played it. you saw what we just showed her testimony was. she did not say when she was living with him, well, you are making the wrong choice and it is not your fault. she said that the choice had to come from mr. martin himself, that only the smoker could make up their mind and she said that is what he did. the claim now that he made a wrong choice or that he made a different choice or he should have made that choice earlier, with all due respect, should not entitle her to be paid money, let alone 4.2 million dollars for a choice that she said her husband made on his own. mr. loehr said in the last few minutes that he did not understand anything about the risk, and i guess he probably meant at a young age. we have shown you evidence at every time period that mr. martin was exposed to specific warnings and to general information about the risks of smoking. let us look first at number 78. the evidence is undisputed in this case that mr. martin was warned about the risks of smoking. if you will excuse me for a moment. remember back in opening statement i told you that there were going to be family and church health warnings. there is sort of a combination of health and religious warnings that he received when he was a kid growing up. we know that his mother took the position that smoking was unchristian because it was unhealthy, that smoking was a sin because it was unhealthy. how do we know this? we know this because mr. hoyt martin came to court and testified. you will remember on one day the plaintiffs called family member after family member. one family member they did not call who was the person closest in age, the brother who knew him the most, the brother who spent more time with him growing up than anyone else, and the brother that went into the service with him, the brother who actually discussed smoking with him when he was in the service, plaintiffs did not call that witness to testify. we had to call him. and if you remember hoyt martin's testimony, i think you know why. he said that their mother warned them about the health dangers of smoking. he said that the church warned them about health. he said they wrapped it up in religion as well, unchristian because it is unhealthy. those are powerful warnings. think of another product where you are growing up as a little kid and you would get that level of warning from both your mother, the key authority figure in the family, and from the church. church health warnings. think of another product where that would happen. now, no one in the family smoked. we heard that his dad chewed tobacco. no one in the family smoked. six brothers and sisters, two parents, nobody smoked except benny martin. benny martin ignored those warnings. that was his choice. it is a free country. benny martin chose to smoke. none of the other brothers and sisters made that choice. they made the different choice. we know that during the time that mr. martin went to school in florida, that it was state law, state law, that florida schools provide instruction on tobacco. dr. norrell testified during the entire period of time that that was true, and i'm going to show you a document from the state of florida that proves it. this is one of the documents that was introduced with dr. norrell. you see it is from the florida department of education and look what it says. it says the teaching of the effects of tobacco is obligatory, meaning it is mandatory in order to fulfill the requirements of the law. it does not say it would be a good idea to teach our kids about smoking. it does not say that some schools can do it and some schools cannot. it says it is the law, that school children were required to be taught the effects of smoking. now, i know that mr. martin's family members could not remember classes they took, and i think when i'm 80 years old or when you are 80 years old, you are probably not going to remember the classes you took when you were in the sixth grade. but what we do know and what is not disputed, it was mandatory under the law for students like benny martin during the period of time he went to school to be taught about the effects of tobacco. let us look at some of the things that you have seen were taught to school children in florida. the same year that benny martin was born, school children were being taught that tobacco led to -- that tobacco led to a decrease in life span, that tobacco could become addictive in the sense that if they cannot get it, they are irritable. fifty years later mr. martin was irritable when he stopped smoking and after two or three days, he decided that it was better to smoke than to be irritable. he made that decision. let us look at the next one. you saw again, this was when mr. martin was seven, specifically saying that tobacco smoking can hurt the lungs, that it has nicotine, that it is habit forming, that people want to smoke it more and more. let us go back to number 78, different ways in which mr. martin was warned. we brought in dr. norrell who is done extensive research on all the newspapers, magazines, what was available on tv. he went to every place where mr. martin lived and looked through those newspapers and magazines and the reason we did it is we know that mr. martin read newspapers. we know that he read magazines. we know that he watched the television news, and the reason we know is mrs. martin agreed. mrs. martin testified to that. in fact, we showed you a video clip when she was on the stand, we showed you a video clip from her testimony and she was asked, how do you know he read the articles? did he say that? and she said, no, i saw it. she said, i saw him reading the articles, and she leaned forward into the camera and she said, he knew about it, he knew about it. well, he did. and the evidence showed, of course, that there was a tremendous amount of information that was available from the time that he became a regular smoker in '46 or '47 and continuing through his 20s when he was in the 1950s. let us look at the montage. i'm going flash up a few things you saw. we know mr. martin read reader's digest. starting in the '20s they were running articles, and continuing into the '50s and '60s. we know the american cancer society said reader's digest had a significant impact on smokers. we know he read life magazine. that is in the evidence. we know he read time. there was testimony on that. we know he read newsweek. there was testimony on that. all these articles of the 1950s. we know he read the newspaper. this was the military newspaper during the years that he had just joined up, '47, '48 continuing into the '50s. more stories and the different places where he lived. finally, the stories that we saw in florida in the later years. this evidence is undisputed. no one denies that he read those, that he read the newspaper or he saw tv or read newspapers, magazine articles. the plaintiffs say, well, look there was some statements by tobacco companies, and they showed you some videotapes, none of which are the statements that were in newspapers or magazines, and i'll talk about some of those videos that we saw later. dr. norrell said that when he looked at thousands of articles, he said in about one out of five articles buried at the back end, there would be some statement from the tobacco statement, well, statistics were not sufficient or you have to have laboratory proof. he said that the news was being driven by the news that smoking caused disease, or the news that smoking caused lung cancer. the news was not being driven by the fact that tobacco companies dispute this, and eighty percent of the stories said nothing whatsoever, according to dr. norrell, about any tobacco company's response. we do not have to guess whether he knew and read about the risks of smoking. in mrs. martin's own words, he knew about it, he knew about it. could you put up number 102, chris? all of us have heard about what a landmark event the '64 surgeon general's report was. think about that, mr. martin was 35 years old then. remember when his sister mary martin took the stand. she was a teacher and she said that a traumatic event occurred when this report came out in '64. she said previously the teachers' lounge was always flooded with smoke, there was smoke everywhere. and she said the day after the report came out, it was shocking because there was no smoke at all. everyone had stopped smoking, at least for that day. there was no smoke whatsoever. she said it made a huge impact on the ordinary people. she also said though that the entire family was concerned for mr. martin when this came out. and when we asked her, well, did you tell him you should stop smoking now? she said, he read the report himself, that he read about the report. so the undisputed testimony is that mr. martin knew and had heard about the fact that the surgeon general had linked lung cancer and smoking, and the undisputed testimony from dr. burns who is worked on all these surgeon general reports said that if mr. martin had stopped smoking, then he would not have gotten this cancer. dr. burns agrees that he could have stopped smoking in '64, but it was up to him. as mrs. martin said, he had to make that decision for himself. look at the next demonstrative. you will see the state of florida said nearly everyone in florida heard about the surgeon general's report. we do not need to know about everyone though. we know mr. martin heard it because his sister testified that it was so, and there was no contrary evidence whatsoever. it was not just the fact, though, that the surgeon general's report came out. in '64 mr. martin started getting a very special warning that very few other people in america got. he got a very special and dramatic warning about lung cancer that very few people in america got. let us look, chris, at number 97. remember dr. norrell testified on this. this is from the air force times, june 3, '64. it said specifically that the air force was putting up posters that describe the risks in smoking cigarettes, and they are going to be placed at the base exchange tobacco counters. there is no dispute when mr. martin was in the air force, that is where he got his cigarettes. that is where everybody buys their various consumer goods when you are in the military. you go to the base exchange. now at the exchange, there was going to be warning posters right at the counter where you cannot miss it that said the risk of developing lung cancer increases with the duration of smoking and the number of cigarettes smoked per day. now, is there any evidence that when mr. martin heard about the surgeon general's report or when he saw these warnings, that he made any effort to quit smoking, that he stopped for even an hour or a day? no, the only time in the '60s that they can remember him stopping smoking was in the early '60s in france and then much later in the '60s. there is no evidence that mr. martin reacted to that warning and said, today i will decide to quit. thirty years later in '94, he did react to the bad news and said, i'm going to quit, and he did. dr. burns, their expert, admitted that he could quit, and if he would have quit in '64, he would not have developed this cancer. let us talk a little about mr. martin's smoking history. i think the evidence is pretty clear that mr. martin did not become a regular smoker until 1946, christmas of 1946 when he came back from basic training. there is no one in this case that testified that he was a regular smoker, smoking every day any earlier than that. that is what hoyt martin who was in the military said. he was the closest to him, saw him every day, he was not a regular smoker until they were in the military at age 17. now, at 17 and a half, a few months short of his 18th birthday, serving the nation in the armed forces, benny ray martin was for all practical purposes an adult. his brother gerald said he did not ever see him smoke before that, before he came back from the military and that he was shocked because the family was so anti-smoking. hoyt martin is the only one that talks about he had heard of him smoking at the a & p. he did not say that he saw him smoking, but he heard of him smoking at the a & p. he did not hear of him smoking daily, but that he was smoking at the a & p. let us assume it is true that mr. martin did experiment with cigarettes when hoyt martin testified he was 14. no one claims that he was a regular smoker. there is no claim in this case that he was addicted at age 14 or 15 or 16. the undisputed testimony is that when he became a regular smoker, he was an adult serving in the armed forces. you heard hoyt martin say that when they went into the service together, hoyt martin had a conversation with him, saying you are a boxer, it would be a lot better for you if you quit. if you set those cigarettes aside, it would be a lot healthier for you. mr. martin had no reaction. he did not try to stop smoking in that decade, the next decade or for a lot longer. let us put up number 77, chris. now, there is a lot of dispute about this, i guess. i heard and i appreciate what mr. loehr had to say. let me be very clear, we are talking in this case about evidence where mr. martin stopped smoking. we are not asking any witness to say what apartment number were you in, what was your phone number then, what was the day, but it is plaintiff's burden of proof to prove some of these basic facts and the only times -- the only times that they can identify where he actually stopped smoking are these. there are other statements saying, well, i think he might have tried to quit. there is not any evidence that he stopped smoking for an hour or even a day. these are the only times when people could recall that he stopped smoking. you have all heard in the early 1960s when he was in france, he stopped for two or three days. mrs. martin said he was irritable and grumpy and then he started smoking again. he was not going through withdrawals, he was not writhing on the floor. there was not anything that resembles withdrawal. he was irritable and he was grumpy, like all of us get for a million different reasons. but he decided then -- he could have decided, i'll be irritable and it will go away in a few days, like dr. cummings testified. he could have said, i'll be grumpy, but i'll quit smoking. he decided to go back. the irritability did not remove his choice and the experts on both sides have agreed to that. we heard from his son about that he stopped smoking for two to three days when they lived on drew circle. mrs. martin lived with him. she does not remember that. i do not think any other family members remember that. but let us credit alexander martin with that. that is two to three days. so from the time he became a regular smoker in 1946 until the end of the '60s, almost 25 years, all we can say for sure is that he quit smoking for four to six days. let us say that there were several other times where people just did not recall, maybe he quit smoking for ten days instead of six days or 12 days, but think about that. for 25 years, almost 7 or 8,000 days, we only know a handful of days where he stopped smoking, a handful of days where he made any effort. and the only thing that happened to him when he stopped was that he became irritable. and i'm not exaggerating this. six different witnesses from the family must have used the word either irritable or grumpy. no one claims that anything more happened to him. that he somehow lost this ability to control and their own experts agree that he did not. no one mentions that he ever stopped smoking for even a day in the '70s, in that entire decade. in the 1980s there is only one person that thought that mr. martin stopped smoking, and that was alexander martin, who you saw, the nurse. he said he did not live with mr. martin, and he does not actually know if mr. martin stopped smoking or how long he stopped smoking. he said he had heard his father was going to quit. he took that picture with the cigarette. he told his father, i thought you quit and he said he shot him that benny ray martin look. so we have got a question mark for the 1980s. there is one witness that thinks that he may have stopped smoking and had a conversation with him about it. we do not know if he quit smoking for an hour or a day or several days. and then finally we know in '90 and '91 that he quit for two to three days again. we have heard something about a subliminal tape that he may have listened to. we have heard there was no change in his behavior during those two to three days. he was able to function, went to work, able to get along with his family. we heard that he had tears in his eyes when his wife caught him in the garage. but just three years later he showed he could quit for good when he was quitting for himself, not quitting for others, when he was motivated to make his own mind up. as mrs. martin said the decision had to come from him and that is what he did. now, we know that if he did want to quit smoking, he never went to anyone and told them that he did or that he wanted their help. it is true that he never went to a doctor. it is true that he went year after year after year where no one remembers him making any effort to stop. it is true that even though now the lawyers in this case are claiming that he wanted to quit for good, no one says that he was going to stop smoking for good and his own actions do not support it. remember every time he stopped smoking for a few days, he did not throw his cigarettes away. mrs. martin said he kept them in a drawer, kept them in a drawer where they would be available for him to use. now, the only time he threw his cigarettes away is in '94 and when he did that, when he threw his cigarettes and ashtrays away, then he quit for good. you have to decide for yourself if a person says, i really want to quit, i'm intending to quit forever, why would they save those cigarettes for the next day? what were they thinking, that they were going to quit for a short period of time? you will have to decide whether mr. martin made that serious effort. when you do, remember that every one of their experts said that at all times he had a capability of quitting. it is not guesswork. we know he could quit because he did. he did it without any help. it did it without any nicotine patches. he did it cold turkey in 1994 and everyone agrees he could have done it in 1954 if he had wanted to. now, the plaintiff's lawyer, mr. loehr, talks about a bunch things and some of which really do not have anything to do with mr. martin. he showed some statistics where 95 percent of smokers relapse and that study may be true for the first attempt. but i think you heard over and over and over again the stats. 50 million people in america have quit smoking successfully. it is not five percent. it is not ten percent. it is way more than half of the people who have ever smoked. the others who are still smoking, many of whom have not tried to quit will go on to quit. dr. benowitz on their videotape was shown the poster that had all the research studies that showed the vast majority of smokers are going to quit in their lives. so this five percent figure does not have a thing to do with mr. martin. we know when mr. martin quit smoking in '94, he did not relapse. he did not go back to smoking. now, you heard some references to the brain and the only one who testified about nicotine in the brain was dr. benowitz. and when we got a chance to cross-examine him, you saw him say a lot of surprising things. he said the brain controls the way we feel. that is how we know if we are happy or sad, the activity in the brain. he said there are receptors that can act on certain stimuli. some receptors can be triggered by nicotine, others can be triggered by food, sugar, feelings. he admitted that these brain receptors are activated even when we are thinking about a good meal. you heard that testimony. not just eating a good meal, but thinking about a good meal. not just exercising, but attending an exciting sporting event. in other words, the brain activates feelings. receptors are a common occurrence in everyday life. he said that what he talked about, nicotine can release dopamine and dopamine in our brain is what makes us feel good. he ran down the laundry list of all the daily activities that can release dopamine. the food, the thinking about food, exercise, friends, anything that makes us happy. that it is not something that is so rare or unexpected. dr. benowitz said when people quit smoking, these extra receptors, that extra activity, it goes away. and dr. benowitz agreed that every one of the 60 million, he said 60 million people who successfully quit, they would have had the same effect on their brain and they quit smoking. dr. benowitz admitted that nothing in the effect of nicotine changes the ability of a smoker to be able to understand the risks of smoking. and dr. benowitz like everyone else the plaintiffs put on said that every smoker can quit. we did not get a chance to ask him about mr. martin because he was testifying only generally. now plaintiffs also attacked dr. seiden and they talk a bit about people who make money. let us cut to the chase here. every one of these witnesses in this case and every one of these witnesses that the plaintiffs have called have made a ton of money as well. dr. burns, and while he writes for the surgeon general, he gets $500 an to hour to testify in a case. you saw on video i asked him how many trials have you testified in? 40. so 40 times at $500 an hour. how many cases have you testified in at a deposition? 100. he is making a lot of money. in fact, dr. burns admitted on videotape that starting in the 1990s he devoted only five percent of his time to seeing patients. you think about that. a 40-hour week, five percent of your time is two hours a week to spend on patients. maybe he works 50 hours, maybe he is a hard worker, that is two and a half hours on patients since the 1990s, and all the rest of his time is spent writing articles, not the practical day-to-day experience with smokers that dr. seiden, the psychiatrist, has, or in litigation. on the videotape, and you can call for this, dr. burns says that since the '90s, he is spent as much time on the lawsuits where he gets $500 an hour as he did actually seeing real patients. dr. cummings came in and said he had been in over 50 trials, $300 an hour. he is listed in another 70 trials. so let us agree that the experts on both sides are smart people who have skills, they are charging the same amount of money to the plaintiff's lawyers as they are to the defense lawyers. they are charging the same amount of money for their time. god bless them that their time or their education has allowed them to do that. but do not let anyone suggest that somehow the plaintiff's experts are not making a ton of money. you saw our witnesses. dr. seiden has testified eight times. dr. norrell two or three. figlar and cook, a couple of times. dr. burns is making a professional career out of this, 140 different cases. dr. seiden, we brought to show the practical day-to-day experience of seeing actual patients, not writing articles, not someone who has an education degree like dr. benowitz, but someone who is actually qualified to deal in the area of behavior, personal control, et cetera. dr. seiden talked about the 30 years of experience in the substance field, from the clinics he worked at, to the rehab centers, to the live-in facilities, to the thousands of patients that he is seen. now, mr. loehr criticizes dr. seiden, i guess, because he said he did not come up with some sort of diagnosis of addiction. that is not the issue in this case. the issue is whether or not addiction caused mr. martin to quit or caused mr. martin to die, or whether, in fact, it was mr. martin's choice that drove his smoking, whether at any time he could have stopped smoking. dr. seiden provided valuable information on that. like all the plaintiff's experts, he agreed that any smoker could quit. he reviewed the same evidence we have seen here today on mr. martin, that mr. martin did not want to quit for himself, that mr. martin never threw his cigarettes away, that mr. martin reacted to others, and then when he was finally self-motivated, he successfully quit. i think dr. seiden dramatically showed us the difference between a person who does something for someone else and a person that makes up their own mind; between a person that says they want to quit and a person that is willing, as he told us, to throw the cigarettes in the trash can and walk out and make their mind up. we showed dr. seiden what mrs. martin said herself about her husband's decisions and how it was up to him and that no one could tell him what to do. of course, he agreed, and we know all the plaintiff's experts agreed with that as well. mr. loehr talked a bit about the medical issues. he acknowledges it is their burden of proof, and i guess he acts as if they satisfied that burden of proof. now, remember that there were dozens of doctors in this case. did they bring any doctors to come in and tell you that smoking caused his cancer? well, there is only one, and it was dr. bray, and he did not testify live. it was a deposition that was read in. he said he had not seen mr. martin until about seven or eight months after the diagnosis. he admitted he is not a pathologist. he is not someone who looks at the cancer cells and determines the cell type or cause. and when they asked him why he thought smoking was the cause, he said, well, he smoked for a long time, and it was, as he understood it, a nonsmall cell cancer. you can look at this. he said, well, smoking is linked to cancer. and that is all he said. now, there is not a single medical record in this case that said smoking caused this cancer. there is almost 1,000 pages or 500 pages of medical records. it would be very easy if any one of his doctors had ever determined the cause of his cancer for them to show you a medical record. it would be very easy for them to bring a pathologist who actually looked at the cancer, that actually looked at the cells. it would be very easy to bring them. they have access to those gentlemen. let us put up 73. mr. martin had four pathologists, and i think i have to clear up some misconceptions that mr. loehr was saying. dr. torres is the only one that actually looked at tissue. you recall dr. barsky explained what the difference was between tissues and a few cells. the only biopsy they took from the lung was this forceps biopsy. dr. torres said no tumor found. dr. o'brien looked at something outside the lung and something in the lung. in the lung he found no evidence of malignancy. and these are the two that mr. loehr talked about. dr. mcfadden thought that it was nonsmall cell, favor squamous. we did hear from dr. burns though that dr. mcfadden agreed that he was not sure about the squamous, just that it was not a small cell. then we have another differing opinion from dr. harvard that it was large cell. any of these doctors, except i understand dr. torres is dead, but any of these doctors could have come in here if they thought smoking caused his cancer. the plaintiffs could have called them. they could have come in and testified. none did. there are no records, whether it is from a pathologist or anywhere else that said smoking caused this man's cancer. again, in a case with this many doctors, the least you could expect is that one of these pathologists that was at issue during the whole trial would come in here and give you that opinion. none of them reached a conclusion in their records, and they sure did not do it in the courtroom. you saw dr. barsky. he is one of the leading pathologists in the country. he ran the pathology department at ucla and ohio state and he is received national awards for his pathology. mr. loehr acted as if the only thing that dr. barsky said was whether or not he thought the tumor started in the lung. he said as a pathologist he could not say. there was no pathology evidence. as a doctor he thought it did. what mr. loehr did not mention is that mr. barsky explained when it came to the cause of his cancer, that there was no way to prove the cause of his cancer based on the physical evidence. and that it is the physical evidence, the pathology tissue that he said is the gold standard in medicine to determining the cause of disease. that is the job of pathologists to determine the pathology, to determine the type of disease, to determine the potential cause. they did not bring any pathologists whatsoever. and you know after dr. barsky was done, after we rested our case, the plaintiffs had an opportunity to present what is called a rebuttal case. after i said i rested this morning, you heard mr. loehr say he rested as well. they never called a pathologist. they could have called a pathologist to say, well, we disagree with dr. barsky's opinions. the truth is that everything dr. barsky said is unrebutted. there is no pathology evidence that disagrees with him. dr. barsky explains you cannot determine the cause of cancer without that pathology. he explained that because of differences of the cell types, we do not know what cell type it is. we know the doctors disagree. he explained that they did not consider other cell types and that there are other cell types of lung cancer that are not associated with cancer. he talked about two. one is called mec, mucoepidermoid. another is called bac, bronchioloalveolar carcinoma. he especially explained though that this mec cell type could look just like what the pathologist found, that it could look like a nonsmall cell tumor with possible squamous aspects. that is what dr. mcfadden said. it could look like carcinoma undifferentiated. the bottom line is we do not have to prove a negative. there were no tests done on this material. this material was thrown away. dr. burns in his videotape talked about how autopsy can sometimes be important. we know there was no autopsy. we know the pathologists disagreed and we know the tissue was extremely limited. according to dr. barsky, he says the tissue is the issue. that is a catchy phrase that he came up with. but the tissue really is the issue because that is the proof, that is how medical doctors determine cause. i know what they say, ninety percent or eighty percent or whatever the stats are of this type of cancer is found in a smoker. right off the bat when dr. burns started this case on videotape, i showed him his own surgeon general's report from 1985, and it said that statistics are great for population groups, but they cannot prove anything for an individual. you can ask for that evidence. the surgeon general's report from 1985, page 167, and dr. burns agrees. after all, he wrote the report. you cannot prove a person's disease by math. the only doctor that ever saw him that ever testified by deposition said smoking is related to cancer and that is what he thought. there is no medical record that says it. there is no pathology proof. if there was, perhaps they might have called one of the pathologists to come in and testify. where are the doctors? where are mr. martin's doctors in this case that actually looked at the evidence of cancer, that actually reached that conclusion? i want to take these last moments to talk about the issue of what they call the conspiracy. the first thing mr. loehr did not tell you is that you are going to be instructed that you cannot consider any conspiracy before 1953 and that is because there is none. dr. cummings, he was their expert on conspiracy. he said he does not claim there was any agreement or any meeting before december of 1953. and that is crucial in this case because mr. martin started smoking years before december 1953. he was a regular smoker in '46. he had experimented before then. so by the time this meeting at the hotel in december 1953 occurred, he had been smoking for years and years, and i suppose their experts considered him addicted at that time. what dr. cummings said, and we both agreed, is that the conspiracy, whatever it was at that meeting, could not have possibly caused him to start smoking. he had been smoking for years and years and years. so the issue for you to decide is did this conspiracy or something that was done stop him from quitting because he was already a regular smoker? he had already been smoking for years. and you know what the evidence is. there is not any evidence of that. let us put up final instruction seven, please. mr. loehr talked about certain findings that you are going to be given about conspiracy. i wanted to highlight something he did not tell you. judge terrell will tell you, "the findings that i have described to you do not establish that r.j. reynolds is liable to mr. martin, nor do they establish whether benny ray martin was injured by r.j. reynolds tobacco company." if the reverse was true, we would not be here, we would not be having a trial. plaintiffs would not have the burden of proof. final instruction 16, judge terrell is going to tell you that in order to determine whether a conspiracy was the legal cause of death, the plaintiffs must show that benny ray martin relied upon statements by r.j. reynolds or other companies that omitted information, relied on statements. can you put up dd1? is there any evidence that benny ray martin saw a statement from r.j. reynolds or another tobacco company and that he relied upon it and it somehow changed his decisions? we know he was already smoking years before this conspiracy existed. is there any evidence that he saw a statement by reynolds and said, today i would have quit, but for i saw this statement and now i'm going to continue? of course not. this is what i used with dr. cummings. that is the only expert they called on this conspiracy. at the end of my questions, i said, there is no evidence that he ever actually saw a statement from tirc or ctr or ti and he agreed no. i said, there is no evidence that mr. martin actually considered it and acted upon it, that he relied upon some statements, that it changed his behavior, and he said, no, there is no evidence. that is why we wrote down no. and there never has been. i saw those statements. they played them over and over again, some of those videotapes, and i'm sure you find them offensive and disturbing and i'm sure that you are angry now. i think you have a right to be by some of those statements. i thought in particular the guy from philip morris saying the low birth rate -- it was just ridiculous. but those were a handful of statements made by tobacco companies, in particular the guy who talked about low birth weight, that was something on british television. dr. cummings agreed it was run on the bbc. there is no way mr. martin ever saw that. the other statements were from the 1950s or the 1960s. we know when these statements were made that mr. martin had been warned by his mother about the health risks, that he would been warned by his church, and we know that the school law required students like him to be warned. we know that hoyt martin had told him to stop smoking for health reasons in the 1940s. we know from his wife that he had read articles about the risks of smoking that were all over the news in the '50s. she said he knew about it. we know from his sister that he read about the surgeon general's report on lung cancer. we know he got warnings in '64, at the air force base that said lung cancer every time he bought a cigarette. he did not stop when those warnings occurred. there is no evidence that he saw any of these other statements that plaintiffs want to hook you up with. there is no evidence that he ever changed his mind. the evidence is that mr. martin did know about the risks of smoking and that mr. martin was aware. it comes from his sister. it comes from his brother. it comes from mrs. martin. you saw that evidence. there was some discussion of these groups, tirc, and ctr and we asked both dr. cummings and dr. burns what they have done. both dr. cummings and dr. burns admitted that hundreds, dr. cummings admitted thousands of peer-reviewed scientific publications were financed by those companies, that they were published in these reputable journals where independent experts did it. more importantly, dr. burns agreed that this tirc, ctr had provided research, and he said up to 400 articles, that the surgeon general itself had relied upon. now, if this was a conspiracy or a fraud that somehow impacted mr. martin, plaintiffs claim, why was the research financed by the tobacco companies finding its way into the surgeon general's report and being relied upon by the surgeon general himself? you heard dr. burns admit that for many years there was a legitimate dispute over whether math statistics could be used to create or proof of disease or whether you needed laboratory proof, a dispute over whether animals, whether painting something on the skin of a mouse proved that inhaling it in a human caused cancer. you heard that dr. burns say that the public health officials themselves, the same ones that said the public was informed, said as far as an absolutely scientific proof, you heard him agree that they said that. i showed dr. burns, and you saw, that the head of the ama, the head of the national cancer institute, the surgeon general himself in the late '50s and the early '60s was still saying it had not been proven. when mr. loehr talked about this thing called the frank statement in 1954, remember not only had mr. martin been smoking for years before that, he had been warned about the risks of smoking for years before that. but that even dr. burns admitted that the public health officials were saying some of the same things about no definitive proof. now, mr. loehr also talked a little about a ph and this was a subject that came up at the last moment with dr. figlar. the only document they showed him was about philip morris cigarettes. you can look for it. it is a document that talks about marlboros and merits. mr. martin never smoked those cigarettes. he never smoked a cigarette by philip morris. i asked dr. figlar the relevant question, is the ph in camel cigarettes, the cigarettes you make that mr. martin smoked, had that gone up, he said no. i said, is it below the level where the surgeon general says it does not have impact on free nicotine. he agreed. that testimony was undisputed. i do not know why the plaintiffs have decided to rely upon information about cigarettes that mr. martin did not smoke, but i know it does not have anything to do with your decision here in this case. you saw mr. loehr show dr. figlar a document that said there were reports that in the 14 to 17 year old group, most of them were smoking philip morris. you saw dr. figlar say that projecting out sales when those 14 to 17 year olds become adults and they can buy cigarettes legally at the store, that that meant that that would be a great disadvantage. what you did not see was this had anything to do with mr. martin. mr. martin was not 14 or 17 in the 1970s and 1980s. he was more than 50 years old. their own evidence from dr. kyriakoudes, remember the first guy who showed you all those ads, he admitted that there was no proof that ads caused mr. martin to smoke. there is not anyone in the case who thinks that advertising caused mr. martin to smoke. there is not anyone who ever discussed it with him. we know that everyone in his family did not smoke and they were exposed to the same ads. there was not any witness who was presented on advertising that he knew was qualified to give that opinion. so at the last moment to say, well, in the 1980s there might have been some advertisements directed to youth, i'm sure maybe he will be able to succeed in making you mad. that does not have anything to do with mr. martin. it does not have anything to do with this case. mr. martin could quit smoking whether there was an ad in 1980 or whether there was an ad in 1940. mr. martin had the choice and the ability to quit, according to their own experts, regardless of what was published in some newspaper as an advertisement. if you could put up 74. when you look at question number one, the issue is cause, not addiction. if you were being asked, does mr. martin meet the definition of addiction, depending on the definition, i'm sure we could say, yes. does he meet the psychiatric dependency definition, i'm sure you would say no. you are going to be asked whether addiction actually caused him to smoke. at the end of the day there was not anything that caused him to smoke. addiction did not cause him to smoke on october 4th, '94 when he started his quitting process. it did not cause him to smoke on any day before. according to the plaintiff's experts, according to plaintiff's own experts, he could have quit at any time. he was not being caused to smoke. there is a huge difference between saying someone meets a definition of addiction and that means it is causing him to smoke. none of us can say we are being caused to do something when we have the free choice to stop it at any time. we know that if he thought that it was beyond his control, that he would have reacted very differently to the diagnosis. he would not have said, i brought it on myself, and that is what i get. he would not have said that he blamed himself, and he certainly would have mentioned something about the tobacco companies. he did not say he was tricked. he did not say he was deceived. he did not say that he should sue. we know that mr. martin never once mentioned that. is not the best analysis of what happened mrs. martin? she is suing for 4.2 million dollars or however much more mr. loehr is going to ask for when he gets up next. she certainly has every motive to try to win this case, but this was her testimony, that no one could tell mr. martin to quit, that it had to come from the person themselves, that they had to make the decision they are going to quit. and that is what he did. this is not some article from the surgeon general. it is not an abstract statistic. this is what mr. martin was about. this is what his quitting was about. the plaintiff in this case, mrs. martin, acknowledges that once he made that decision, that is what he did. he quit smoking. at the end of the day when you go to question number one, mr. martin answered that question. mrs. martin answered the question. the answer to question number one on the verdict form is no. i know these opening statements, closing arguments are long. i know there is been a lot of evidence from a lot of different people and you are going to hear some more from mr. loehr. but remember, this case is not going to be won 100 to 99. it is not totaling up issues, or did the tobacco companies do something wrong, or have you been angered by what you have seen. i'm sure you have. the issue is one nothing, and it is that first question and the answer to that question should be no. i thank you for your attention, and i thank you for your service during these three weeks as jurors.