mr. loehr: may it please the court, counsel, and ladies and gentlemen of the jury. it is been a long couple of weeks. i'm sure it is been long for you, long for all the attorneys that are here, long for ms. martin. we have gone through a lot of evidence, a lot of witnesses, a lot of videos and now it is time that the case starts to come to a close. it starts to come to an end when your role as jurors takes on added importance. before i launch into what i will apologize at the outset may be a little bit longer than my opening statement because we have got a lot of ground to cover. i wanted to thank you on behalf of all of us in the courtroom for the attention you have paid to both sides during this case. you have been extremely attentive. you have paid the attention and respect that all the witnesses and all the attorneys deserve. i hope you appreciate that both sides in this case, r.j. reynolds and ms. martin, have done everything they could to present to you a professional case, not a case where we are arguing and fighting with each other, but a case where we are trying to present the evidence that we think is the most pertinent to the issues in the case. r.j. reynolds has hired an extremely talented and very decent team of defense lawyers. they have done the best that they could, and i hope you feel that ms. martin did the same with myself and my co-counsel. it is a privilege to practice law and it is a privilege especially to practice law in a case like this where instead of lawyers arguing and bickering with each other and instead of having judges that have to separate us or make us be professional, that judge terrell did not have to do that in this case. that we have been able to stand in front of you and present the evidence that we felt you would be the most interested in. benny martin died of lung cancer after smoking cigarettes for 47 years. he died of a cancer that was caused by smoking cigarettes, just like everybody today knows would happen. you have to have that thought in your mind when you walked in this courtroom that under those circumstances, what in the world are you doing bringing an action against r.j. reynolds? the man smoked 47 years and got lung cancer, duh, what are you doing here? you had to think that. well, the fact is there is an innocent victim here. there is an innocent victim in hilde martin. she did not choose to smoke. she did not go through the addiction process that her husband went through. she did not do any of the things that r.j. reynolds did. and you have to keep in mind as benny martin lay on his deathbed and said, i brought this on myself, this is what you get for smoking for 47 years, benny martin did not know any of the things that you saw in this courtroom and neither did his wife. the tobacco institute was alive and well in 1995 when he passed away, in 1994 when he was first diagnosed. in fact, just months before benny martin was diagnosed, all seven of the chief executive officers of each of the major tobacco companies raised their right hand in congress and swore, swore they did not believe cigarettes were addictive. we are here seeking justice from you because benny martin paid with his life for his fault, but r.j. reynolds still today denies that they have any fault. the law gave ms. martin the right to walk through that door, and i'm extremely proud that i'm the person and my co-counsel are the people that she chose to escort her through that door. benny martin died of lung cancer in 1995 after smoking -- well, he started smoking r.j. reynolds products 20 years or more before the first warning label was ever placed on cigarettes. it is hard to take yourself back to that time frame. it is very difficult, but 20 years of smoking before the first warning went on the labels. probably 20 years of smoking before the surgeon general ever told anybody that cigarettes were a cause of cancer. we have admitted from the outset, you will see a jury instruction that we have admitted that benny martin shares in the blame for what happened to him. he shares in the fault. his fault was human weakness. his fault was getting caught up in an addiction process that he knew nothing about. no teenager knew the things that you have learned in this courtroom. benny martin did not know those things. we claim that r.j. reynolds shares in that blame. we claim that their conduct both before benny martin started smoking and for decades after he started smoking was a contributing cause of his loss, of his death of ms. martin's loss, and we will go through that as we work through this case, but at this point r.j. reynolds denies any fault whatsoever. long after r.j. reynolds learned from the research of others, rather than their own research, long after they learned that their products were addictive, that nearly ninety percent of their customers started smoking and became addicted as teenagers, long after they learned that their products would slowly but surely be depositing carcinogens in their lungs, that they would develop lung cancer, they made corporate decisions. they made their decision to make it as easy as possible for people to start smoking, as hard as possible for people to stop smoking and as easy as possible for people to relapse. you have seen evidence that is shown that they manipulated minds and bodies, piling up millions of users, millions of fatalities, 14 and a half million from cigarettes in the united states alone, and ever growing sales all the way up to the mid '70s, when the per capita use started to decline. you have seen some of the documents that were first released in the late '90s, years after benny martin passed away that show what they really knew, and you have seen some of the clips and some of the advertising, some of the things that they were saying to the public. and i'm going to go through some of that now. but, first, i want to discuss with you what it is that you are going to be doing here, what are the questions that you have to answer. do we have the verdict form? the way the jury system works is you are going to be handed a two-page piece of paper, you are going to be handed some jury instructions that you will take back with you. judge terrell will read them to you first and you will get copies to take back with you. then the six of you will fill out this form. your decisions must be unanimous, and that is not always easy. it requires that everyone listen to everyone else. it requires that you not bend and yield to what you think and what you believe the evidence has shown, but that you cooperate and you listen to each other because you all come from different places in life and you all have different experiences, and you will all participate in filling out this form. the first question is, was addiction to r.j. reynolds tobacco company cigarettes a legal cause of the death of benny martin? you certainly noticed as we went through the case the focus that we had on addiction, the focus on this side of the room to addiction, to bring to you experts that we thought were knowledgeable on addiction, to talk about it over and over again to see how it applied to benny martin. as you look at this, was addiction to r.j. reynolds tobacco company cigarettes a legal cause of death to benny martin, legal cause is a little bit different than what you might expect. if we could see jury instruction number 12. addiction is a legal cause of death if it directly and in a natural and continuous sequence produces or contributes substantially to producing such death so that it can be reasonably said that, but for the addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine, the death would not have occurred. the very next instruction under number 13 is concurring cause. this is extremely important in this case. in order to be regarded as a legal cause, addiction need not be the only cause. addiction may be a legal cause of death even though it operates in combination with the act of another, or some other cause, if such other cause occurs at the same time as the addiction, and the addiction contributes substantially to producing such death. so addiction need not be the only cause and it is no secret in this case what addiction acted along with. what was the other cause of benny martin's death other than addiction? his inability to quit. his relapsing when he tried to quit, and that is what we have accepted blame for. and there is another place on the verdict form where you will deal with that. both of these questions, you notice they do not say choice, they choose, did he have choices, did he have free choices. if so, then addiction cannot -- it does not say that. the word "choice" appears nowhere in the jury instructions. the focus is upon addiction. was addiction a legal cause, and what burden do i have to prove that to you? and it is very important. the burden of proof in this case is the more clear and convincing force and effect of all the evidence in the case. it is called the greater weight of the evidence, instruction number 11. it is the shortest instruction i think in the entire manual you will take with you, but it is probably the most important. greater weight of the evidence means the more persuasive and convincing force and effect of the entire evidence in the case. we talked about this before in opening. we do not have to come in here, and if this was a football game, win this case 48 to nothing. we talked about this in voir dire and in opening, and each of you said that you could apply this standard of proof, and it will become very important as we go through some of the testimony that you heard, especially on the defense side. the greater weight of the evidence, which way does the scale tip? the plaintiff's evidence on one side and the defendant's evidence on the other. could we show exhibit 15? we have come back to this numerous times, and i think each of the witnesses, including dr. seiden, basically agreed with this equation. we have number one addiction, plus number two, continued smoking or relapse, leads to or equals number three, lung cancer. that is what you have heard over and over again. you heard it from dr. burns who wrote, edited and contributed to every single surgeon general's report on smoking and health since 1975. you heard it from dr. benowitz, a world renowned expert, in a long video. i apologize how long it was and difficult to watch at times. you heard it from dr. cummings live from the stand. the man who has spent his entire life working in smoking cessation. the ph.d. who teaches doctors and nurses as a medical school professor how to deal with addiction. each of them said this. dr. seiden said, dependence upon nicotine can, in fact, lead to disease and this is what they have all basically agreed to. it is not addiction alone. one alone does not equal three because we all know you can quit smoking. there is no mystery here. we have admitted it from the outset. that is why we admitted that benny martin shares in the blame. but smoking alone is never going to do it. you have heard witness after witness describe the dose/response effect. you do not get cancer from smoking a couple of cigarettes a day a couple of days a week. not one witness told you you would, because you will not. it takes the constant repetitive dosing that only comes about from addiction, day after day after day, 20 or 30, 40 cigarettes, year after year. in mr. martin's case half a million cigarettes over 47 years, 8 to 10 puffs each, four million to five million individual doses of carcinogens deep into his lungs. that is what kills people, and it only comes about from addiction. if you think of any other type of substance, would it be difficult to reach a conclusion? if someone was using cocaine every single day, multiple times every day for years and years, would it be tough to figure out they are addicted or if their addiction might be harming them? if it was heroin or alcohol, people using alcohol heavily day after day, month after month, year and year if they are caught up in an addiction process? your common sense can tell you, which you should take in the jury room with you. in fact, the judge will instruct you on that. you do not take biases, preconceived notions about the issues in the case with you, and you swore you would not, but you do take your common sense. would anybody do what benny martin did, spend all of that money, all of that time to stink, to be shunned, to be sent outside of his own house? is it fun? do people enjoy it? well, you have heard over and over again, take the nicotine out of the cigarettes, nobody buys them. people are not doing it because they enjoy taking smoke into their lungs and blowing it back out. if they were, take the doggone nicotine out. sales ought to do great. no, it is addiction to nicotine that drives this repetitive use over and over again that causes lung cancer. but you do not have to rest with your common sense. we can look at the evidence that we presented, and i think you can tell very clearly how we chose our expert witnesses. dr. benowitz was the senior scientific editor of the 1988 surgeon general's report on addiction. dr. cummings who runs the quit line for the state of new york. he was a contributor to the surgeon general's report on addiction. both of them have contributed to nci, national cancer institute, monographs on addiction and cessation from smoking. dr. burns, in addition to his long career with the surgeon general and in public health, wrote the chapter in harrison's internal medicine on nicotine addiction, a book that was used when he was a medical student in harvard and a book that is currently used at harvard, and virtually every other medical school in the country. he wrote the chapter. we tried to bring to you the most knowledgeable people on the subject that we possibly could. there was one witness that was not someone we found. all of these expert witnesses get paid to varying extents. you heard some staggering numbers from some of them. could we show mar39.0086? this was dr. olsen, the family doctor who benny martin went to when he started having headaches and had some symptoms of hernia. dr. olsen, the family doctor, sat across the table from him, was able to see him, talk to him, asked him any questions he wanted to ask, see the stains, the yellow stains on his fingers, asked him about his motivation, asked him if he wanted to quit, and this treating doctor who has passed away and could not testify, diagnosed nicotine addiction. now, when dr. seiden was on the stand he kind of made light of that. did he write down the questions he asked? do you know how he did it? i want you to think for just a minute if the defendants would have made light of a treating physician diagnosing nicotine addiction. would they have made light of it if it said, no motivation to stop smoking, he chooses to keep smoking? would they have made so light of that, or would it have become a feature of the case? this is an important piece of information. nobody paid this man. he is a family doctor. he sees hundreds of patients every week. he sits down and talks with them when he makes diagnoses. the evidence that we have shown regarding the addiction process with benny martin has been absolutely overwhelming. visual 28, please. we started out at the very beginning, this is dr. cummings and dr. burns talked about this process, because you can get thrown off if you allow your mind to think back, the way some people think about addiction. we know addicts, right? an addict is out robbing stores and an addict is going to jail, an addict is meeting up with his dealer. well, that is not how it is with cigarettes. cigarettes, we know, you get free choices and benny martin made them. he made them as a teenager at the a & p grocery store when he was or 14 years old. he made them. he had free choices and he made poor choices. but benny martin slowly but surely worked his way over to where when he was 17 in the military, his fingers were already stained brown and yellow from all the smoking he was doing, and he unfortunately got caught up in an addiction cycle. it features daily use, physical dependence, and unfortunately the choice that dr. seiden talked about -- you heard each witness who has ever published anything on addiction, dr. burns, dr. benowitz, dr. cummings tell you that the choice gets lower and lower the more you get into the addiction process, and the chance of relapse gets higher and higher. and that is exactly what happened with benny martin. go to 2b, please. some of the features of this process, again, we brought to you world renowned scholars and medical school professors to talk about the physical effects, the brain changes. a 15, 16, 17 year old brain, it is not developed yet. it is still developing. and what happened with benny martin? he ended up putting cigarettes, nicotine into that brain, cigarettes that the defendants told you had as much as three times as much nicotine as today's cigarettes do. three times as much. it is their product. congratulations to them for lowering it now, but it is too late for benny martin. three times the nicotine factor. his brain developed bathed in nicotine, heavy doses of nicotine, repetitive doses of nicotine at a time when r.j. reynolds knew that its customers were teenagers. tolerance: when you start smoking, it is not very pleasant. sometimes you get ill, you cannot take it. you quickly develop a tolerance that becomes a compulsion. you have a compulsive need to smoke over and over. try to think of any other substance known to man, known to man that people use 20 or 30 or 40 times every single day over and over again, every month and every year of their lives. cravings: that is what it is about, especially with a teenage brain that is being bathed in nicotine. some of the most important things that we heard from the people who deal every single day and spend their lives researching this is that people caught up in this process do not think and process information the way you and i do. you know it from your own common sense. alcoholics fall off the wagon after they quit because they think they can just have one drink to celebrate on friday night, they think they can just go to happy hour. they are in denial. why is it in aa meetings the first thing they make you do is stand up and say, my name is bobby loehr and i'm an alcoholic? they make you do that to try to get through this denial. the denial that says, you know what, i'll quit smoking later. i can quit, but my life is a little too stressful right now to put the cigarettes down. i'll do it before i get sick. nobody who is young gets sick from cigarettes. i do not think this cigarette is going to hurt me. the last 200,000 that i smoked did not seem to do me any harm. denial, rationalizations. you know, if they were that bad, the government would not allow them to be sold. if there is anything really bad in them, they will take it out. it is part of the process. it is part of the addicted brain. if we can see visual 4c, please. and unfortunately, relapse is the rule instead of the exception. we started out with this, each of these witnesses that we presented agreed that these numbers are more or less accurate. any given quit attempt, 95 percent failure relapse, and we ended up with dr. seiden with the new wonder drug chantix, the best pharmaceutical companies in america, and they are pretty doggone good, the best in the world, the best they could come up with studying the brain chemistry, working with people like dr. benowitz, they came up with a new drug. and what did we see? they did a study. they had a placebo. they gave people a fake pill who did not know it was fake and they gave people the real pill. the failure rate for the placebos, 95 percent, between 90 and 95 percent. the failure rate, relapse rate for the new wonder drug, 75 percent failure. were these people that did not know that smoking was harmful for them? you heard a tremendous amount of evidence talking about knowledge and how everybody in the world knew and we will talk about that in a few minutes. did those people know in this decade, in the 2000s that cigarettes were bad for them? you heard motivation was the main factor from dr. seiden, directly conflicting with what you heard from dr. benowitz and dr. burns and dr. cummings, and motivation is important to get you to try to quit. but the heaviness of your smoking and the age that you started is what is more important. the chantix thing that we saw at the end with dr. seiden goes a long way in proving that dr. burns and benowitz and cummings, who spent their life devoted to this, were right. these people knew exactly what the cigarettes were doing to them in the chantix study. they knew exactly what they were doing. they were willing to take experimental drugs that no one even knew what the harms and side effects might be. that is how motivated they were. they stuck to it and they were followed for a year afterwards. you will not find a more motivated, a more knowledgeable group of smokers, and 75 percent of them failed in the first year and went back to smoking. the study ended then. we do not know what happened then as far as relapse with the other 25 percent. unfortunately, knowledge, when it comes to smoking, does not equal power. we could see that with benny martin. he smoked a couple of packs a day in his younger life, i think that is pretty much unrebutted. perhaps later, perhaps after 1985 out of concern for his family and his wife, he began smoking outside, perhaps he smoked less of them. maybe that explains in the medical records where some places they say one, some places they stay two. but the point is he constantly smoked. his children remember their father, memories of their father as a kind, decent man who helped them every way he possibly could, worked two jobs to help them go to college. he did all of that with a cigarette in his hand. that is their memories. each of them told you that. it would be hard to find a man who took on the challenges of life and handled it better than benny martin, but you know, sometimes challenges of life take everything we have got. we admit benny was at fault, but you know what, we all have our limits. we all have strengths and we all have weaknesses and we all have points where we just cannot do anymore. it is part of being human. it is hard to get married young and to stay married until death do you part. you, who are married, know that. it is difficult. it is even more difficult to do so when you have a large family. it is wonderful to have six kids, but imagine the stresses of that. working two jobs is a noble thing to do, but it is tough. it is tough when you never finished high school. it is tough to be a soldier in korea in the early '50s. benny martin succeeded at all of that. it took everything he had. he did not have enough to break out of the addiction cycle. he did not have enough to get himself out. he was like the 75 percent of failures. there was not any chantix back in the time when benny might have stood a better chance of quitting smoking. there were not any wonder drugs back in the '60s when he tried when ms. martin remembers him trying before they moved to france in the early '60s. she cannot tell you the date, the time, the apartment. she remembered the early '60s. mr. martin's son, al, remembered quit attempts in the late '60s. and again he actually took a photograph of a cigarette in his father's hand in the early '80s because his dad had quit smoking and that is when he said, dad, i thought you quit smoking, and you heard that he got that benny martin look and how that went. i think he got a much better picture of nicotine addiction than our experts could ever show you. al said, this is my dad. he never got defeated at anything. when he was a boxer, nobody ever made it more than one round with him. i'm a nurse. i'm looking at him. i know what i see. he failed. my dad failed. the only thing i ever saw him fail at. what do you think i was going to do? throw it in his face. that is not the kind of relationship we had. his sister mary when asked why she did not do more said it is kind of like trying to talk someone out of being in love. you cannot do it. that is the face of addiction. that is how it really is. this is someone who quit, tried to quit so many times. the family cannot tell you this date and this place and that place. i think they named, when you add them all up, at least four and perhaps five that they had distinct memories of culminating in the early '90s. he is already having to smoke outside, he is been sort of shunned, but he is quitting. hilde martin goes out to the garage and he is smoking a cigarette. and you know there is been some suggestion that maybe -- maybe he knew what was coming. who knows? odd things happen in life. maybe he did. but at that point with tears in his eyes he told his wife, i just cannot quit. he told his brother at one point, i'm just a slave to these things. i cannot stop. now, should he have thrown them away, washed them, burned them, gotten rid of the ashtrays? yeah, doggone right he should have. should he have gone to a doctor and said, could you please help me quit? yep, he should have. we have admitted that from the outset. that is benny martin's fault in this case. he should have tried harder. would it have worked? the evidence is very scant on whether it would have worked or not. the defense has suggested to you that the fact that he quit when he was told he had six months to live proves somehow that he was not addicted or proves that his addiction did not cause his disease. now come on. we all know people that are in an addiction process with any substance known to man can quit. heroin addicts can quit. does it mean they were not addicted for the five years they were in the gutter shooting heroin? cocaine addicts can quit. does it mean they were not addicted when they were snorting every day or smoking free-based crack? some alcoholics are successful. they get on the wagon. does it mean that they were not alcoholics or they are not still alcoholics? of course not. what is that? we all know you can quit. in fact, the heroin addict who overdoses and dies could quit. it does not mean that his addiction to heroin did not kill him. cigarettes are different. it takes a long time. it is a slow gradual process, which makes them, in a way, the perfect addictive drug. think about it. no harm is coming to you that you can see. they are easy to quit. they used to be cheap, not so cheap now. you do not see your life going to pieces. you never hit rock bottom like you do in an alcoholic or like you do in other drug addictions. you just keep going until it is too late. rock bottom for a smoker, just like with benny martin, is when it is too late and you are diagnosed with a life-threatening disease. dr. seiden was the only witness presented by the defendants to talk to you about addiction. dr. seiden, and i listened the whole time, you listened, you took notes. did he ever tell you benny martin was not addicted? not once. he never addressed the issue. look, we put our witnesses on the stand, we asked them to answer the questions, was benny martin addicted, did the addiction lead to his disease? over and over again they said yes. the one witness for the defendants that took the stand never said the word addiction on his direct examination and on his redirect after i did the cross-examination, mr. belasic asked him, what things did i ask you to form opinions on, and he said whether he was addicted or not, but he never told you. he never once gave you whether he was addicted or whether the addiction could have caused his disease. now, what are we doing here? that is the first question on the verdict form. it is extremely important. we have presented a mountain of evidence to prove to you that he was addicted and it caused his disease and their one witness says everybody can quit. he controlled his smoking. the smoking did not control him. cigarettes are not like heroin and that sort of thing. he could have quit. he never once told you what his opinion was, whether benny martin was addicted or not. think about it. r.j. reynolds has not skimped and saved on their witnesses. you heard how much they paid some of them. dr. barsky, nearly two million dollars over the years, one million dollars in a five-year period. dr. norrell, nearly a million dollars. if there were a witness in the world knowledgeable about addiction who could take that stand and tell you benny martin was not addicted, you would have heard them. dr. seiden has been testifying for them, i think he said, well over 20 years, approaching 25 years. they are the experts on addiction. no one sold more addictive products than the cigarette manufacturers and not one witness took that stand for them and told you benny martin was not addicted. the evidence on this issue is overwhelming. in fact, no witness took that stand and told you benny martin was not addicted. so what is left? well, did the addiction cause the lung cancer? dr. seiden said when you are dependent, and admitted benny martin had some dependence on nicotine, not dsm-iv dependence that means you have got a mental disorder, not that kind, but that he did have dependence on nicotine and that that could then lead to longer smoking which may play a role in developing disease. dr. burns told you flat out, his addiction to smoking caused his lung cancer. there are two questions there, of course. one is was he addicted, and then how did he get the lung cancer and what role the addiction played. i'm sure at the beginning of this trial you thought there was some confusion about, number one, did he really have lung cancer because you heard the defense go through these test results that came back and some of the biopsy results said they were negative, there was no cancer. then they showed you a chest x-ray, the very first one taken and said we need to rule out a metastasis. we need to rule out this cancer started somewhere else and went to his lung. they persisted with that. they showed a ct scan that said the same thing. we need to rule this out. then their own witness, dr. barsky, took the stand and although he could not figure out anything else, he said, oh, yeah, as a medical doctor, of course, it is a primary lung cancer. why in the world were you listening to all that stuff? why did we waste all that time with all the negative tests and all the quest for whether it was a metastasis or not when every single treating physician said after the tests were done, it is lung cancer and their own expert said it was a lung cancer. you know, dr. burns, who has spent his life doing this, came in and said, the types of cancer that the two pathologists said were most likely are overwhelmingly caused by cigarette smoking, there were no other risk factors in this man. this is a smoking related disease. it is caused by repetitive doses of nicotine that only come about from addiction. if you could show lp732. this is the surgeon general's report. next page of that. i'm sorry, matt, it is page 43. the chart at the top deals with different types of cancer. we know this case was not a small cell cancer. there were only two pathologists who looked at the slide from the lung nodule. we talked about three. there was cancer in the lymph nodes, in the subcarinal nodes that one doctor looked at and said nonsmall cell. then we had dr. mcfadden who looked and said that he favored what he called an epidermoid. he called it a squamous cell, but dr. burns told you, and it is been unrebutted and it is agreed, squamous cell is the same as epidermoid in this chart. so dr. mcfadden who looked at it first thought it was a nonsmall cell cancer, perhaps he leaned toward the squamous type or epidermoid type. this chart shows you of nearly 900 people that were diagnosed with that type of cancer of men, i'm sorry, of the male population, 899, all but seven of them were cigarette smokers, all but seven. we know it was not small cell, neither mcfadden nor dr. harvard who looked at it later said it was a small cell. large cell was what dr. havard leaned toward. neither one of them could say definitively. they both said nonsmall cell. one of them favored squamous or epidermoid. one favored large cell. out of 450 people diagnosed with cancer, all but 16 of them were smokers. overwhelming numbers, overwhelming. so if you ask yourself -- you have to think about this for a minute. they brought to you an addiction -- they brought a psychiatrist who treats psychiatry patients who happened to be smokers to testify on addiction and he did not say a word about addiction. he never said whether benny martin was addicted or not. they could choose any kind of doctor they wanted to do. you heard from dr. burns, a renowned pulmonologist, and you heard from dr. bray, the treating pulmonologist, a lung doctor. both of them said clearly this is caused by smoking. they could have brought a pulmonologist to rebut that, someone who treated lung cancer. an oncologist, any kind of medical doctor they wanted. but how do you fight with these numbers? what do you do here? how can you? they choose whatever type of expert they want to bring. since the hospital did not retain the slides, they chose a pathologist, the one kind of doctor that cannot render an opinion in the case. to know what it was, the pathologist said, i have to see the slides. he is right. if there were a pulmonologist or an oncologist, cancer specialist in the world who would tell you that benny martin's smoking was not caused by cancer, was not caused by smoking, you would have seen him. you would have heard him, but you did not. dr. barsky could not address the issues. the answer to the first question on the verdict form, was addiction to r.j. reynolds tobacco company cigarettes a legal cause of the death of benny martin? greater weight of the evidence, greater weight, not one witness, not one witness for them refuted what dr. burns told you, what dr. bray told you on causation, what dr. olsen, dr. burns, dr. cummings told you on addiction. the overwhelming evidence is, the answer is yes. you will be told in a very clear and concise jury instruction that r.j. reynolds is responsible for conduct of brown & williamson tobacco company and american tobacco company. i just want to clear up any confusion about that. those two companies are now r.j. reynolds. the reason i mention that, you heard some talk about lucky and camels and did he smoke luckies, camels. none of that matters. camels were manufactured by r.j. reynolds. luckies, for most of the time he smoked them, were manufactured by american tobacco company. it does not matter. it is undisputed that r.j. reynolds is responsible for those cigarettes and for the conduct of those two companies. the next question that we go to on the verdict form, a little hard to see, please state the percentage of any fault that was a legal cause of benny martin's death that you charge to r.j. reynolds and benny martin. you are going to hear an instruction about findings from the engle class action that kind of brought us here. the first two findings are that cigarettes are addictive and cigarettes cause lung cancer. so you kind of have to add those to the overwhelming evidence that i talked about here in the first question. we know they are addictive as a matter of law, and we know they cause cancer as a matter of law. but the second question now really gets more to what they have been talking about on benny martin and that is how much fault do you place on r.j. reynolds and how much do you place on benny martin. you know, as r.j. reynolds sold cigarettes, i believe the evidence showed from somewhere either 1913 or 1916, all the way up to 1953 or '54 without conducting any tests whatsoever on their products, none. i asked dr. figlar, what were you guys doing? he said, well, there was no evidence out there that there was any problem. he took the stand right after dr. norrell who told you that everybody in the world in the '20s and '30s knew cigarettes were harmful for them. r.j. reynolds did nothing to investigate their cigarettes. you heard no evidence that american tobacco company, who is now r.j. reynolds, did anything to investigate their cigarettes decade after decade after decade. why is it that the public health figures had to come up and find out? they had to find all the carcinogens in this. they had to paint them on the back of mice and see tumors grow. why was not the company selling the product, advertising the way they did, why were not they doing their own tests? do not we expect that of companies and corporations? of course we do. for over 40 years, 50 years they did nothing. now, you know, you can accept or reject some of dr. norrell's testimony, but clearly there was a growing concern about cigarettes and they sat back and did nothing until their hand was forced. they addicted decades and decades and decades of americans knowing that there was mounting concern and doing nothing about it. that is part of their fault. when the evidence finally did begin to mount, if we could see lp395, we have claude teague back in 1953, apparently the birth of research and development at r.j. reynolds. if you can go to page 17 of that document. what dr. teague did was he went and started looking at the studies that were done, again not by the cigarette manufacturers, but by outside help. "the closely parallel increase in cigarette smoking has led to the suspicion that tobacco smoking is an important etiologic factor in the induction of primary cancer of the lung. studies of clinical data tend to confirm the relationship between heavy and prolonged tobacco smoking and incidence of cancer of the lung." 1953, the first time they finally took a look at the evidence that had been mounting. claude teague who rose up to where he was finally, i think, a vice director or associate director of research, he reached a conclusion that studies of clinical data tend to confirm a relationship between heavy and prolonged tobacco smoking and the incidence of lung cancer. if we could go to lp198. this is a document in 1956, a few years later by alan rodgran. someone who had been with the company for many decades and decades. dr. rodgran, again looking mostly at outside research, and i think maybe r.j. reynolds had begun doing some research at this point, he reached the conclusion, "it is a reasonable presumption that the change which has taken place in tobacco consumption, in amount and in method, are responsible for the major part of the real increase in mortality." 1953, they concluded that the clinical evidence tended to support their cigarettes were causing lung cancer. 1956 they reached the same conclusion. if you can go to lp200, please. and this is another document by mr. rodgran to mr. hoover. this is in 1959. go to page 3, please. mr. rodgran concluded, "cigarette smoke should contain as little as possibly preferable at the zero level of the polycyclic hydrocarbons, should possess satisfactory flavor to the consumer and should contain sufficient nicotine to supply the necessary requirements of the smoker with respect to this compound." then you have an asterisk. they are recognizing at this point, "we consider the zero level for these carcinogens to be impossible to achieve as long as the combustion temperature of the cigarette is greater than 700 degrees centigrade", which it always has been and is today. now they have recognized the products are full of carcinogens, there is cancer in them and we cannot take it out. the zero level is impossible to achieve. if you can go to lp2241 and go to page 3. this was one of the competitors. this is after -- we will get to in a moment, after the formation of the tobacco industry research committee, dr. wakeham with philip morris. they too were doing research at that time. if you can go to page 21, please. just a few years after what we just saw from mr. rodgran, "carcinogens are found in practically every class of compounds in smoke. this fact prohibits complete solution of the problem by eliminating one or two classes of compounds. flavor substance and carcinogenic substances come from the same classes in many instances." again, it is becoming widespread knowledge in the cigarette industry that it is full of carcinogens, they are in every class of compound of smoke and we cannot take them out. so at this point they had a serious choice to make. go all the way back to the '50s, go back to claude teague. what is their choice? what do they do? they got together in december 1953 with their fierce competitors, all of the major manufacturers of cigarettes, and they met at the plaza hotel in new york city. and they decided to form a group called tirc, and they decided to start a cover-up, to hide this information, to not let anybody know and to continue in their own way to make it as easy as possible to start smoking, hard as possible to quit, and as easy as possible to relapse. they issued that frank statement that you heard about that was published all over the country in newspapers, and if we could see visual 8a. i'm not going to show you the whole frank statement. you will have it in evidence. but the overwhelming message of the frank statement and of what came after that for many, many years was there was no definitive proof that cigarette smoking causes lung cancer. they said it loudly, they said it clearly and they said it over and over again in many different places. i want to show some video clips at this point of some of the things they were saying publicly after those documents that you saw. if we could see lp024a, b and c. this is from the see it now show in 1955. "this is timothy b. hartnett, former president of a major tobacco firm and chairman of the industry research committee. mr. morrow, i would like to quote from a statement released at the time the tobacco industry research committee was formed. at that time we stated we accept an interest in people's health as a basic responsibility paramount to every other consideration in our business, and that is where we stand today. i would like to emphasize that the industry has assured the scientific advisory board individually and collectively of complete freedom of action. they have extended the same freedom of action to investigators who are free to present their findings or publish their findings without clearance or prior approval from this board." "the scientific director is the imminent cancer investigator, dr. clarence cook little, head of the jackson memorial laboratory at bar harbor, maine. dr. little, have any cancer-causing agents been identified in cigarettes? no, none whatever either in cigarettes or in any product of smoking as such. suppose the tremendous amount of research now going on, including that of the smoke industry research committee were to reveal that there is a cancer-causing agent in cigarettes? what then? well, if it was found by somebody working under the tobacco industry research grant, it would be made public immediately and just as broadly as we could make it, and then efforts would be taken to attempt to remove that substance or substances. i would like to say this, however, that i have heard sort of a point of view, and i'm not aiming this again at any one individual, but a point of view that says let us eliminate the agent in tobacco that is harmful. well, it seems to me that we cannot possibly eliminate an agent that has not yet been identified or the presence of which has not yet been proven." "this is the ritzman laboratory of one of the major producers. i'm dr. robert m. dupuis, chairman of the industry technical group of the tobacco industry research committee. our primary objective is to analyze all of the components of smoke. using these instruments, we have isolated and identified some three dozen components of smoke. many more will be identified. as we find these components, we publish the results of our work in technical journals, which are available to any scientist in any part of the world. so far we have found none that give us any cause for concern. if we do find any that we consider harmful, and so far we have not, we will remove these from smoke and still retain the pleasure of your favorite cigarette." making those statements after the documents that you just saw. after dr. teague had done his research and reached the conclusion that it was pretty clear what was going on. let us go forward. i want to go forward to -- let us go all the way up to 1971, lp1023a, b and c. "from cbs washington in color, face the nation, a spontaneous and unrehearsed news interview with timothy coleman, iii, chairman and chief executive officer of philip morris, incorporated, and chairman of the executive committee of the tobacco institute. so we have shown, i think, responsibility and we have been responsive. we are also very concerned about the charges leveled against our product, and we are very anxious to do whatever we can to clear the air in this matter. we happen to be optimistic about the future and we happen to feel this is a great industry and that this industry can face the future with confidence because when, and if, any ingredient in cigarette smoke is identified being injurious to human health, we are confident that we can eliminate that ingredient. in an ad that you ran in newspapers, december 1, i believe, you said that you had spent 35 million to support independent research. i would like to know whether you have ever spent anything, the industry -- when i say you, i mean the industry -- to help those millions of people, i believe there are millions, i cannot prove it, who would like to quit smoking and who may be told by their doctors that they had better quit smoking. what are you spending on ways -finding ways to make tobacco cigarette smoking less addictive? well, these are really two questions, are not they, mr. mims? as you please. we have no program, that i know of, to try to help people to stop smoking. we do talk to the question of whether or not cigarettes are hazardous. we do not believe that cigarettes are hazardous. we do not accept that. but we are working with the government, working very hard with the government, on various methods of ascertaining whether or not cigarettes can be found to be hazardous. do you believe that cigarettes are safe? have they been proven to be safe, mr. coleman? i believe they have not been proven to be unsafe. well, in view of the fact that they have not been proven to be safe, what is the justification that you would offer for spending, according to one estimate i've seen, three billion dollars in the last 20 years, to promote their use when there is that uncertainty, when we have excess deaths of 200,000 to 300,000 a year, when there is all this evidence, which you do not feel is conclusive; what is the reason for promoting its use when it might cause cancer, heart disease and so forth? well, i would have to answer that in this way, mr. mims. there is a great many people in the united states and all over the world who enjoy smoking, who find it satisfies a very important human need. we think that those people are entitled to the best possible products that we can produce. that is essentially our job. now, embryos do not have much chose, fetuses do not. they do not like to smoke. british medical research council did a study of all of the 17,000 babies born in a single week in the united kingdom, as you know. the council found that those babies born to mothers who smoked during pregnancy were in significantly higher proportion small, weighing under five and a half pounds approximately than the babies born to mothers who did not smoke, and that there was a higher rate of stillbirths and of deaths within 28 days of birth. my question is, in view of this study, which is the largest and the most elaborate of its kind ever made, is it right to promote smoking among women with virginia slims and the other brands especially marketed for them with no warning as to the danger of the embryo that may exist? you are reading that question because it is a complicated question. i would say that i did read that report and i concluded from that report that it is true that babies born from women who smoke are smaller, but they are just as healthy as the babies born from women who do not smoke. some woman would prefer having smaller babies." that was in 1971, decades after this started, 15 years after some of the documents we saw, and they are still saying there is nothing in these cigarettes that is harmful and if there is, we will take it out. we will show two more clips, lp1738, just the a portion, please. this is james bolling. "if you were convinced that cigarettes were killing people, would you stop making cigarettes? well, i've personally been on record on that for a long time. i'm not in the business of killing people. obviously i've said all along there is simply plenty ways to make a living. i happen to believe in what i'm doing very strongly. but i also am, first of all, a human being. i certainly would not -- if i thought that were so, i would not smoke myself, nor permit my wife to smoke or my children to smoke." the court: mr. loehr, you are requested cue. mr. loehr: thank you, your honor. he would not permit his wife or children to smoke. 1976, 20 years after the document you saw. he is encouraging people to permit their children to smoke. you have to keep in mind, you will be instructed by the court in one of the jury instructions, if you have found that benny martin was a class member, you check yes to that first box, and now down here on number two, you will be instructed that r.j. reynolds entered into a conspiracy with morris and all of the other manufacturers to do exactly what you have seen, to conceal their knowledge of the health hazards of their products. now, earlier than that, at times when it was affecting mr. martin and during some of the same periods, we need to look at a few of their advertisements. if we can go to mar2250, page 1, please. this is an ad from 1930. this was the kind of thing that when mr. martin was very young, what we have here are luckies, and mr. martin would not have seen this particular ad. he was probably a year old. but this was lucky strikes, less irritating, it is toasted and they have physicians, 20,000 physicians that are advertising for them. if we could show 2377. you saw a lot of these with dr. kyriakoudes, an r.j. reynolds ad. the last one was american tobacco company, which is now r.j. reynolds. another focusing on doctors. this is from 1944, right about the time period mr. martin likely started smoking. "more doctors smoke camels than any other cigarette." if you will go to ar2365, please. santa claus with a cigarette. you know, at first blush, i guess you could say that is kind of cute. now this was back from the '30s again, but he is got a cigarette in his hand. now that is cute to an adult, is not it? because the only person that would really think that santa claus would smoke would be the person that believes in santa claus. this is the kind of advertising that was going on. if we could show -- i'm sorry, 2268, please. and if you have any doubt as to whether any of this was directed at children or teenagers, where most of their customers came from, "give dad his favorite smoke on father's day." and it is got a little built-in card where the kid can just sign his name. they are advertising in 1952, is when this came out, they are advertising for children to give products they know are addictive and have carcinogens to their fathers. if we could go to mar2475, please, one of their cartoon ads. and if you send in enough of the fronts from the camel packs, you get a book on magic tricks. who in the world would want a book on magic tricks? adults? children? the purpose of their conspiracy, the purpose of tirc was to do -- to hide their knowledge and not tell anybody what they were doing. if we could see lp313 page 1, please. this is a document from -- i believe this is from philip morris, one of the conspirators with r.j. reynolds, and they are talking about the public relations program. now, keep in mind, when they got together at the plaza hotel, they did not gather with doctors or scientists. they gathered with philip morris, they gathered with their pr people. they came up with their pr. this is when the surgeon general's report has come out. "however, at some point reflecting the same seriousness with which we met before, we must in the near future provide some answers which will give smokers a psychological crutch and a self-rationale to continue smoking." psychological crutch. you have heard us use that term many times, but it came directly from the cigarette industry. again, how you divide up the fault in this case? we have talked about benny martin's fault. his humanness, his weakness. he should have tried harder to quit, but this fault was intentional. they knew exactly what they were doing. they did it over and over again for decades. what i say is simply a suggestion and is entirely up to you. i suggest eighty percent for intentional, constant conduct, for conspiracy to do exactly what they did, for carrying out that conspiracy. you will be told that negligence causes an unreasonably dangerous effect. i think i've been rather generous in doing this. the next issue that you come to on the verdict form, i'm going to skip number three for now, damages, and i'll come back to that in a moment. but we will go straight to number four, which was, was r.j. reynolds conspiracy to conceal information and actual concealment of information a legal cause of the death of benny martin? in other words, did it work? all of that information, you heard a number of physicians who specialized in addiction tell you about an addictive brain. they tell you about how that brain handles information. the denial, the rationalization. you are going to get the same instructions on legal cause that i talked about earlier, and it does not have to be the only cause, and there is nothing whatsoever in the jury instructions that says we have to point out this article or that article or this statement or that statement. you have heard both dr. cummings who described the counter information from the cigarette companies as a wallpaper effect. it was everywhere. dr. cummings said you have to live under a rock not to see it. dr. norrell, on the part of the defendants, agreed that benny martin likely would have been exposed to and seen all of this information from the cigarette companies. you have seen just little bits and pieces of it. it went on for decades. it talked directly to the denial of the person in the addiction process. and the answer to this is overwhelmingly yes. he could not have missed it, their own expert agreed, it was there. if the law required that, no one could ever prove that a conspiracy led to their injury, not in a death case, could they? nobody walks around saying, hey, did you see that recent thing from tirc, did you see the tobacco institute and what justice coleman said? this stuff just comes in, just like the health information came in to benny martin and just like he did know and did understand at some point, so did their information as well. the last question on the verdict form is under the circumstances of this case state whether punitive damages are warranted against r.j. reynolds. punitive damages are meant to punish a company for their conduct. they presented a couple of very nice young scientists, and my hats are off to them. they seem like decent people. you had a very distinguished dr. cook, with the british accent, the young dr. figlar, the bright scientists. but you know what? when we started asking them questions about addiction, you would have thought a skunk walked in the room. they could not answer the questions. they acted like they did not know what i was talking about. they could not define addiction. they have tried to make their cigarettes safer. i think that evidence was compelling. but the one thing they will not touch is the addictiveness of their products. they simply will not go away from it. they are going to stick with it no matter what. and you have seen, i think, a continuing interest in young americans. show lp211 page 1, please. this is an r.j. reynolds document. the summary right at the beginning, "it is suggested to develop a new r.j. youth appeal brand based on the concept of going back at least halfway to the technological design of winston and other filter cigarettes of the '50s." they are after youth market. down at the bottom, the last two lines indicate they can get additional nicotine kick through ph regulation. remember i showed that document to dr. figlar. you could change the amount of free nicotine in cigarettes to make it even more addictive, to make it get to the brain quicker and they said, well, it does not work unless you get the ph real high. we showed the document from brown & williamson, where dr. figlar started working, it showed fifty percent of free nicotine in cigarettes with ph just in the same range as their cigarettes are. here they are, they are very interested in youth. we have a document, lp400. this is, i believe, claude teague again in 1973 at page 2 of this. "at the outset it should be said that we are presently, and i believe unfairly constrained from directly promoting cigarettes to the youth market, that is to those in the approximately 21 year old group. realistically if our company is to survive and prosper over the long term, we must get our share of the youth market. in my opinion this will require new brands tailored to the youth market." show l3285, please. r.j. reynolds tobacco company, domestic operating goals. this is from 1974. "what are our goals? increase our young adult franchise into 14 to 24 year old group. we will direct advertising to appeal to this young adult group." how many decades now have they known their products are addictive and are killing people? show lp415. this is from 1980 into the next decade. report on teenage smokers, 14 to 17. they are bemoaning the fact that philip morris is getting more of the 14 year olds than they are, and they conclude, "hopefully our various planned activities that will be implemented this fall will aid in some way in reducing or correcting these trends." i asked dr. figlar about it. i gave them every chance to say, this is immoral. this is wrong, we would never do that and what did he say? i do not see the harm, mr. loehr. what increased harm? you do not see any more harm for 14 year olds? no, i do not see that. again, the jury instruction will ask you whether this is reckless, whether it is intentional misconduct, whether it shows a callus disregard. i would ask you, what are the opposites of those words? if it is not reckless, what is it; cautious? is that cautious? if it is not callus, what it is; caring? if it is not intentional, what was it, an accident? the evidence is overwhelming and the darkest part about this, the darkest part, you will not find any document where anybody says, wait a minute, wait a minute, stop, these products are addictive and they kill people, and you cannot market them to 14 year olds. there is no one at r.j. reynolds that says that? is there no one that just says, wait a minute, you cannot do this? this has gone on over and over throughout the decades, during the time mr. martin was smoking. the answer to this question is overwhelmingly yes. they cannot get away with that. is that what we expect of corporations? we expect corporations to research your own products. do not sit back over all these years and let the public health department pull you along. they are your products. you are selling them by the billions. remember that consumption chart, by the billions. did people know at some point they were harming them? yes, they finally did. the word did get out after nearly half a million americans were addicted to cigarettes. so what should they have done? research your own products. make known what you know immediately and fully. do not lie. do not cover it up. do not conspire. try the best you can to lower the addictiveness of your products, and by all means do not ever, do not ever go after 14, 15, year old kids. so if they cannot figure out, because they admit no harm, no fault, no nothing, if they cannot figure out what they should have done, that is a blueprint of what we expect from corporate america. we expected it in the '40s and '50s, and we expect it today and they have failed miserably. the damages to ms. martin, back up here to question number three. you know, you are going to be instructed that there is no exact measure for those damages. and how could there be? you know, you can try to use the scales of justice and try it procure loss on one side, and money on the other side. it is a cool, kind of callus way to do things but it is all our system can do. it is all r.j. reynolds understands anyway. they pay dr. figlar and dr. cook $300,000 a year approximately each. that is how they value their time, their efforts. they paid dr. barsky in one five-year period, they paid him a million dollars to do part-time consulting with r.j. reynolds. ms. martin's grief is full-time. you heard, you saw her family describe what benny martin was like, a kind, decent, caring man, her only love. the man who had six children with her, worked two jobs to support that family, did not have many hobbies. he was always home or always working. helped each of his children go to college. and then as each of them grew and moved out, he had more time to spend with hilde, more time to be together. she took care of him and he took care of her. and i would suggest to you, take the figure that they pay dr. figlar, the man who cannot define addiction, cannot figure out what it is, $300,000 a year for the last 14 years. that is about 4.2 million dollars. it is not a verdict that is going to set any records. that is not what you are here for. it is a verdict that is trying to balance. that is for the past. add whatever you feel is appropriate for the future. you know one thing is clear, benny martin comes from a family of extreme longevity. his 81 year old brother, hoyt, took the stand and has played softball three days a week. as they got older, i think the roles might have reversed a little bit. it might have been benny taking care of hilde, if he had not got caught up in the addiction process as a teenager that he did not know and did not understand and had no ability to control. as you think about the amount, what is the appropriate amount, ask yourself this. the way we generally value things is what would we give for something, what would we pay for something? whatever amount you choose, you ask yourself, would ms. martin willingly give that up to have her husband back? you could even ask yourself this, would she willingly give it back, not to have him back permanently, just to have him back for one day? i started this by saying we all know benny martin smoked cigarettes for 47 years. he got lung cancer, just like we would all expect to have happened to somebody. how dare we come in this courtroom and sue r.j. reynolds. i think you have seen as this has unfolded the answer to that question, benny martin did not know any of this and neither did you when you walked in the courtroom. and the evidence that we presented has been overwhelming, and i appreciate your attention throughout this process. thank you. mr. loehr: i promise i'll be very brief, not more than another hour or so. kidding. could you please show the final instruction number 13? this really is the crux of this case. what you just heard over and over again, stated as eloquently and professionally as i think is humanly possible is that if mr. martin could quit smoking, then somehow his addiction could not have been a legal cause of his death. nothing could be further from the truth. this is the instruction that judge terrell is going to give you. "in order to be regarded as a legal cause of death, addiction need not be the only cause. addiction may be a legal cause of death, even though it operates in combination with the act of another, or some other cause, if such other cause occurs at the same time as the addiction and the addiction contributes substantially to producing such death." what is the other cause? what else was acting along with the addiction? mr. martin. number one, his addiction. you add it together to the continued smoking and the relapse, and you end up 47 years later with lung cancer. in order to say addiction was not a contributing cause, that addiction had nothing to do with mr. martin's death, you would have to conclude that mr. martin would have simply chosen all on his own without nicotine, without addiction to smoke 20 or 30 or 40 cigarettes a day every single day of his life. now, who has told you that would happen, or a better way to look at it is, what have the defendant's witnesses and their own documents shown you would happen if you took the nicotine out of the cigarettes? we go out of business. nobody buys them. they sit on the shelf all by themselves. there is no continued smoking, there is no relapse unless you have addiction. the defendants want to take this and separate it out, as if we have to prove that only one thing caused his death. life is not that simple. when we started this in jury selection, when i talked about an intersection collision, a drunk driver doing 60 miles an hour down the road, somebody pulls out from a side street and a horrendous collision occurs. the old law in florida would say if the person that came from the side street was any -- even one percent at fault, then he could not recover. he could not come into the courtroom. that was changed because the law recognized it let people get away. it let people avoid their own personal responsibility. the law changed to what we have now, comparative fault. the second question on the verdict form recognizes that that drunk driver speeding down the road should not get off just because a person coming from the side street in the moment of not paying attention rolled through a stop sign. the new law makes everyone responsible for their conduct, everyone. it makes mr. martin responsible because we have admitted from the outset, yeah, it was some tremendous effort. he could have quit. everyone can quit. our experts said that right from the outset. does that mean addiction had nothing to do with this, that addiction was not a contributing cause? that is just like an alcoholic drinking himself to death and having somebody stand over his body and say, alcoholism had nothing to do with this because anybody can quit. a heroin addict overdosing the 400th time using heroin, would anybody in their right mind say addiction had nothing to do with it because heroin addicts can quit? it is the combination of the two. one does not equal three. two does not equal three. you have to put the two of them together. go back to that jury instruction number 13 for just a moment. this is the law. this is what you are told. nowhere here does it say if benny martin could quit, then addiction does not play a role. nowhere does it say you have got to decide between addiction and choice, between addiction and the ability to quit. every witness who testified on this issue indicated that yes, while people can quit, most of them relapse. it is a terribly difficult thing to do, and nobody smokes themselves to death unless they are addicted. that is been the unrebutted testimony throughout. you know there was a little bit of talk about ti. if you can pull up 166, please. the fact that tirc published a lot of information, some of it the surgeon general even relied upon, but the public statement part of that, the tobacco institute we have here -- we have a statement from them, "for nearly 20 years this industry has employed a single strategy to defend itself on three major fronts: litigation, politics and public opinion. while the strategy was brilliantly conceived and executed over the years, helping us win important battles, it is only fair to say that it is not, nor was it intended to be a vehicle for victory. on the contrary, it is always been a holding strategy, consisting of creating doubt about the health charge without actually denying it." this is what the tobacco institute was formed to do. and it is what it did over and over and over again. you heard, well, ti, no, ctr, no. what that was saying is mr. martin never said it, doggone it, i heard something from the tobacco institute today. of course not. that is not how it works. the two witnesses who knew the most, dr. cummings and dr. norrell both agreed the information was broad based. it was spread everywhere. it was in the magazines that were in mr. martin's house. it was on the news shows that he watched on tv. it was everywhere. dr. norrell, their expert agreed, yes, reasonable conclusion is he was exposed to it. of course, he was. the court: five minutes, mr. loehr. mr. loehr: thank you. you heard talk about all the information that was available at various times and yet this was a poll. we had a little trouble interpreting this with dr. norrell, but it is really quite clear. in 1957 what is your opinion? do you think cigarette smoke is one of the causes of cancer of the lung? half of the people said yes. percent said no and 26 percent said undecided. at that point in time, despite the fact that there was information out there, only half of americans basically believed that it was even a cause. it did not ask if it was a major cause, did not ask how likely you would get it. half of america still did not believe it. and what was going on with cigarette consumption at that time? was mr. martin somehow out on his own, some risk taker doing something wildly different from the rest of america? the top chart here, the per capita growth of cigarette smoke. if you come down here in the '40s and '50s, what is happening? there is a few peaks and valleys, it is going steadily up. way back in the '20s and '30s when they said it was in the school books and everything else, look at the meteoric rise of cigarettes. yeah, the message was there. benny martin got the message, he got it from his mom, you should not use tobacco, you should not smoke while his dad was chewing tobacco, spitting in a can, while the advertisement showed santa claus smoking and on father's day, give your father a carton of cigarettes. eighty percent of mr. martin's age smoked, eighty percent. he was not some wild risk taker. he did not do anything out of the ordinary. those early warnings, they just did not sit with anyone. half of america in '57 still did not think there was any link, some were undecided about whether there was any link. we have been clear from the outset that every smoker can quit. every smoker should quit. but for some, it is easy and for some it is exceptionally hard. the evidence has been clear over and over again it was exceptionally hard for mr. martin. he did manage to quit after his diagnosis. it is not undisputed that he quit cold turkey the day he was diagnosed. the medical records suggested that is what he told his doctors. mrs. martin told you very clearly and unequivocally he continued smoking. i would suggest the evidence would show that he did quit, perhaps relapsed. she remembers him walking into the hospital with a cane, that was kind of late in the progress, when he was having trouble with the hip, running into dr. inclan and dr. inclan telling him, yes, benny you should stop. she would know. she was the one crawling in bed with him every night. remember when her son al described what his father looked like at one point, wearing a diaper, emancipated, sitting on the end of the bed. it was mrs. martin tucking him in at night. she would know if he quit. and let me tell you something, it takes a lot of nerve to say, hey, he quit; he quit when he got a death sentence and he did not relapse, did he? he did not live long enough for us to know whether he would have relapsed. he died. he paid for his addiction and his 47 years of smoking. and, yes, he accepted the responsibility. he learned that lesson young in his house. it was drilled into him by his mother, but r.j. reynolds still has not learned it yet. those findings that you heard about, they have not phased them a bit. conspiracy, negligence, unreasonably dangerous product, nope, they will not admit anything. they claim they have done nothing. at the end they say, well, it is just all about money. she is just in here wanting millions of dollars. it is the only thing our system allows. you cannot put them in jail. this is what the system allows, and it is probably a good thing because it is the only thing r.j. reynolds understands or cares about anyway. thank you.