closing argument mr. wichmann: folks, first i want to thank you on behalf of hazel mathis and the mathis family for coming down here and doing your civic duty and paying such close attention to the evidence that you received in the case. what this boils down to is saying that, hazel and robert mathis were and are members of the engle class objection, your honor, misstates the law. the court: what did you say? mr. persons: objection, misstatement of 3733 the law. the court: he has not finished his sentence. mr. wichmann: -- and r.j. reynolds, the defense, saying that mr. and mrs. mathis are not members of the engle class. mr. persons: same objection. the court: hold on a second. you-all decide, based on the evidence that you heard and the law that the judge has instructed you on, and you will get a three-page verdict form to fill out after you hear from the defense and when you retire to the jury room and get all the exhibits. the three pages, the judge will go over with you or has gone over with you -- and i'm going to go over with you in my presentation, but there are some things that you do not have to decide. the judge just talked to you about that, and she said that the court has determined and instructs as a matter of law that mr. mathis had lung cancer caused by smoking, and that the cell type of his lung cancer qualified for the membership in the engle class, if you decide that the other issues pertaining to class 3734 membership. other issues that are pertaining to class membership -- so, folks -- i'm going to go through this again, but the first question is: "was mr. mathis addicted to nicotine and cigarettes, and if so, was such an addiction a legal cause of his lung cancer and death?" so you if you must answer 1(a) yes. (discussion off the record.) mr. wichmann: you must answer 1(a) yes or hazel goes home. right there, you must check that yes. right there, you must check that yes. the second question under 1 is, was his -- was robert addicted to nicotine in cigarettes and, if so, was his addiction a legal cause of his copd? you should answer that yes. the other question is, "please state whether mr. mathis suffered from or experienced symptoms of either or both of the following diseases before november 21st of 1996." lung cancer. you must check that yes or hazel goes home -- hazel loses. you should check number 2 yes, based on the evidence that you have heard that we are going to go over here today. the first thing that is important -- the 3735 judge just read you the instructions on the believability of the witnesses that you have heard. and in a nutshell you can consider these elements when you decide who it is you are going to believe, both insofar as the family witnesses are concerned, the mathis family witnesses and insofar as the opinion testimony of the expert witnesses that you have heard. so this is how you decide whether or not hazel is a member of the engle class which we say she is. now, who do you believe, folks, r.j. reynolds brought you yesterday dr. abramson, got on the witness stand and he said he is never treated a single patient only for nicotine addiction. never done it. he said that he is never published a single article on smoking cessation or nicotine addiction. you recall i gave the guy his three-page cv. that is his -- that is a professional background. that is a professional history and the word "nicotine" does not appear on a cv. the word "smoking" does not appear on his cv. and this is the expert witness that reynolds brought you and they want you to believe. i showed you the u.s. surgeon general, the 3736 guy with the beard, c. everett koop, we showed you a video of him talking about how serious nicotine addiction was, how it acts on the brain like cocaine and heroin, how the younger that you start the harder it is for you to quit in the future and how nicotine causes people to smoke that causes millions of deaths in this country including robert mathis. and the r.j. reynolds expert, dr. abramson said i disagree with him, every single -- every single thing that the chief public health authority figure in this country says reynolds' expert disagrees. why? it came out that r.j. reynolds has paid him over a million dollars. he could not get it right. first, he said it was 1.1 million, then i pointed out to him that just last year he was up in broward county and he said it was between 1.1 and 1.2 million. but one thing is clear, that he is charged 42, $43,000 before he even set foot in this courtroom and -- and he told you that in another case, a previous case r.j. reynolds had given him a script, the questions and the answers before he testified and he said, i looked at it, and then r.j. reynolds rolled the videotape of him testifying in a previous case. why? so he could 3737 hone himself, so he could be sharper, so he could be better. why? because he is paid, it is a script, he is telling you what they want you to hear but that goes against common sense, it goes against the u.s. surgeon general and it goes against their own, the cigarette industry's own internal documents and the history objection, your honor. the court: -- and the history that you have heard about from dr. proctor, the very first witness who came here from stanford who wrote the book that i put up there on the witness stand, who wrote the book about the history of the cigarette industry. so he goes against all of those folks, he is an outlier. who did we bring? we brought dr. richard hurt. there is his picture. he came -- he had a neck brace and he had an arm brace because he had a fall. he was -- he is recently retired. he was the medical director of the nicotine dependence center for the mayo clinic, the number one ranked hospital in this country, treated thousands of patients, over 50,000 patients he is treated for nicotine addiction, for copd and for lung cancer. 3738 he is published extensively on nicotine, nicotine addiction, disease, he is cited in peer review literature, he lectures all over the country, all over the world on nicotine addiction and he is testified as an expert in front of the u.s. congress concerning nicotine and nicotine and cigarette addiction. so -- but it is up to y'all. are you going to believe the reynolds lawyer -- or, i'm sorry, i beg your pardon. are you going to believe the reynolds expert objection, your honor. ms. henninger: the reynolds expert. mr. wichmann: the reynolds expert. the court: -- who got paid a million dollars, who has no qualifications concerning nicotine and cigarette addiction over dr. richard hurt, and the other witnesses, and there are more witnesses. there is a whole family. you heard from the three daughters, hazel's three daughters, you heard from aadron and you heard from dionne, you heard from viola and i'll go over that testimony, again, with you today. but do not set your common sense aside outside of the courtroom. 3739 listen to what the folks who knew the most about robert had to say to you. let us start out with slide 11, addiction. what is addiction? dr. hurt came in and told you it is defined as a chronic relapsing brain disease that is characterized by compulsive drug seeking and despite -- and use despite harmful consequences. let us take it from reverse -- the reverse. and we will go over this again a little bit later, but you will recall, aadron mathis got on the witness stand and said, "my daddy was so badly addicted that when he was in the hospital, he was begging for a cigarette." i'm going to read you the testimony. she said he had lung cancer. he knew he had lung cancer. he was still begging for the nicotine. that is -- that is using cigarettes despite harmful consequences. and why? what is it about their product, what is it about this product that they sold to americans that they marketed to african-americans? what is it about the product objection, your honor. mr. wichmann: -- that leads somebody -- the court: well, he has not finished 3740 hearing i do not like to cut him off, but -- the court: okay. so if it is based on my prior rulings, i'm going to overrule. mr. wichmann: may i proceed, your honor? the court: yes. mr. wichmann: what is it about this product that would lead robert mathis to smoke so much over 50 years to be on his deathbed begging for cigarettes? it is the nicotine. and dr. hurt told you chronic relapsing brain disease, he talked to you about how the quickest way to get the drug nicotine to the brain is to smoke it. it is even quicker than injecting a drug into your veins. it goes right into the lungs, right into the bloodstream and right up to the brain and it creates receptors and creates nicotine receptors and the brain -- the brain demands more. and dr. hurt told you that the younger that you start, if you have a brain that is still developing -- the evidence in this case was robert started at age 9, he started at age 12 objection, your honor. hearsay. 3741 the court: overruled. members of the jury, what the lawyers for both sides say during closing arguments is not evidence. you must rely on your own recollection of the evidence. what the lawyers are doing is summarizing what they believe the evidence showed and in an argument format and the rules allow them to do that. but the jurors must rely on their own recollection of the evidences. very well. mr. wichmann: one of their own paid witness, dr. abramson came in here said, well, 50 years, i did the math, he started around age 12. that is what abramson said. age 12, the brain is not fully developed. dr. hurt went through that with you, and the u.s. surgeon general, who is the video you saw said that the younger you start for scientific medical reasons the effect nicotine has on your brain the harder it is for you to quit, the harder it is for you to quit. compulsive drug seeking. dr. hurt talked to you, he said nobody -- nobody starts smoking three packs a day. why? because of this medical concept called tolerance. okay. it is like -- it is like -- it is like a sprinter. no sprinter starts out running the 100-yard dash in 9 seconds 3742 because his body will not tolerate that. you have to work at it, you have to go out there and you have to smoke and regularly smoke and get your body used to nicotine, used to inhaling. that is what dr. hurt said. so he went from whatever he started as a boy to two to three packs a day according to the family. now, reynolds says, oh, no, no, no. there is a -- there is a medical record that says he only smoked one pack a day for 50 years, so it is only one pack a day. dr. abramson got up and said to you, oh, man, i do not believe the family. they are not creditable. it is what he said. he said objection, misstates the evidence. mr. wichmann: it is what the medical record said. the court: the medical record says, according to dr. abramson, it is only one pack a day. well, the family knew him the most. they knew him the best, and they told you how his smoking progressed from two to three packs a day up to when he is in the hospital on his deathbed 3743 asking for -- asking for nicotine, asking for the cigarettes. now, that, folks, is tolerance. that, folks, is over the years the brain crying out for nicotine and the body tolerating more and more and more and more. you know what? during the entire time that robert mathis was alive smoking reynolds' cigarettes never once did they say, do not do that. mr. persons: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. mr. persons: may we have a sidebar? the court: no. sustained. mr. persons: okay. move to strike. the court: jurors, disregard the last statement. thank you. mr. wichmann: reynolds continued to sell him cigarettes. he was their best customer. he did what they wanted their smokers to do and that is buy more cigarettes, smoke more cigarettes so they could sell more cigarettes and make more money all the while that they knew, you heard the evidence from dr. proctor from stanford, they knew in the mid 1950s that their product was addictive and that their product causes lung disease and 3744 death, and they were in america while, i'm going to show you the conference -- the consumption chart in an minute, while people -- while they sold more cigarettes and the line of consumption went up. and they were here in this country selling their product while the lung cancer death rate went straight up through the roof and never once did they say during the course of the conspiracy, never once did they say our products are highly addictive, our products are so addictive they are like cocaine and heroin and our products are going to cause lung cancer and death to millions of americans like robert mathis. they never said that. they never said that until after robert mathis was dead, but reynolds is going to blame robert objection, your honor, blame. the court: just a moment. i'm going to -- i'm going to overrule the objection, but remind the jurors to be mindful of the jury instructions that i read to you on this issue. go ahead. mr. wichmann: reynolds has a simple argument and that is it is all robert's fault. go to the next slide, please. 3745 let us go through some of the documents, and what i've tried to do is -- what we have tried to do is we tried to -- to present you with sort of a bird's-eye view. there is literally thousands of documents. you heard that from dr. hurt, who was one of the first people outside of the cigarette industry to be allowed into their vault where they kept all their previously secret material. he was not allowed in until after robert died. and so we cannot -- as he said, we cannot bring you every single piece of paper, but we can bring you what we think are the important documents, and you have them back there. and you can look at them, but i want -- i want to go through some of them right now. here is one. this is r.j. reynolds. they knew that they possess knowledge of the effects of nicotine far more extensive than exists in published scientific literature. this is part of the concealment and the conspiracy. the next one, please. they knew that nicotine was the substantial chemical that kept addicted smokers smoking. i knew i was going to do that. mr. philipson: do you want me to get the 3746 tape from the back of the courtroom? mr. wichmann: we will muddle ahead. okay. so the question is: was robert addicted to -- next one, please -- was robert addicted to the nicotine in cigarettes? and this is a summary of what you have heard as evidence in this case. he started smoking age 14 or 15. well, you heard dr. abramson say it was probably even earlier than that, around 12, and you heard the family say 9. but y'all -- the point is that he started when he was a teenager. he smoked two to three packs a day for 50 years. he received 40 to 600 doses of nicotine to the brain every day. you heard that from dr. hurt. woke up in the middle of the night to smoke. smoked first thing in the morning. smoked everywhere including in bed. i'm going to go over that in a minute. he had burn marks on his clothes. he was described by the family as a chain smoker, even though dr. abramson, the paid reynolds witness, said, "no, i do not believe that." he did not satisfy his technical definition of a chain smoker. but y'all heard from the family. you can decide who you are going to believe. 3747 he smoked after he was diagnosed with lung cancer. and i talked a little bit about that. he said he needed a cigarette in the hospital. abramson and said, "well, everybody knew that he was going to pass." and so they took him out, and let him have a cigarette before he passed on. he was very agitated when he was trying to quit, and that is because dr. hurt told you people smoke either to prevent the withdrawal from nicotine -- addicted smokers smoke to prevent the withdrawal from nicotine or to satisfy the brain's craving for nicotine. he had that. he tried to quit. you heard this from the family. he tried the patch; he tried the gum; he tried going cold turkey. now, we are talking about events that happened 20, 25 years ago. some of the family dates were off, and dr. abramson made that clear. he said, "no. it does not qualify for use of the patch or the gum because they did not get exactly the right date, exactly what day it was in january of 1986 where there was" -- nobody remembers that. nobody remembers that. but y'all have to decide. you heard the family come up and say to you under oath, sit 3748 down, remember, he had the t-shirt on, he had the patch on his arm. you remember the girls that came up and told you, "yes. he chewed the nicotine gum because he had dentures, and it was bothering his dentures." they remember this. also cold turkey. they told you about how -- and i'm going to get into that in an second, how robert mathis, hazel's beloved husband for many years, okay, raised four girls and rodney mathis, the eldest son. and how he was just the most even tempered guy you could imagine. that is what you heard from the family. except, except, except when he was trying to quit, when he went without his cigarettes for a day or so, how he got snappy. that is what the girls said, "he got snappy." what is that tell you? that tells you he is having withdrawal symptoms from his brain crying out for nicotine, and that is what happens to addicts, nicotine addicts. and also he switched to pipes and cigars to try to quit smoking. dr. richard hurt, we brought down from the mayo clinic. i already went over his qualifications. he sat here and told you in his opinion robert mathis was unequivocally, 3749 absolutely addicted to smoking. what did he base that on? he based it on the heaviness of smoking index. he told you about that. he said this is the diagnostic tool that he used and that they use at the mayo clinic when people come to them that are so addicted, they have to check themselves into the hospital in order to get help to -- to kick this addiction. and he talked about using those two criteria and how that was the best test to use because robert is not here, unfortunately, to answer questions from the doctor. but he applied it, and he said robert had the highest level of dependence. highest level of addiction. now, he also talked about the very same criteria, the very same book that reynolds' doctor used, the dsm-5, which is what the psychiatrist and psychologists use. dr. hurt told you they do not use -- the doctors, the clinicians, the doctors who actually treat addicted smokers do not use the dsm-5 because it is not geared for smoking addiction, but he said he applied it anyway. and he got 9 out of 11 criteria, robert met. only two were needed for addiction. he said based on the dsm-5 robert mathis qualifies as a class member. 3750 hazel qualifies as a class member. now -- now, based on what y'all heard from the family, based on what y'all heard from dr. hurt, okay, you got to compare that with what y'all heard from reynolds' paid witness who said -- who said -- first he admitted he does not see addicted smokers because most addicted smokers do not go to psychiatrists like him. they go to medical doctors first. that is what he said under oath. but he applied this test to robert. and guess what? he came up with 0. he said robert mathis who smoked for 50 years first thing in the morning all day long, smoked in bed, smoked at night, smoked in the hospital while he is getting treatment for lung cancer. the family came in and told you he was addicted. the paid reynolds' expert said he did not meet not a single criteria. he is so far out of the mainstream he should not be believed. now, one thing he did not talk to you about when he went through his dsm criteria, but i did when i cross-examined him, and i think it is important. the other page of the dsm-5 criteria that says, "associated features supporting a 3751 diagnosis of tobacco use disorder." "smoking within 30 minutes of waking." the family told you first thing he did in the morning was smoke. smoked daily. the family told you he smoked every single day. smoked more cigarettes a day. we covered that. waking up at night to smoke. they are all associated with tobacco use disorder. but the reynolds witness he said, "no, he does not meet a single criteria." and importantly for this case the dsm recognizes that serious medical conditions like lung and other cancers often occur as well as pulmonary disease, and that is the copd. the copd is the pulmonary disease and the lung cancer. reynolds' own expert's book says that people who are addicted often get copd, and they often get lung cancer. so i asked him this question yesterday: "can you answer my question? who knows more about the reasons he woke up? the family members who were living with him, or you who never met him but got a million dollars from reynolds?" 3752 and he finally admitted the family would know more. so let me just talk to you a little bit about what the family said. aadron mathis, very first family member, sitting right back there, was asked here, "do you think your dad was addict?" she said, "he had to have been. he was in the hospital hooked up to an iv. he would have other things on his body hooked up, and he still wanted to smoke. when he could not smoke laying in the hospital, he trembled. he would shake because he needed to smoke." dionne, sitting right over there, licensed practical nurse, got on the witness stand and told you her dad smoked continuously. her dad smoked first thing in the morning. he got up to smoke at night. and she said, "well, i know that because i used to see him get to smoke at night." but dr. abramson, paid a million bucks, was not there, never met robert, said, "no. no. that does not -- no. no. i'm not gone -- i'm not going to factor that in." she also said that she remembers his bed sheets being burned from him smoking in bed because he fell asleep with a cigarette in his 3753 hand. he was a chain smoker. and she was asked, "well, do you think your dad was addicted?" she said, "he just could not stop." viola, shari sitting over there, this lady served in the u.s. military just like her dad. robert mathis was a good man. robert mathis' life matter. robert mathis was in korea serving in this country. what did she say about her dad? she said he was a chain smoker. that is what she told you, even though dr. abramson yesterday said, "oh, no, could not be." she also said he made deep pulls on a cigarette, and she described how the ash would stay on the cigarette because he was inhaling so deeply. dr. hurt told you the reason for that is it is a scientific medical condition called compensation because reynolds put filters on their cigarettes so that people would think the cigarettes were safe. but what happened was addicted smokers like robert had to get the nicotine. so they covered the holes in the filters with their fingers, subconsciously, dr. hurt told you, and they inhaled deeply. and 3754 they inhaled deeper because they had to get that nicotine passed the filter up into their brain. and that is what she is telling you that she -- that she saw. and she also said, "my dad smoked every day, all day." that was an addicted smoker. she said, "he was a continuous smoker." she said, "he smoked all the time." "some people referred to him as a chain smoker," is what she said. now, they are going to get up and tell you he was a free and willing smoker. he just chose to smoke. so he just could have put it down. he just could have quit, and we would not be here. well, their own document -- and these all have pt numbers on it. this was written in 1980. it was a previously secret document. it was secret during the entire time robert mathis was -- was alive. it says right here, "cigarette smoking is more addictive than using heroin." that is what -- that is what the internal cigarette document says. but you heard their expert they paid a million bucks to yesterday, say, "no, no, no, no. i do not agree with the surgeon general," but here is what the cigarette industry was writing in secret. 3755 it is more addictive than using heroin. and, "we cannot defend continued smoking as free choice," which is what they are going to say if the person objection, your honor. the court: -- if the person was addicted. now, again, their doctor came up yesterday said, "he was not addicted, and i got this book that says so, right?" then i said, "well, why do not you turn your attention to this page?" and this page was, "culture-related diagnostic issues." i asked him to read to you right in the bottom, highlighted, "african-american males tend to have higher nicotine blood levels for a given number of cigarettes, and this might contribute to greater difficulty in quitting. also, the speed of nicotine metabolism is significantly different for whites compared with african-americans." he said, "well, you know, that is news to me." could you put up pt1207, please? 3756 why is that? well, here it is. there is an internal document, previously secret document. you can take it back there, and you can find it. and this is what they wrote. "king-size kool" -- remember, that was one of the brands of mentholated filtered cigarettes that robert smoked. they wrote, "king-size kool has the highest nicotine delivery of all the king-size cigarettes today, menthol or non-menthol. one of the keys to kool's success is the high nicotine to tar." so they knew that. but they never told robert mathis that. how is robert supposed to know that? how is robert supposed to know that, this cigarette that he is smoking, this kool cigarette, this mentholated cigarette that they are marketing has got the highest nicotine delivery? he did not know that, just like he did not know all about the cancer-causing chemicals in their -- in their cigarettes. and he did not know all about the ingredients that dr. hurt told you about. they put in the cigarettes everything from chocolate to menthol, to this, to that to make the smoke more inhalable so that folks can inhale 3757 their cigarettes and buy more. here we go, right here. just an idea of some of the cancer-causing chemicals in smoke that the cigarette industry denied for all the time robert mathis was alive. they denied. they kept saying, well, we do not think there is anything harmful in the smoke from our cigarettes, but if there is, we will find it and we will fix it, and if there is, you got to smoke a filter, you got to smoke this, you got to smoke that, smoke the filter, use menthol, that is -- that was what they were saying when they knew otherwise; when they knew the product they were selling was highly addictive, could cause lung disease and lung cancer to people like robert. here we go to the next one, please. so robert smoked winston, which is a filtered cigarette. robert smoked kools, which was a filtered menthol cigarette. robert smoked newport, which is a lorillard cigarette, menthol filtered cigarette. he also, later in his life, he smoked benson & hedges, a philip morris brand. now, this just summarizes what i've been through, "smoking cigarettes is the number one cause of lung cancer, and the number one cause of 3758 copd in this country." dr. hurt talked to you about that. he said he is treated over 50,000 patients for nicotine addiction and for the diseases. and he said oftentimes copd, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, goes hand and glove with lung cancer because they are both caused by smoking. they are both caused by smoking from people who are addicted for over 50 years, in this case, two to three packs a day, this is what happens. here are over 70 carcinogens including polonium, cyanide, arsenic, tobacco-specific nitrosamines. fifty percent of all long-term smokers die of a smoking-related disease, that was what dr. hurt told you. 500,000 americans die a year. 20 million americans have died since the cigarette companies started their conspiracy in the 1950s, and that came from dr. robert proctor, the historian who wrote the book on the history of the cigarette epidemic in this case. now, i told you, we went over briefly the verdict form and some of the questions that y'all have to answer. and let us talk about the testimony to support the finding of, yes, on that verdict form. "in addition to copd, did you find, 3759 based on your review of the records, that robert mathis suffered from lung cancer?" dr. hurt said, yes. "would those symptoms have been before november 21st 1996 or after?" dr. hurt told you before, i think mrs. mathis and the daughter, aadron, said that he had these symptoms at least a year and a half before he died. and he died in june of '97, so it would be in 1996, the early part of '96, they would have recognized these symptoms from the family. another thing that is interesting is, reynolds -- well, we do not have all of robert mathis' medical record. the reason we do not have objection, your honor. the court: the reason we do not have all of robert mathis' medical records, you heard from the doctors, you heard dr. villa, the pathologist who testified from mercy hospital, you heard from the defendants' own doctor, dr. okun and dr. hurt, is because there is a records retention policy at the hospital, that they only keep the records for seven years. after that, they do not keep a full 3760 set. so everybody agrees in this case, that we do not have a full set of records. but we have -- and that is not reynolds' fault, that is not our fault, that is not anybody's fault, it is just -- it is just the way it is. so we -- but we can reconstruct from the family testimony objection, your honor, objection. the court: -- reconstruct from the family testimony and from the records that we have what symptoms did robert mathis have before november 21st of 1996, because he has to have those before so that hazel can qualify as an engle class member. he had a cough. he had shortness of breath and he had these symptoms going back at least a year and a half before his death. talked about an x-ray -- and we are going to put that up here in an second, that said, copd, which is emphysema or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease has an impression on that x-ray, caused by smoking. "did you find in your review 3761 of the medical records any evidence that robert mathis had had copd prior to november 21st? "yes. "what evidence did you find of that?" dr. hurt told you, "well, he had a cough, there was a record from, i think, november of '96," which said he had a cough for the last two months and they treated it with robitussin. went to the va, took a while to get the appointment. he was not a complainer. he went to the va. they gave him robitussin. you have -- you will get the records back there, they gave him robitussin for, like, three months. i mean, come on. i mean, come on, the guy is still coughing for three months, and they give him robitussin. next slide, please. and why? why? folks. this is the chest x-ray from march of '97 that was first diagnosed the end of january of 1997. look at this over here. that is the mass -- pass me the tennis ball, please -- you can see it right there, right there, that is the tumor that he had in his chest. the tumor he had in his chest at the end of january of '97. it is not -- makes no common sense to think that somebody who 3762 had a mass this size (indicating) in january would not have been feeling symptoms of it before thanksgiving. why -- dr. hurt told you, he said when a tumor like this is growing in the human body, the rest of the body is trying to fight it off. it is like a massive infection that is going to kill you. it is right there in your chest, causes you to cough. it makes you tired because the rest of your body is fighting it off, trying to -- trying to keep it from growing, from growing. and also one of the common symptoms -- and you will see in the medical records is, it causes hiccups. we are going to get to that in a second. all of these symptoms, all of these symptoms robert mathis had before november 21st of 1996, he had to have had those to qualify as a class member. next slide, please. here we go. complaining of a cough times two months, for two months. that is november 8, 1996. that puts him back, when, in september '96. this document says he is a class member. next page, please. here is what dr. hurt told you, "so cough 3763 is one of those things we know occurs in people with copd." it is a symptom of copd. coughing is a symptom of copd. their own doctors admitted it. "the family members reported that he also had these symptoms at least a year and a half or so before he died." okay. shortness of breath. one of the obstructive lung disease or copd, one of the symptoms is you are not being able to catch your breath when you are doing regular activities. shortness of breath. one of the symptoms we see in people with copd is shortness of breath. the family told you that he was tired. he had shortness of breath. he was tired. next slide please. "your opinion, as a primary care internist, did robert mathis have copd?" absolutely. he described, what is copd? he said, "it takes a long time to develop. when we see an x-ray of a person that has changes consistent with copd, we know that that has occurred over probably a decade or two or three before. so we know what this is." and this is the -- the next thing is, i 3764 asked dr. hurt, what about this other medicine, because he got -- we have records that he got robitussin for the cough. but we also have records that he got a drug called thorazine. dr. hurt said, "yeah, the records show he got thorazine." what is that? when we have a cancer patient, particularly a cancer patient with cancer of the lungs, it involves the nerve that affects the diagram, the main muscle that causes us to breathe. if it affects that nerve, it causes people to hiccup because the diaphragm moves quickly and causes hiccups, and they are intractable. dr. hurt told you, well, it is so intractable, that means you cannot stop it. it is involuntary. you cannot stop it. dr. hurt said it was so severe in robert mathis' case, that he had to give him medicine for it, thorazine for it. we are going to talk a little bit here about weight loss. all right. we asked dr. hurt to summarize the records that we have on weight loss. and he found one. you have that record, robert? yeah. the weight loss record. yes. and this is the record that dr. hurt 3765 talked to you about, and you can take it back and you can find it, and it was dated march 10th of 1997. and in it they noted at the bottom, "unintentional weight loss of 16 pounds." so he had lost 16 pounds in march of '97. now, they could have checked, the nurses -- the doctors could have checked, fast, one to three months, which is what reynolds wants you to believe -- remember, they brought, they showed you he weighed this much on this day, but he weighed this much on that day. he weighed this much on this day, he weighed this much on that day. it went back and forth and back and forth with the weight, with the medical records. it was -- but they cannot get around this one. "slow 6 to 12 months." there is the "x." so the hospital personnel charted, noted in his chart that in march of '97, he had lost 16 pounds, unintentionally, and it was slow weight loss, over 6 to 12 months. let us go back six months from march of '97, and that puts us before thanksgiving, that puts us into the class membership by a month; october. let us go back 12 months. that puts us back to march of 1996. he is in the class. he is a 3766 class member. they want to keep him out. let us go back to the slide, please. and then i asked him, i want to finish up with the weight loss. i showed him the records, and he talked about it. so the highlighted portion is, they talk unintentional weight loss of 16 pounds and show over the previous 6 to 12 months. so this again shows, "this is not something that happened overnight. this is a slow progressive sort of thing that occurred over time." that is the point. it occurred over time so it is a symptom of the copd and/or the lung cancer; one of the two. they brought an expert in here, dr. amos. i guess, he was here yesterday morning, actually, "have you had experience with patients where they are not necessarily appreciating symptomatology that is taking place, but the family members have talked to you about those symptoms?" and he said, yes. so we know robert mathis was not a complainer. he did not go to the doctor, and he did not say, hey, i'm losing all this weight. he 3767 did not go to the doctor and say, i got this bad cough. well, that is not unusual. robert was like a lot of other people. robert was like reynolds' own doctors's patients. but he talks here about family members talking about the symptoms. let us talk a little bit about what the mathis ladies said to you here under oath. first of all, aadron came up and talked to you and said -- the question was, "did your father ever have hiccups?" she said, "yes, he did. he had real bad hiccups. not normal hiccups." and she said, "they were unnatural. he would have them all the time. further down the stretch when the hiccups would come, it was just a rolling, rolling hiccup. he almost could not catch his breath. it was sickening." they also told you about the cough, the family did. said he had a cough. they talked to him about going to the doctor. he made an appointment at the va. he went and got robitussin, but he had that cough. and that cough is from this in his lung growing and from the 3768 copd. and that is why on the verdict form is going to ask you to check "yes" when it asks about his addiction causing his disease and his addiction causing his signs or symptoms of both copd and lung cancer. now, this is just a simple slide illustrating to you what the judge has talked to you about. and, that is, what our burden of proof is. and, that is, "the greater weight of the evidence. more persuasive and convincing force and effect of the entire evidence in the case." so if y'all imagine a scale, the mathis family brought -- we brought in the family members, we brought in the girls. they talked to you about his addiction. they talked to you about his disease. they talked to you about him having symptoms before thanksgiving of '96. so that -- so we are -- we are -- the evidence is way ahead for the family, way ahead. now, i just want to breeze through. you will see a certified state of florida death certificate. cause of death is metastatic lung cancer. the court has already ruled that as a matter of law that smoking caused his lung cancer. but they are going to tell you, "well, addiction 3769 did not cause his lung cancer." now, you heard from dr. koop, u.s. surgeon general in the past, talks about addiction causing continued smoking that results in lung cancer. that is what dr. hurt basically said to you. he explained to you medically why people continue to smoke. why it is nicotine that is the key ingredient in the cigarette that causes people to smoke, and why that continued constant exposure to cancer-causing chemicals is what causes the copd and what causes the lung cancer. surgeon general koop: we should also give priority to the one addiction, tobacco addiction, that is killing more than 300,000 americans each year. wichmann: okay. now, let us look briefly at some of the internal documents that were secret before robert died that you will have back there to look at if you would like to. they talked about how important nicotine was to their business, because they are interested in selling cigarettes, and you saw the chart. and 3770 the more they sell, the more money they are going to make. said, "without the chemical compound nicotine the cigarette market would collapse. we would all lose our jobs and our consulting fees." that is what they were concerned about, folks, during the course of this conspiracy. their jobs and their consulting fees. they were not concerned about smokers. they were not concerned about americans. they were not concerned about robert mathis. they went on to say, "that is to say, if the exit gate from our market should suddenly open, we could be out of business almost overnight." they were putting their money and they were putting their business over and above the health and the safety of american consumers, american smokers like robert. and this is dr. koop again. he talked about cigarettes are addicting, nicotine is the drug that causes addiction. and, again, when we went over this yesterday, they denied it. their expert denies it, but dr. koop says, similar to -- addiction to cigarettes is similar to the addiction to drugs like heroin or cocaine in terms 3771 of how it -- how it acts on the brain. so who disagrees with him? you saw dr. abramson from yesterday. you saw this gentleman here. we will play the video. speaker: (inaudible) disagrees with the warning, does not it? mr. heinmann: we certainly do. speaker: you do not think that harms smokers so there is no reason to put any warning on them, do you? mr. heinmann: we believe our product is not injurious to health. speaker: as far as you are concerned is the surgeon general simply wrong in concluding that cigarette smoking causes lung cancer? mr. heinmann: i would use the term misguided. speaker: if he is misguided, then i take it your opinion is he is wrong? mr. heinmann: i'm simply trying to be polite about it. speaker: but not being polite about it, in your opinion he is wrong. 3772 mr. heinmann: dead wrong. speaker: congress is wrong about it, correct? mr. heinmann: we do not think they are justified. speaker: so they are wrong? mr. heinmann: they are wrong. wichmann: this is the position that they were taking, and this is what they were telling people. and that -- you remember at the beginning of the case in opening statement i stood up and told you what the case was about high-level executives in the industry making -- making conscious decisions, choosing, making choice to -- to sell their product that they knew was addictive and caused disease. that is what the case was about. that is an example right there. that gentleman, you heard, was the president at the highest level of american tobacco company that is now part of reynolds. this is what he is -- this is what -- this is a lie that they were telling the american people during the conspiracy so they could sell folks cigarettes even though they knew 3773 they were addictive and would cause horrible deaths like the death robert had. what about this gentleman down here? speaker: in your judgment for the surgeon general and the u.s. public health service and the centers for disease control, it is equally ridiculous and preposterous for them to say that 450,000 americans died every year as a result of cigarette smoking? mr. spears: i think it is totally unsupportable. wichmann: this is what they were saying, totally unsupportable. but we know today that is not true. that is just not true. they were lying. mr. persons: objection, your honor. may we approach? the court: no. let us go to the number 40. class membership. so based on what you heard so far, please check 1(a), "yes," because if you do not, we lose. 3774 please check 1(b), "yes." please check 2(a), lung cancer, "yes," because if you do not, we lose. please check 2(b), copd, "yes." now, if you find robert was a class member, if you find robert and hazel are in the class, not outside the class, that the door is open, and you come on in and join just like other americans, these are the findings that apply from the engle jury that decided engle, right down the hall those many years ago. the judge read this to you and talked about, 1, cigarette smoking causes copd and lung cancer. cigarettes are addictive. reynolds placed cigarettes on the market that were defective and unreasonably dangerous. they concealed and omitted material evidence. in other words, they lied. they had information in their files that if they had told the american public they could have avoided this catastrophe. they knew that the material was false and misleading that they put out. they entered into an agreement -- that is the conspiracy with the other companies -- to conceal and omit information regarding the health effects of smoking or the addictive nature of 3775 smoking with the intention -- and this is what is important, folks. i'm going to go into this in an second -- with the intention that smokers, that is robert, and members of the public would rely on this information, the false information that they put out to their detriment. so these are the findings that apply if y'all decide that robert and hazel are class members. now, i want to take you back just a bit to go over some of this that we went over with dr. proctor, the historian. and, that is, we have to put ourselves back into time, back to the '40s and the '50s when everybody smoked, legislators, airline passengers, entertainers, everybody was smoking. the next one, robert. here we go. we have got hank aaron smoking. lenny dawson smoking in the half time -- in the locker room of the super bowl. this -- this was the atmosphere that the industry created, and they created it, how, by spending -- by the biggest advertising and marketing campaign in american history. and here is what the 1967 ftc report -- that is the federal trade commission report -- was 3776 to congress. "cigarette advertising reaches virtually all americans who can read or understand the spoken word. it is virtually impossible for americans of almost any age to avoid cigarette advertising." that is how massive it was. they even used doctors to advertise cigarettes. they used movies and movie and television stars. we saw that. y'all remember that. we had i love lucy, and we had the flintstones, and we had humphrey bogart. we showed you that. it was different back then. but this was the environment that robert mathis grew up in florida and down here in miami. now, reynolds, in particular, the next one, marketed the two brands of cigarettes -- well, reynolds in particular marketed kool cigarettes to african-americans. and these are examples of some of the ads that they used to sell cigarettes to -- to black folks. okay. and part of it was "got a cold? switch to kools." would you pass me the menthol cough drops? yeah. why? because they knew, they knew that the 3777 menthol that they put in their cigarettes, they put in their cigarettes would give the smoker the same sensation in his or her throat that you get from a cough drop. and it feels cool. it feels medicinal. it helps the smoke from the cigarette get in the body. it helps the smoker to get more smoke and smoke more cigarettes and get more nicotine. it also gives the smoker this false feeling that he is doing something that is good for him. the next slide, please. here i want to talk a little bit about that. they are the number one advertiser on tv, and these are examples of some of the ads. the next one, please. we are not going to go through that again. so we are able today, dr. proctor studied this, and he wrote about it in his book. and he is able to put a number on how much they spent during the course of the conspiracy. they spent $250 billion marketing and advertising something that they knew was addictive and would cause copd and lung cancer. they spent more -- they spent more advertising cigarettes in one day than the government -- that was the 3778 government agency at the time. they spent more in one day than the government national clearinghouse on smoking and health spent in an year. this was the example i gave y'all in opening statement. i said, "well, there were some -- there were some publications -- some people out there that were warning folks that smoking was bad." and i told you it is like an example, you take -- take a penny, put it in a glass jar, stand in the back of the courtroom. and while the case is going on, shake it. no one is going to hear it up here, but you are going to hear it back in the back as opposed to the $250 billion that the industry spent marketing and advertising these cigarettes so folks -- so americans would smoke their product. that is like taking a tin can and filling it with -- with pennies and standing in front of y'all and shaking it like this during the whole trial. that was the difference between the marketing and advertising campaign of the industry and what the public health folks were doing. they were totally -- the public health folks were totally out there. play this. 3779 this is just an example. speaker: what cigarette do you smoke? you will be interested to know how the doctors of america -- smoke camel. yes, according to this survey more doctors smoke camels. do you inhale and you are better off smoking philip morris. and here is how you can prove it. try the philip morris. take a puff. the host: the exclusive winston filter work so effectively. let the full rich tobacco flavor come right through you. (singing) desi arnaz: give me a cigarette, will you? lucille ball: do not say cigarette. say phillip morris. desi arnaz: is there any other kind? lucille ball: not for you there is not. granny: sure wish you could taste it. pearl: i am tasting it, darlin'. winston tastes good. granny: like a cigarette. singer: you get a lot to like with filter, 3780 flavor, pack, or box? mr. flintstone: okay. how's about taking a nap? mr. rubble: hey, i got is better idea. let us take a winston break. mr. flintstone: that is it. winston is the one filter cigarette that delivers flavor 20 times a pack. winston has got that filter blend. mr. rubble: yeah, fred. wichmann: the next point i want to make is, that is just -- that is just a collage of examples of some of the ads that they used to market and to sell their -- their cigarettes over the years. and the next question, is, well, you know, looking back on it, we are like, well, come on, who the heck is going to believe that? that is the way we think today. but -- could you play this, please? speaker: do you expect the consumer to rely upon your advertisements? speaker: yes. our advertising is truthful 3781 and we would anticipate that they would rely on it if they chose. speaker: but that is no promise as to what the consumer can expect from your product, is not it? speaker: yes, it is. wichmann: that was their position, they were not spending $250 billion for nothing. they were spending it because their marketing people at the highest levels of their company said this is how -- this is how you get people to smoke, this is how you get people to keep smoking. so, of course, we expect people to rely on what we are saying. and that right there was the president of american tobacco company several years ago. now, so we talked a little about dr. proctor talked about how the conspiracy started in 1953 when some scientists were finding out that if they painted the back of mice with the tar from tobacco smoke, they would cause disease. how it got into life magazine, how all of a sudden the sales dropped and i showed you that on the -- on the consumption chart and how all of a sudden 3782 the cigarette industry executives in 1953 were in a panic, so what they did was around the time of christmas, it was unheard of because they were like mcdonald's, burger king and wendy's, they were all competitors, but once this bad news hit, what did they do, they interrupted their christmas vacations, went to the plaza hotel and they cooked up this conspiracy and it lasted over the years. in fact, they swore under oath in front of the u.s. congress in 1994 while robert was still alive, they swore that their products were not addictive and that there was no proven link between smoking and disease. now, here is just some examples of what they did in the beginning, instead of going to doctors or public health officials, they went to hill & knowlton, which is a public relations person -- public relations firm to figure out how they -- they combat this message that cigarette smoking was bad and you will see all this evidence back there. they put out the frank statement. we talked about that. they put it in the newspaper and they said, "no proof that cigarette smoking causes lung cancer." they are accepting 3783 responsibility. they will believe that their products are not injurious, and they are going to work close with people whose task it is to safeguard the public health. none of that was true. they did that through a public relations outfit in order to sell their cigarettes from 1953 up until after robert mathis died. and here is, for example -- let me just give -- these are some documents. let me just play this guy over here. what he was saying in 1976. speaker: anything can be considered harmful. applesauce is harmful if you get too much of it. well, when you say it this way, the people who eat applesauce die. the people who eat sugar die. the people who smoke cigarettes die. does the fact that the people who smoke cigarettes die demonstrate that smoking is the cause? there are polycyclic hydrocarbons in smoke. speaker: and they are found in mammals? speaker: under certain circumstances with an animal, some have been identified as so-called carcinogens. you will discover there is a great 3784 deal of doubt with regard to whether or not smoking causes all these diseases which are alleged to be caused by smoking. wichmann: this is what they were telling publically. this is what they were saying to the american people on tv while this is what they knew inside. they knew going back to 1958, 1961, 1962, 1963 smoking causes lung cancer, carcinogens are in our smoke, the evidence accumulated to indict cigarette smoke as a health hazard is overwhelming, and cigarettes cause lung cancer back in 1963. they never told the american public that. instead they spent all this money denying it, creating doubt, confusing people with half-truths and lies. and you know what? it worked. here we go, we went over this, the blue line shows the number of cigarettes that were being consumed, being sold. dr. proctor talked to you about early on lung cancer was practically unheard of, 1900 to 1920. then when people started smoking, look at that, the red line is male lung cancer rate, it went straight up. now, this is approximately when the first 3785 evidence came out that smoking might be bad, the number of cigarettes drops. they go -- they go full force with their advertising campaign. it goes back up again all the way back up and notice the lung cancer rate that resulted in 500,000 americans dying a year. it went straight up. now, this is -- these are just some examples of the confusion that they created in the minds of americans. they talked about the psychological crutch and the self-rationale for smokers so they would continue to smoke. in other words, they do not want to tell them the truth. they were not telling the truth because they knew if they told the truth, that their sales would drop. instead they wanted to confuse them, the key word is confusion. doubt is our product. that is what they were selling back then. doubt. they were not selling the truth. they were selling doubt and they talked about the -- the organizations that they set up that dr. proctor talked to you about publically and frequently denied what others find is the truth, that they were set up as -- as shields, propaganda entities. dr. proctor talked to you about how much money they have spent on that. take a look at this. 3786 speaker: i do not believe that most people that smoke get lung cancer. we are now in an era, as you know, of moderation. i do not think the industry admits there are any bad elements. if there are bad elements through the surgeon general, through the ama, through acts of god and the like, we hope we may find them, and if they are found, they will be removed. we do not believe that cigarettes are hazardous. we do not accept that because when, as and if, any ingredient in cigarette smoke is identified as being injurious to human health, we are confident that we can eliminate that ingredient. the babies born from women who smoke are smaller, but they are just as healthy as the babies born from women who do not smoke. what about the high rate of -- and some women would prefer to have a smaller baby. wichmann: obviously, we are not saying that robert mathis was a man and that this means he is supposed to believe one thing or another 3787 about getting pregnant. no. the point is is this was a high-level executive on face the nation in the 1970s on national tv and the reason he is saying that, folks, is it is another reassurance message. he is talking to americans about the most vulnerable members of our society, unborn kids, babies and he is telling smokers do not worry about it, it is okay, keep smoking, you might have a smaller baby, but some women want smaller babies. now, the reason that this is -- the reason i was showing you this is to give you an idea about the thinking that was going on in the cigarette industry at the highest levels because part of this case is that you are going to decide whether to punish them for what they did, and this is the kind of evidence that you need to think about and you need to consider in terms of deciding whether or not to punish these cigarette companies. but this shows you what they were thinking at the time and what lengths that they would go to to preserve their company profits and to conceal this information and to lie to the american people. next slide, please. 3788 what they did not tell robert and smokers is all about the fact that filters were just an illusion. you heard that from the doctor. they did not make smoking any safer. they did not talk to you that they could control the levels of nicotine in cigarettes. they never told robert mathis that, that they would take the nicotine out and they spray the nicotine back on, and there is internal documents that we went over that shows that they regulate the nicotine, they put how much nicotine is in their cigarettes. they did not tell robert all about the additives and that they manipulate, the ph, the ammonia to give a kick for smokers when the nicotine hits the brain. they did not tell robert that. he did not know that. menthol, they did not tell robert how menthol would make it harder for him to quit because menthol triggers more brain receptors which is what dr. hurt explained to you, told you about scientifically and why the dsm-5 that their expert brought in actually says african-american men have greater nicotine -- greater nicotine levels and it is harder for them to quit. why? because menthol and the ingredients and the 3789 additives in their cigarettes, all of this -- that they put sugars in there, all of this robert had no idea. next one, please. now, i'm going to talk to you a little bit about what they did to sell their cigarettes to african-americans, to black folks. did they have a plan? yes. they had marketing and advertising people studying this, how do we sell cigarettes, more cigarettes to african-american folks? well, they, at that time, they had the national medical association which was the black association of doctors. they shamelessly went to them, the same like they did to ama to tell them, here is free cigarettes, distribute them around, it is okay. here we go. this one, pt5792, 1969 a reynolds document spent $5 million tailoring, advertising to the black and spanish language markets. to be effective, advertisers should use customer oriented media in which over 22 million african-americans can identify with. this is especially true of brands that are heavily advertised like winston. so it is no -- by no mistake that robert mathis was a winston 3790 smoker? why, because they decided robert was the market that they wanted to sell their products to. and ebony, this is -- this is a reynolds document. the family told you that one periodical, one magazine that they received regularly in their life that they could remember was ebony magazine. that was -- that was a very popular magazine with black folks at the time. you think reynolds knew about it? of course they did. reynolds' own document says, "ebony has made an extensive effort to win advertisers, like them, and within the last few years has taken grade strides in that direction. our marketer says that ebony is for the black folk who had made it." so they are looking -- they are looking at robert to sell robert their cigarettes that they knew were addictive and that they knew caused disease. now, next one, please. you heard from dr. robert proctor, got up here and said based on his historical study, "did you run across any evidence in your studies of reynolds giving free cigarettes to african-american kids? yes." they commonly did that from the 1950s. but in the 1950s lorillard that has historically sold newport that robert 3791 smoked and is now owned by reynolds, lorillard would distribute free cigarettes from a truck, a green truck, okay, giving black folks, black kids free cigarettes so they would get addicted, so they would smoke their product, so they would buy more knowing -- knowing how dangerous their cigarette was and lying about it. now, here is an example of some of the menthol -- and you will get a big stack of them back there. you can look through them. they are from back in the day. i know they are from back in the day. but the reason that i'm giving them to you is to give you an idea of what was directed towards robert and towards consumers at the time. look at this. everybody's smiling. everybody's got a cigarette in their hand. it is nice colors, by water. look at there, everybody's having a great time. nothing in there about poor robert mathis in -- in the va hospital in jackson with lung cancer, dying, holding up and begging for a cigarette. no, they are not going to show you that. no, they are not going to show you that. this is what they are going to show you. here's another one, menthol. here's the newport. look at this there, everybody's having a 3792 good time around the water. it is nice and cool, cool like that, menthol that they put in their cigarettes. there it is alive with pleasure, alive with pleasure, all the pleasure but they do not show the pain. all right. now, what do we know about menthol? dr. hurt told you it masks the nicotine and it makes the smoke more inhalable. why, because it cools the throat so what is harsh then becomes smooth and a man can take it. that is why it is cool, why it is menthol, right? and here is what they were writing in '72, '74 and '83. i talked about this a moment ago. "king-size kool has the highest nicotine delivery of all the king-size cigarettes today, menthol or none menthol." you think robert mathis knew that? no. "more than 25 percent of the blacks who smoke smoke menthols." they are looking for them. they are looking for a market. "nicotine has been described as a major irritant in cigarettes, while menthol is known to produce the cooling effect that is often used to alleviate sensations of irritations." these are the previously secrets. see that 3793 one there that says confidential? all that was secret until dr. hurt got the opportunity to go into the vaults and find it after robert mathis died. he did not know about this. and filters, too, we talked about filters. dr. proctor talked a little bit about it, from a marketing standpoint. and dr. hurt talked about, from it a doctor's standpoint, about what effect it has on human smoking behavior. and that is what i talked to you, it is just the merchandising and sales promotion device. they just sold it because they thought people want it. the water might not be so good over here in this polluted city up in who-knows-where, so what are we going to do? we are going to get a water filter, put it on our tap. get the filter there, run the water through it, everything is fine. that is what they thought people would believe, and folks did believe it. folks did believe it. now, they were also -- we went through this, they were also hiding and rewriting and destroying documents. we talked a little bit about that. dr. proctor talked about. 3794 and so here is what they were saying. yeah. california scientist says, "i find no persuasive evidence that cigarette smoking causes lung cancer." a new york doctor told congress, "to claim there is now sufficient scientific evidence to establish that cigarette smoking causes disease, is, in my opinion, unjustified." speaker: turning a significant health question into a publicity stunt is an insult to serious science. speaker: i cannot point to anything that i would consider the cause of cancer to the lung, but the behaviors of the disease does not support the idea of cigarettes being the causal agent. speaker: we believe our product is not injurious to health. ms. browder: the jury has not come in. mr. stossel: it may not be harmful, you are not convinced? ms. browder: it may be or it may not be. we do not know. 3795 speaker: insofar as of correlation between lung cancer and cigarette smoking are concerned, no one knows. it may; it may not. how can cigarette smoking be the cause of lung cancer if the cause of lung cancer is, as yet, unknown? in fact, no one knows what causes. speaker: cigarette smoking does not cause cancer, yes or no? speaker: it is not known whether cigarettes cause cancer. it has not been causally established. speaker: cigarette smoking, no causal relationship between cigarette smoking and emphysema? speaker: despite all of the research to date, there has been no causal link established. mr. tisch: the data that we have been able to see is all the statistical data that has not convinced me that smoking causes death. mr. campbell: we do not know what causes cancer in general right now, so i think that we might find what causes cancer, and we may find out some relationship, which has yet to be proven. speaker: i do not think any of them die of diseases caused by cigarette smoking. 3796 speaker: zero? speaker: if they do, i think it is an unproven case. wichmann: folks, robert is not here, unfortunately, to tell you about what effect, if any, this message, at the time, had on him. but there is other ways we can tell that it did affect robert, and that is one of the questions you will have to decide. and when you get to the question on the verdict form here in an second. but how do we know that robert was affected by this marketing campaign by these advertisers, by -- by these false statements that they were making? well, first of all, we know that he kept smoking. he kept smoking all those years. and he kept smoking, that tells you that he was getting the message that the industry wanted to get out. next, we know why he kept smoking. he was smoking kools, and he was smoking newports, and those were the two brands of cigarettes that reynolds and that lorillard was marketing and advertising to black folks. so we can tell by his behavior, folks, that 3797 relied on what the industry was saying. but there is a little bit more than that. he was here in miami and watched tv, you heard from the family, he got ebony and sat down with the girls and went through ebony and all those cigarette ads were in ebony. he also watched tv here in miami, and what was on tv in miami when robert mathis was living here? play this, please. speaker: first of all, we know cigarette smoking is bad for our health. why does the tobacco institute continue to promote smoking? anne browder: well, the medical institute does not promote smoking. it promotes the right of an individual to make a decision to smoke and then supports that individual in making that decision. and i have to disagree with you, in that, we do not know what causes the illness that had been attributed to the cigarette smoking. i am not denying the fact that criminals could be a risk factor involved with some people in some of the problems that they might have. but i do not think that there is a causal relationship 3798 established between cigarette smoking and any disease. if there were, diane, i do not think there would be a cause without the effect or the effect without the cause, and we all know that that happens. wichmann: so that is what robert would have viewed right here in miami. that was played on channel 10 in miami. that is the message they were sending out to smokers. now, we have this slide right here, 72, please. this is one of the questions you are going to have to decide. the issue for your determination is, whether robert reasonably relied, to his detriment, on any statement made by the defendant. you do not -- we do not have to prove or identify a specific statement on which he relied. it is not necessary that a direct statement be made to him. it is this climate that they created. it is this smoking culture that they created, and then that they perpetrated, that they kept going by spreading their lies. that is what -- that is what y'all need to focus on. and the answer to that is -- verdict 3799 form -- a couple of more yes boxes for y'all to check. first one, "did he reasonably rely to his detriment?" yes. "did he reasonably rely on a statement in furtherance of their conspiracy?" yes. he was here in america. he was here in miami. he was receiving ebony. he was watching channel 10, and he continued to smoke, and he bought the products that they wanted him to buy. so those are two more yeses on your -- on your verdict form for the mathis family. now, i want to talk a little bit about apportionment of fault. ms. -- mrs. mathis accepts some fault for mr. mathis in this case. and there is going to be a section of the verdict form for you to check. and here is why hazel accepts some responsibility for robert's behavior. y'all are going to apportion it, and we submit that you apportion it ninety percent to reynolds and ten percent to robert. why the 10 percent? because robert started, he started when he was a very, very, young boy, either 9, 12 14 or 3800 15, so for that we accept some responsibility. but this is important, folks, we do not accept any responsibility for their intentional conduct, for what they did on purpose, for their lies, for their conspiracy, for their concealing this information. why? because robert mathis did not know that their cigarettes, that those kool cigarettes he smoked had the highest nicotine delivery out there. he did not know about all those additive ingredients. he did not know that those filters were not going to protect him one bit from copd or lung cancer. so we do not -- we do not accept any responsibility for their intentional conduct. now, i'd like to talk with you a bit about the mathis family. okay. first of all, y'all heard from hazel, and it was very emotional testimony. and what you heard from hazel was that, she was 19 years old when she met robert. and she told you -- and here is the testimony, "it was love at first sight." she said -- when she saw him, she said, "i know it is real." she said, "i was in love. he could do no wrong." 3801 the next slide, please. she said -- to give you an example of what her life has been like, she married this man at age 19. and they were married over 40 years. she is here today, 82 years old, now, some things, when she is on the witness stand, she got confused about, and we made that pretty clear, i think, that the girls talked about how important the family was to robert and how important robert was to hazel and vice versa. and these are things that y'all are going to have to take into consideration when you decide how much to award hazel in this phase of the trial. she talked about robert. and she said, "i never met a man like that. he was just unique. he was calm when i was hyper. he was kind. he was considerate. he was humble." she said, "you know, he was just the best man i could ever have known, better than my father." mr. millard asked her, "did you depend on him?" she said, "he is a family man. he treated me like a queen. i was not used to that because i 3802 was one of the older siblings, and i always" -- "it was like i had to be a mama growing up." but that is not the way robert treated her. robert treated her like a queen. she told you here on the witness stand. it was very emotional. bear in mind, she is 82 years old, this is not easy for her. she said, "he looked after me, and i looked after him." she said, "i looked after my man." put up the hospital record, please. and this is one of the hospital records that survives, and it tells us about this relationship that hazel and robert had this special relationship right here. "patient rested through the night with his wife at his bedside. patient had morphine. spouse -- "that would be hazel," wanted to bathe robert and make the bed." so this man, she met at age 19, got sick, and he was dying in the hospital. and she is by his side, telling the hospital staff, i want to take care of him. now, who was robert mathis? folks, robert was a family man just like hazel testified to. he served his country, did not 3803 get his high school degree, went into the service, was in korea, got an honorable discharge, came back here to miami, went and got his ged, got his mechanic's license. and there is he and hazel, got married. she was the one for him; he was the one for her. here you go. we talked a little bit about this. aadron was born 1960. family bought their home in brownsville. robert worked for miami transit. then he went -- robert was a go-getter, he was always going, drove a taxicab at night. viola was born in '65, somewhere in there, dionne was born. i do not know, she got left off unintentionally. the kids all attended local schools; floral heights elementary, brownsville (phonetic) high school. robert worked for yellow freight in hialeah. the next one, please, robert. there is the family, right there. y'all heard from every daughter there, you got hazel and you got robert. go back to the timeline, i think. and so it talks about robert rodney graduated from miami high, dionne graduated from 3804 miami high. aadron graduating from miami high. we talked about robert, we talked about that. the court: miami springs. mr. wichmann: miami springs, i stand corrected. the court: i'm sure there is rivalry somewhere there. mr. wichmann: so the next one, please. talk about viola graduating from miami springs high. kind of give you an idea of the family and relationship that we are talking about here because y'all are going to -- going to be asked to give an award of compensatory damages for hazel's loss of robert's care, companionship and protection. and this is what the law is that the judge read to you. "the total amount of damages sustained by hazel for the loss of her husband's companionship and protection and for her mental pain and suffering as a result of mr. mathis' death." the girls told you about how she is sad, how she lost her man, and what effect it had on her. we are talking about a 40-plus year marriage, a man that she met at age 19. mr. payne read to you the mortality tables. 3805 they are statistics about how long folks are expected to live. and the reason for that is to give you an idea about how long hazel may have going forward because y'all are going to be asked to assess an award from when robert died on through when you think hazel might live. but let me call your attention to this. hazel told you that longevity runs in your family, that her -- her dad lived to age 96 and her mom lived to age 99. so there -- you can take the mortality tables that show how long she has to live without her beloved robert into account, but you can also consider these other factors. so this is what the verdict form is going to look for -- look like. and so we are going to ask you to award hazel mathis $10 million. not any more, because on behalf of hazel, that is what we think we believe the evidence shows and will support. certainly not any less, $10 million for her past pain and suffering and for her future pain and suffering. but that is not where your job ends. the judge talked a little bit about punitive damages, and the judge gave you instruction on what the level of evidence has to be before you can award 3806 punitive damages. we think that you should check the box -- go back to the previous one -- right here, "under the circumstances of this case if you find by clear and convincing evidence that punitive damages are warranted against reynolds," check "yes" on that. check "yes" on every box, like i said. and the reason why is -- 84, please -- you can consider harms to others in this phase of the trial on the reprehensibility and the wrongness of conduct. in other words, you can consider the number of folks that have died from reynolds' fraudulent conduct over the years. you can consider their marketing to kids. you can consider their concealing and their lying in this phase to make an award, to make an entitlement award to check that box "yes." now, here are just some of the documents that we talked about that you will have back there to look at. and they go to deliberately downplaying the role of nicotine in their cigarettes. that is a previously secret document. they talk about misleading youth and targeting them as future consumers. they talk about here, backlog of youth. they are studying 3807 youth to decide how they can best market their products. the next one, please. they talk about increasing educational programs to prevent young nonsmokers taking up the practice of smoking. that is -- that is a problem for them. they considered it a problem that people were being educated not to smoke. and they talk about the support of newport, being fantastic. black folks, all ages. "the base of our business is the high school student." this is what they were saying back in 1978 in private. and this is why they need to be punished. now, go to the next slide, please. they are talking about kids. they are studying kids as young as age 12. they are studying smoking patterns of teenagers. and they are talking about young adults turning away from smoking. "if that happens, the industry must decline just as a population which does not give birth who eventually dwindle." what they knew was they are selling a product that if the smokers smoke it exactly the way they want them to, they are going to die from 3808 it. so what are they going to do about that? they got to find replacement smokers. that is what they called them, replacement smokers. "younger adults' importance as replacement smokers." to replace folks like robert mathis who died from using their product. we -- also, we talked about controlling nicotine. they controlled the smoke ph to keep folks addicted. we have documents we talked about for that. and last but not least, they put profits over human lives. they talked about "who ain't in it for more money?" they talked about our basic position -- this was back in 1968. the cigarette controversy is subject to the charge and may be subject to a finding that we are making false or misleading statements to promote the sales of cigarette. so they knew, folks, way back in 1968 that what they were doing was false -- falsely promoting cigarettes in this country. and so we already saw the -- if you could go to the last slide here. y'all, please, check the last question on the verdict form "yes." that is the question about 3809 punitive damages. if y'all do that -- we appreciate the patience that you have shown in this length of trial. if you do that, we are going to come back for a very brief, i promise you, a very brief punitive damage phase to decide how much to punish reynolds for. i will make sure that is brief, but please check every box on your verdict form "yes" and award mrs. mathis the amount of money that we are asking for, the $10 million in damages. and so i may have a little bit more to say in rebuttal, but that -- that is my argument at this point. thank you. thank you, folks. closing rebuttal mr. wichmann: today reynolds would have you believe that robert mathis, while he was alive, had a responsibility to quit smoking cigarettes. well, if that were the case, why did the cigarette companies spend $250 billion on marketing and advertising to get people to buy their products and to smoke? so now they are blaming their best customer who did just what they objection, your honor. the court: overruled. mr. persons: blame. mr. wichmann: -- who did just what they told him to do while he was alive. now they are 3720 saying he should have quit when they denied consistently during -- while he was alive that there was anything wrong with smoking and health, and now they want to talk about the warnings. well, we showed you the high-level guys in the company who said, "we did not think the warnings were necessary. we have fought against the warnings." now they want to say, "well, robert should have heeded the warnings. he should have quit." mr. persons: objection, your honor. the court: now, what is their responsibility. what is reynolds' responsibility? their responsibility, folks, was to tell the truth to the american people. the defense just told you, "well, if mr. mathis had all this information, it would not have made a difference." well, i submit had the american public had this information the public health community, like dr. hurt had this information, that they kept secret, it would have made a difference. it would have saved lives. they would have known more objection, your honor. the court: overruled. 3721 mr. wichmann: -- they would have known more about nicotine, addiction, and the chemicals in the cigarette smoke that the cigarette companies kept secret during the course of the conspiracy. and, by the way, reynolds now would like you to believe that the great u.s. civil rights leaders somehow knew of the dangers of smoking the products that -- that reynolds was selling because they insisted that reynolds also market the cigarettes to black folks. well, guess what? the great civil rights leaders of this country were also lied to just like robert mathis. they did not know about chemicals objection. no evidence. the court: overruled. they did not know about the chemicals, they did not know about the additives and ingredients, they did not know about the cigarettes that robert smoked that -- like kool had the highest nicotine levels of all cigarettes. the american civil rights leaders did not know that when they were telling reynolds you need to market -- 3722 mr. persons: objection. the court: overruled. this is in direct response to an argument that you made. mr. wichmann: they were lied to just like robert. now, they came in here in opening statement and the reynolds' lawyers, the defense lawyers said, "well, he did not have the right kind of lung cancer so he did not qualify as an engle class member." well, that is not the case. that is -- that is been disproven. now, they come in and say objection, your honor. mr. wichmann: now the objection. mr. wichmann: -- defense comes in -- the court: just a moment. just a moment. mr. leppert: we need a sidebar, your honor. the court: just a moment. i need to get this back online. i could not hear because of all of the objections that were louder than the argument. [#deleted sidebar#] continued closing rebuttal mr. wichmann: the defense told you that hazel and mr. mathis did not qualify because we did not prove the copd. the question directly was asked of you, where did the copd come from? would you put up number 15, please? well, here is where it came from right there. it is in the medical records, "signs consistent with copd." those are robert's medical records. next, please. right in impression: chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. that is copd. they said, well, there is some interrogatories that hazel signed back in 2007. it did not mention copd. well, they want you to believe now that in order to qualify hazel has to be a doctor. and dr. hurt told you, he had copd. and this is the evidence of him having copd. dr. hurt said they did not treat him for that, why, because, put up the chest x-ray, please. why? why did they not treat him for the copd that he had. okay. because he had this in his chest that was growing 3735 and that was causing him hiccups, that was contributing and causing him coughs, and it was causing tiredness and that was killing him. defense told you just a few minutes ago that they gave him robitussin, and robitussin cured the cough. that is what she said. robitussin cured the cough. well, here is exhibit no. 82. look at the data date on this, folks. this is in april of '97, months after the robitussin was given to him, and what does the record say that he had? cough, productive of white/yellow sputum. so he still has the cough. after he got the 'tussin, that did not cure the cough because the cough is coming from the copd and the lung cancer. dr. hurt said chemotherapy does not cause copd. smoking for 50 years being addicted to nicotine is what causes the copd. next they said, oh, well, robert knew, robert knew, robert knew, robert knew. ptsg1990, please. this is in evidence, this was the 1990 surgeon general's report, seven years before robert died. what does the surgeon general say in 1997? 3736 "smokers may have failed to quit because of a lack of appreciation of the health hazards of smoking and the benefits of quitting." why is that? $250 million advertising and marketing campaign and all of the lies that they told for 50 years. what did the surgeon general go on to say? "30 to forty percent of smoking in 1990 either did not believe that smoking increases these risks or cessation reduces the risk." and the surgeon general wrote, "15 to 20 million smokers in the united states," that 30 to forty percent of smokers came to. "clearly our efforts to educate the public on the health hazards of smoking and the benefits of quitting are not yet complete." why was that? because they spent, the industry spent more in one day with their lies, with their false message to keep smokers like robert from smoking than the government spent in a year. that is the evidence, uncontradicted before the jury. now, they told you that it is all a matter of choice. it was robert's responsibility to quit. we talked a little bit about that. 3737 but would you put up, please -- this is what their internal documents said that they knew in 1980. "the entire matter of addiction is the most potent weapon a prosecuting attorney can have in a lung cancer case." 1980. a secret document. "we cannot defend continued smoking as free choice if the person was addicted." now, they also told you that the family all said he never tried to quit. he only tried to quit, i think, 3 days in 1,000 days of his life. well, you-all heard from dionne, you all heard from aadron, you-all heard from viola, and they all came up and told you he tried many, many times. he tried cold turkey. he tried nicotine patch. he tried nicorette gum. he even switched to a pipe and a cigar. he tried. that was the testimony from the family witnesses. he was unable to quit. first, they came and told you, he -- he quit according to the medical records, then they came and told you, well, he never quit because he never tried to quit. but we know, because aadron told you from the witness stand, that he was asking for and begging for cigarettes when he was in the hospital 3738 with lung cancer, and she had to wheel him out of the hospital for a cigarette. that is the power of nicotine addiction; that is the power of a product that they sold to the american people and lied about for 50 years. i also wanted, just to call your attention quickly to some of the testimony, mr. persons put up slides and the defense told you-all about what the family knew, what the family talked about concerning the hazards of smoking. this is the testimony from aadron mathis. "question: while you were growing up in the family home in miami, did your dad ever tell you that smoking cigarettes was bad because it was bad for your health?" aadron sat right there under oath, looked at you, and this was her. "answer: no. "did your dad ever tell you that smoking cigarettes could kill you? "answer: no. "did your father ever -- did you ever hear your father tell any of your siblings that smoking was bad for their health? "not at all." 3739 that is what she said under oath right here in front of y'all. "did you ever hear your father tell any of your siblings that they should not smoke because it was going to cause lung cancer? "answer: "no. "did you hear your father tell any of your siblings that smoking was going to give them any health-related disease? "answer: "no." that is the sworn testimony from the family members. the girls were all consistent on that. they all said the same thing regarding what robert knew and what robert told them about the dangers of smoking. ladies and gentlemen, i submit and the plaintiff would ask that you check "yes" for every box on the verdict form, and that you award fair award of damages which has $10 million in compensatory damages. the defense submits that the number should be 500,000. you-all heard the testimony from hazel about what robert mathis meant to her. and you-all heard the 3740 testimony from the girls, from the children. now, we are not up here claiming that they are asking for money damages. they are not. what they were doing was telling you about this family, about this man, and about hazel, who is now 82 years old. she got confused on some things, that is understandable. but we are looking back at the family, and we are looking back at the man and the relationship between hazel and the relationship with robert and the family that they raised, and their ties to the community because it goes to the magnitude of hazel's loss. hazel's loss of her man, her man that she met when she was 19. her man that took care of her. her man that she cared for in the hospital, she offered to bathe him. she offered to change the sheets. that is her man, and her man -- she is unmarried. she still has not remarried after the loss. and she is got another ten years to live, ladies and gentlemen, and that is why we are asking for that large amount of money, $10 million. and to suggest that the evidence in this case does not support that award based on 3741 the evidence that you-all heard in front of the jury is just not so. thank you, folks, and we appreciate your attention.