closing argument ms. henninger: good afternoon. welcome back from lunch, ladies and gentlemen. i want to first start by thanking each and every one of you because this has been a long process, been a lot of waiting sometimes, a lot of listening you had to do. you had to go away from your families and your jobs. and everybody in this courtroom appreciates the time and attention you have given this case, so thank you. and i want to walk through some of the facts in this case and the verdict form and talk with you a little bit about the evidence you have heard in this case. and i'm going to start where 3628 mr. persons started, and that is talking about how this is a case about one smoker, and that smoker is mr. robert mathis. it is not about all smokers or all tobacco company conduct. it is about one specific smoker. and you know that because when judge butchko gives you, at the end of all the closing arguments, which i know you guys will have soon, but you will get a verdict form at the end. and the questions you have to ask all ask about mr. mathis. so that is why i start out by saying that this is a case about robert mathis because the issues you are going to decide in this case about one smoker, and that smoker is mr. mathis. and plaintiff, as you know, we talked about it all the way back from jury selection on, plaintiff has the burden of proving their case. and they have to prove their case about mr. mathis, and they have to prove it with evidence about mr. mathis. not generic evidence, not with sympathy, not with guesswork or asking you to speculate what may have been there and not with inconsistent testimony or evidence. now, i want to start talking about sympathy, because the court will instruct you -- 3629 it is instruction number 21, that in reaching your verdict, do not let bias, sympathy, prejudice, public opinion or any other sentiment for or against either party influence your decision. your verdict must be based on the evidence that has been received in this courtroom and the law that judge butchko is going to give you. and why do i start here? because mrs. mathis is a very nice lady. nobody is here criticizing mrs. mathis or her family. we have heard some very emotional testimony. but that testimony is not how you view the evidence with sympathy, because the court is going to instruct you that you cannot let sympathy influence how you evaluate the facts and the evidence in this case. now, i want to talk about what the evidence -- my clicker stopped working on me, they should never have let me have control of this. try it now? okay. let us see if i can go back. sure can. okay. so i want to talk about what the evidence you heard in this room told you about robert mathis. and as judge butchko has already instructed you, the very first thing you are going to be asked when you go back and deliberate is, 3630 you are going to be asked to determine whether or not mr. mathis was a member of the engle class. so i'm going to start talking about class membership. and you will recall there are two diseases at issue in this case, the plaintiffs are alleging to make mr. mathis a member of the engle class, for copd and lung cancer. and i'm going to walk through in a little bit more detail both of those diseases. but let me start by summarizing -- start with copd. mr. mathis was never diagnosed with copd. there are no medical records that diagnosed him with copd. the only witness who told you he had copd was plaintiff's addiction expert, dr. hurt. there is none of his medical records say diagnosed with copd, no medications for copd, there is a certain test that is the gold standard for diagnosing copd, called a pft. there is no evidence that that was done. so there is no evidence he had copd, and we are going to talk about the signs and symptoms of copd, and whether he had any of those as well. but with regard to lung cancer, there is no evidence in this case that mr. mathis had symptoms that led his doctors to believe or even suspect, 3631 knowing that he was a smoker, all the doctor visits he had in the class period before november 21st, 1996, none of his doctors suspected that he may have lung cancer. there are no medical records that identified symptoms that are specific to cancer within the class period, again, that is november 21st, 1996. and he was not diagnosed, as you know, with cancer within the class period. you are also going to have to decide issues in this case with regard to whether or not mr. mathis was addicted or whether or not addiction caused either copd or lung cancer. and there is a lot of testimony -- i'm going to walk through it in a little bit more detail soon, but there is a lot of testimony mainly from dr. hurt about how hard mr. mathis tried to quit. and his family members talked about things that he did to try to quit smoking. but what you will also hear when we go through the evidence is that all of these quit attempts, he continued to smoke the cigarettes. when he smoked pipes, he continued to smoke cigarettes. when he smoked cigars, he continued to smoke cigarettes, when he had the patch on. and keep in mind mrs. mathis, who was 3632 married to him, never told you he had the patch on, but when he had the patch on, he continued to smoke cigarettes. when he chewed gum, he continued to smoke cigarettes. the only testimony about when he may have actually stopped smoking for a day to three days or two days was the one time, one time he tried to quit cold turkey. you cannot say you are addicted if you have never tried to quit. in his 50 years of smoking that plaintiffs talk about, there is only one time he put the cigarettes down and tried to quit. there is also claims, as you know, mr. persons is going to address with you later after me, claims for concealment and conspiracy. i just want to overview those with you right now, because you heard from the mathis family. and you heard that there is no evidence that mr. mathis ever heard or read or saw any statement from r.j. reynolds tobacco company. there is no evidence that he heard or read or saw any statement from any other tobacco company. he never discussed advertising, be it r.j.r.'s advertising or any other company's advertising with any of his family members. and there is no 3633 evidence that he relied on any statement by any tobacco company in making his decisions about smoking. now, one thing you have also been told by the court in the instructions is that plaintiff admits that mr. mathis bears some measure of responsibility for causing his lung cancer and death. he admits that his actions were a cause of his lung cancer and death. so in this case plaintiff has failed to bring you evidence to prove their claims when it failed to prove that mr. mathis had an engle qualifying disease that manifested prior to november 21st, 1996. plaintiff failed to prove that mr. mathis was a member of the engle class. plaintiff failed to prove that mr. mathis died because the dangers of smoking were not otherwise known or available to him. and plaintiff failed to prove that mr. -- mrs. mathis is entitled to recover money damages because mr. mathis smoked despite knowing that cigarettes were dangerous and addictive. and he continued to smoke with that knowledge for decades. so i want to walk through the verdict form and start with class membership. because that is 3634 the issue i'm going to address with you is class membership and whether or not mr. mathis was a member of the engle class. then i'm going to turn it over to mr. persons. and these questions are not about sending mrs. mathis home. these questions are about whether or not they brought you the evidence, sufficient evidence to meet their burden of proof. it is not a personal decision that you like one party more than another. it is whether or not they have met their burden of proof with evidence. and the two issues that you have to decide on class membership -- there is two questions on the verdict form. and the first was, "was mr. mathis addicted to nicotine in cigarettes? and, if so, was such addiction a legal cause of lung cancer and death or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease?" which i'm going to just say "copd" from now on, just to save that mouthful of words coming out. but that is the first question. but that is not the end of the analysis as to whether or not mr. mathis is a member of the engle class. there is a second question. and this is an important question because in order to be a member 3635 of the engle class, not only do you have to prove that you are addicted and your addiction caused a disease, there is certain requirements. and some of those requirements are that the disease manifested within the class period. there is a specific class period. and i outlined that for you for a minute, but that is part of proving you are a member of the engle class. and the second question asks, "please state whether mr. mathis suffered from or experienced symptoms of either or both of the following diseases prior to november 21st, 1996." again, lung cancer and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease or copd. so i'm going to walk through these briefly -- well, maybe not so briefly depending on your perspective, but try to do it as briefly as i can. and i'm going to actually start with the second question first. i'm going to go a little bit out of order and start with the manifestation. but first before i do that, let me remind everybody, remember these hurdles that mr. persons showed during opening statements. these are the hurdles to class membership. and what we have here over to the left are the two diseases, lung 3636 cancer and copd. plaintiff must clear those hurdles for each of those diseases to be a member of the engle class. so the first hurdle is manifestation. plaintiff must prove mr. mathis had an engle-qualifying disease that manifested during the engle class period, which is prior to november 21st, 1996. then plaintiff must prove the addiction hurdle, which is plaintiff must prove mr. mathis was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine. if those two hurdles are overcome, then there is still a third hurdle, which is addiction causation. and plaintiff must prove that addiction to nicotine in cigarettes was a legal cause of mr. mathis' lung cancer and death or copd. so those are the four hurdles, or three hurdles i'm going to talk about as we go through the evidence in this case. and, like i said, i'm going to go a little bit out of order, and i'm going to start with the first -- the second question on the verdict form, which deals with manifestation. now, if you recall there are two diseases 3637 at issue, lung cancer and copd. and there is no evidence that lung cancer or copd manifested within the class period. first and foremost, i'm going to be addressing with you the fact that mr. mathis did not have copd. plaintiff did not prove that he had copd, and i'm going to walk through the reasons and the evidence why. plaintiff did not prove that mr. mathis, if he had copd, that that copd manifested within the class period. and plaintiff did not prove that mr. mathis' lung cancer manifested within the class period. and here is the official definition of what it is to be an engle class member. it is, "all florida residents who suffered or died from certain diseases or medical conditions" -- and keep in mind the diseases or medical conditions at issue in this case, are two, copd or lung cancer -- "that manifested by november 21st, 1996, caused by their addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine." so i said i wanted to start with copd because there is an issue as to whether or not plaintiff even proved that mr. mathis had copd. and so i first want to walk through the evidence 3638 and why mr. mathis did not even have copd and plaintiffs failed to prove that. and let me back up, because if he did not have copd, then there is no issue as to whether or not it manifested within the class period. so let us go back and talk about the evidence. so mr. mathis was not diagnosed with copd. you will have all the medical records. you can look at them. no treating physician diagnosed him with copd. he never received any medications for copd. there were no symptoms in any of his doctor visits, either before he was diagnosed with cancer or after he was diagnosed with cancer -- never was there a symptom that a doctor wrote down could be related to copd. those records do not exist either. there are no pulmonary functions tests. you will recall there was evidence that that is the gold standard as to how he died. no copd. you blow into a little tube. dr. hurt even explained that for you. no pulmonary function test. no diagnosis. dr. hurt talked about the pft being the gold standard for diagnosing copd. and i want to stop right here for a moment because during 3639 plaintiff's closing argument there was -- it was referred to "our paid experts" in this case. well, i want to remind everybody that dr. hurt was a paid expert; dr. proctor was a paid expert; dr. villa was a paid expert. in fact, there was not an expert from either side that y'all heard from in this case that was not a paid expert. there were no treating physicians. all the experts in this case were paid experts. but only one expert in this case, dr. hurt, gives lectures on how to testify and how he gives answers that are direct and concise and do not give things away. so there is only one paid expert who is a professional and lectures on the profession of being a paid expert. so let us go on and focus back on copd briefly. plaintiff cannot prove that he had copd because the first mention of copd in the medical records is march 1997. and let us talk about what dr. hurt, the only doctor who said he had copd -- what dr. hurt said is that copd is mentioned on an x-ray in march of 1997. and you may recall that when mr. persons was cross-examining dr. hurt he pointed out that there were at least nine, if not 3640 more, chest x-rays before that march '97 one that did not mention copd. none of his x-rays mentioned it until march 1997. and why is that important? because in march 1997, at the time of that chest x-ray, mr. mathis' tumor, which was 7 centimeters -- remember, it is the tennis ball -- had grown to 10 centimeters by that point. dr. hurt told you that his lungs were changing rapidly in march 1997 because the tumor had grown. he even showed a demonstrative on the screen showing how a tennis ball, when it was diagnosed, and then i think maybe a softball by march 1997. and what else had happened in march 1997 before then, before this first chest x-ray that says copd, what else happened? he had chemotherapy, and he had 20, 20 radiation treatments targeted straight to his lung. 20 radiation treatments, chemotherapy. the tumor had grown in size. and what else? those are the same time, march 24th -- do you remember that record where it says he had a cough with sputum on march 24th? i'm going to show it a little bit later. it is 3641 also the record that says he lost 37 pounds because he was vomiting five times a day. that is what took place the time that they took the x-ray in march that says, "indication or impression, copd." that is the first record that ever said copd. and dr. hurt, the professional paid addiction expert, who makes his career treating addiction, not pulmonary diseases, came in here and told you that that x-ray, not a pft, but that x-ray proved that he had copd in the class period because he said copd is a long-developing process. it takes years, if not decades, were his words, decades. well, if it took decades, why do we have eight chest x-rays and one cat scan all before march 24th, 1997, that make no mention of copd? there is only two chest x-rays after march 24th, 1997, that mention copd or changes of copd. and, again, that was after the radiation, the chemotherapy. he is throwing up five times a day, and the tumor is 10 centimeters big at that point. so if you are weighing what the evidence is as to whether or not he had copd, look at all of 3642 the chest x-rays, look at the cat scan. remember, dr. amos was here yesterday and told you how sensitive cat scans are and everything you can see on a cat scan. no mention of copd on any of those eight x-rays and one cat scan, none. but yet dr. hurt, the paid addiction professional, comes in here and says, "i can tell you he had copd because when he was in distress in march of 1997 -- i'm going to extrapolate it back even though he was never diagnosed, never treated, and never tested." and we also showed you yesterday interrogatories answers that mrs. mathis signed and swore to asking, number one, "what diseases are you claiming your husband had related to smoking?" and her answer at the time was, "heart disease, hypertension, and lung cancer." no copd. well, they are not claiming copd in this case. but there was another interrogatory we read to you, and that interrogatory was, "name all the smoking-related diseases you think your husband had and when they manifested." whether or not you are claiming them. what did he have, and when 3643 did it manifest? "heart disease, lung cancer, hypertension," no copd. so where did copd come from? well, i think copd came from dr. hurt. he is the only doctor in this case who mentioned copd, the addiction doctor. so for all of those reasons the evidence shows that mr. mathis did not even have copd. so in evaluating class membership, copd is not something you need to even consider. but you still have lung cancer, and i'm going to also talk about copd just in case you disagree with me. so the next question you have to ask is whether mr. mathis had an engle qualifying disease, which again is either copd or lung cancer, that manifested during the class period. now, i want to refer back to question number 2 because the question asks, "please state whether mr. mathis suffered from or experienced symptoms of either lung cancer or copd?" "suffered from" or "experienced symptoms." now, judge butchko told you do not leave your common sense at the door. so what is 3644 suffering from? suffering is the state of undergoing pain, distress, or hardship. there is no evidence in this case that mr. mathis had any pain, distress, or hardship from either lung cancer or copd prior to 19 -- prior to november 21st, 1996. now, we do not have to go to common sense or dictionaries for the definition of symptoms, because we had a medical doctor, dr. okun, who came in here and explained to you what a symptom was. he defined for you what a symptom was, and he told you that a symptom is what a patient reports. remember, he said it is objective versus subjective. subjective is what the patient feels. in other words, you say, "i have a headache" or, "i have a stomachache." those are symptoms. there is something different called a sign. a sign is something a doctor finds or other people find, and, that is, when you go to the doctor and they do a test and say, "hey, you have diabetes," that is a sign. or the doctor remember said, if the doctor pokes you in the stomach, you do not have a tummy ache at the time, but if he pokes you and it hurts, that is a sign. 3645 so he defined a symptom as something that you have, something that you feel, something that is subjected to that person. it is what you have before you actually go and see a doctor. so i want to talk a little bit about whether or not copd -- if he had it, whether or not it manifested prior to november 21st, 1996. first, if there were no symptoms that led his doctors to even suspect or believe that he may have had copd before that date, none of the treating physicians that he saw for any of the complaints he had in november -- and we will talk about them, you know, he had the cough, he had the bursitis, he had the feet problem -- none of those doctors suggested that he had copd, suggested he take a pft or an x-ray. there is not any mention of pfts anywhere in mr. mathis' medical records. and there is no reference whatsoever, not even a "c" and an "o" and a "p" and a "d" on the same record prior to november -- i mean, march 24th, 1997. and we talked about what that was. and that is that x-ray. now, mr. mathis' lung cancer also did not manifest prior to november 21st, 1996. and the evidence is undisputed that he went to the doctor 3646 at least six times in november of -- or in the fall of 1996. no symptoms were reported that led his doctors to suspect he may have cancer. they knew he was a smoker. some of those records reflect that he was a smoker. no suspicion of lung cancer, much less copd. there is not a medical record that identifies a symptom that is specific to lung cancer prior to november 21st, 1996. and, again, mr. mathis was not diagnosed with cancer, as we know, within the class period of november 21st, 1996. in the witness testimony in the medical records, they conflict on what mr. mathis' symptoms were. and, remember, mr. mathis' symptoms are what he reports. and plaintiff cannot meet her burden of proving that his diseases manifested within the class period with inconsistent evidence. so i want to walk through a little bit more of what mr. mathis told his doctors about his symptoms. now, mr. mathis may not have been a complainer. if you believe all the family members -- and believe me, they know him better than -- than i because i've never had the pleasure 3647 of meeting him. he may not have been a complainer. but after he was diagnosed -- remember he goes to the emergency room. they find out he has cancer. they ask him what his symptoms were when he comes in. and they ask him if he had specific symptoms, which he denied. he knows he has cancer at this point. he knows he has cancer, and he goes in with a history of a one- to two-week history of a headache, sluggishness, and one episode of syncope -- remember, that is the fainting, and the word that nobody can say, right, except for the doctors -- secondary to dizziness. so one to two weeks when he first goes in in late january. so sometime in january he develops headaches, sluggishness. he almost faints, and he is dizzy. that all happens in january of 1997. and, remember, dr. amos talked about how patients not only tell you what their symptoms are, but doctors will also ask, "are you having any of these other symptoms?" and when a patient has lung cancer, they ask about a bunch of symptoms. and doctor -- i mean, mr. mathis denied any weight loss. this, 3648 again, is when he knew he had cancer, denied weight loss. he denied fever, chills, nausea, and some other things, but he denied shortness of breath, and he denied a cough. excuse me. these are the symptoms mr. mathis told his doctors that he had or did not have knowing he had cancer. this record, the february 15th, 1997, discharge summary says it all about mr. mathis' manifestation of lung cancer and copd. now, you recall that dr. hurt said that he had a cough; he had shortness of breath, that can be lung cancer, that can be copd; and he had weight loss. and that is dr. hurt said that is from his lung cancer. but, again, if you look at what mr. mathis said on february 15th, knowing he had cancer, he denied everything that dr. hurt sat in that chair and said that he had. now, what do we know about mr. mathis' health before january 1997? well, we know that he went to the doctor several times, that we have records for, in 1996. these are the records we have from mr. mathis in 1996. in none of these records is there any mention of lung cancer or copd. there is a variety of complaints, and we are going to talk about 3649 those. remember, bursitis and the feet, and there is even cough. and i'm going to talk about the cough. none of those say, "we are considering or we think it might be copd or lung cancer." six visits between january 1st, 1996, and november 21st, 1996. the number of records that say copd or lung cancer is zero. now, i said that, of course, there is records, some of these records -- well, one of those records, only one of the records mention that mr. mathis had a cough, and that is the november 8, 1996, record. all the other records are -- do not mention a cough at all with the exception of there was that medication chart that talked about some robitussin. but mr. mathis had a cough. he reported the cough. he took robitussin for it. but you heard every doctor, every single one, even dr. hurt tell you that a cough is a nonspecific symptom. just because you cough does not mean you have lung cancer. just because you cough does not mean you have copd. you can cough because you have allergies. you can cough because you are giving a closing statement and you get choked up 3650 like i did just a seconds ago. you can cough because you have asthma. there is a variety of reasons including a cold as to why people cough. and you -- one thing you do not do is treat lung cancer or copd with robitussin. that is not a treatment for copd or lung cancer. and that was the medication -- it was over-the-counter, but he got it at the va. that was the medication his doctors gave him for his cough. when they gave him the medication, you are going to see from the records, that his cough resolved. it gets better. the robitussin apparently worked. so none of the doctors that he saw this cough for or gave him the robitussin, nobody said, "hey, you are a smoker. maybe we should check you out for lung cancer or copd because you are coughing." none. it is not a symptom. it is not a manifestation. now, i said that the robitussin cured his cough, and it got better because what we know is that after that november 8th, 1996, record where he reported having a cough and got the robitussin and december 9th, 1996, he denies any other complaints or problems. he goes in. he did not complain of the cough. once more, i'll remind you 3651 that when he goes into the hospital in january and he is diagnosed with lung cancer, he denies a cough. there is no medical records that say he has shortness of breath at all. the medical records that show that he had a cough also show that his cough resolved because december he is not complaining about a cough. and when he goes to the hospital and he is diagnosed with cancer, he is not complaining about a cough. not complaining about shortness of breath either. he denied having both of those symptoms. now, the size of the mass does not dictate whether or not there is symptoms. you heard from dr. okun that it is unfortunately very common for patients to present to him with cancer, including lung cancer, large masses, and the very first thing that they notice is the brain test. that is the first thing that ever causes any problems. he said that, "unfortunately, that is what cancer does. that is what lung cancer does." so the size of the mass does not dictate that he must have had symptoms. but we know that he had not reported any symptoms in the class period. 3652 so let us talk about some of the other things besides cough and shortness of breath that had been mentioned by dr. hurt, the addiction expert. we have weight fluctuations. and mr. wichmann said you cannot get around this one record. he showed you one record from -- i believe it was april or march -- it was april, i believe -- one record that said he had weight loss for six to 12 months. we cannot get around that. well, these records get around that because he goes to the doctor each and every one of these times within the class period, and his weight is not fluctuating a tremendous amount. he is being weighed by doctors. he was not being weighed by paid experts or anybody else. he goes in -- well, the first one is remember the insurance application in 1982, a little bit longer ago, but he is 163 pounds. may of '96, he is 170. one week later, maybe the scale is a little different, maybe he ate a big dinner, but he is 6 pounds heavier at 176. then in june, he is 171, that is 5 pounds. then in september, he is at 171 and-a-half. he gained a half a pound. and then at that record that is when he is diagnosed 3653 with diabetes, remember, told to walk, start following the diabetic diet. and he goes back in in november, and he is 167. so we are talking about a 3-and-a-half to 4-pound weight loss. that is not the kind of weight loss you expect with cancer. this is the kind of weight loss you expect with cancer. in march 24th, 1997, they note that he had a 37-pound weight loss in a couple of months. that is the weight loss that you expect to see with cancer. that is also the record that talks about him vomiting five times a day. he had the fever that they were trying to figure out what was causing his fever, was it pneumonia, was it other things. this was the type of weight loss the doctors look for as symptoms of lung cancer. handwriting. there is been testimony that his handwriting was not as good. well, the handwriting that we have available within the class period shows that his signature was remarkably similar. what we do know is that after he is diagnosed with cancer, because he has that brain tumor and that tumor, remember the swelling and the edema that dr. amos talked about, did have some impact on his left hand. 3654 he did have a resting tremor, but that brain tumor was fast growing and dr. amos said it was his opinion it was fast growing because of the amount of swelling and it existed for days or weeks. it was not there in november of 1997. so it was not causing any symptoms before november 21st, 1996. now, hiccups. dr. hurt brought up hiccups as a sign of lung cancer. and he said that hiccups can be a sign of lung cancer if it affects that nerve. and remember, that is the phrenic nerve that was in one of those records. you will also remember that dr. okun talked about, yes, that is very true, it can affect the phrenic nerve. it can cause hiccups, but there were a variety of things that can cause hiccups in a patient such as mr. mathis. one of those things could be some problem with his throat. remember, they called him an ent. one of the other things that could be causing hiccups was pancreatitis, and they investigated and found he had pancreatitis. the cause of mr. mathis' hiccups was never outlined or diagnosed within his medical records. and there are no medical records before february of 1997 3655 that mention hiccups whatsoever. so, if you remember, dr. amos said that the medical records tell a story. and i would like to tell a story with the medical records, and the story is how mr. mathis presented with his lung cancer, how that came to be found out. and what you learned is that sometime in january he had a fall. he had a fall and he hit his head, and a week or two later he started getting dizzy, he started -- he almost fainted once. that injury to his head, the trauma to his head is what led him to go to the er. when he goes to the er, what do the doctors do? the doctors say, hey, you have lung cancer because you are coughing, you are short of breath? no. the doctors say, hey, we think you have that thing -- remember the subdural hematoma, which is basically an injury or bruise to your brain, and so they -- the first thing they thought was subdural hematoma. they go in and they do a cat scan and that is when the cancer was discovered. it was not discovered because he had been falling asleep at his desk or the family was concerned and took him in. and i'm not saying they did not take him to 3656 the er, but the reason why he went to the er as outlined in those medical records was because he had a trauma to his head, not because of a cough or hiccups or weight loss. and when he -- when they found this, that is when they looked at where it came from, and that is when they found that he had lung cancer. there is no diagnosis of lung cancer until january of 1997. there is never a diagnosis of copd. and that is the story that mr. mathis' medical records tell. for that reason, mr. mathis is not a member of the engle class -- if i can find my pen -- because the second question asks, "please state whether mr. mathis suffered from" -- can we show it up, thanks -- "please state whether mr. mathis suffered from or experienced symptoms of either or both of the following diseases prior to november 21st, 1996?" and for all of the reasons i've outlined for you now, the answer to lung cancer is "no" and he did not have copd. but if he did have copd, there was certainly no manifestation of it in the class period, so the answer to 2(b) is "no" as well. so, because i went out of order and took 3657 number 2 first, i guess you can guess where i'm going now. i'm going to turn to the first question on the verdict form. and the first question asks, "whether or not mr. mathis was addicted to nicotine in cigarettes and if so, whether or not such addiction was a legal cause of his lung cancer and death or his copd?" now, you remember the little hurdles, this is the second hurdle and this was the addiction hurdle. we heard a lot of criticism of dr. abramson today during closing arguments, but there is some things that dr. abramson and dr. hurt agree on. and one of those things is that not all smokers are addicted to nicotine, and the evidence in this case is that mr. mathis was not addicted. none of his treating physicians diagnosed mr. mathis as addicted. there is not a medical record that says tobacco abuse or a tobacco addiction. mr. mathis never told anybody he was addicted. what we do have is the paid professional expert, dr. hurt who comes in here and assessed mr. mathis as addicted almost 20 years after he passed away. and how did he do that? well, he talked a bunch about different 3658 tests, fagerstrom, dsm, he gave you various definitions. you were even shown some definitions in closing arguments today. but what did dr. hurt do to give you the opinion that mr. mathis was addicted? he answered two questions. he said, that is the test i'd use, is the heaviness of smoking index, two questions. and what is really important about this test is if you smoke one cigarette a day, just one, you are addicted. that is the criteria that their paid expert uses to assess addiction. and plaintiff cannot meet their burden of proof of proving that mr. mathis was addicted by answering two questions. now, the dsm, i thought i heard today that dr. hurt said that the dsm is not used to evaluate people for addiction to tobacco or nicotine. and that is interesting because there is a whole section in the dsm-5 called tobacco use disorder where it lays out criteria to be examined to determine whether or not someone meets the criteria to be addicted or have tobacco use disorder. and, according to the dsm, half of all daily smokers are not addicted and people smoke for reasons other than addiction. 3659 according to dr. abramson, mr. mathis did not meet those diagnostic criteria. he walked you through why, but one of the important things to remember is that not only do you go through those criteria, one of the things you must find, like a threshold -- well, like a hurdle, i guess, or a threshold question is: did smoking cause clinically significant impairment or distress? that is the first thing you must find. and dr. abramson explained to you why that was not the case in mr. mathis' example. mr. mathis is one of those smokers who was not addicted. now, you did hear from three of the -- three daughters -- he had three daughters and one son, mr. mathis did, and you heard from his three daughters and you heard from mrs. mathis and they all told you and gave you their opinion that he was addicted. and no one is going to say that they are wrong, but they -- everybody has their own definition of addiction. and we have shown you what the medical community uses and that is the dsm-5. now, one of the things that the family members did not tell you is that mathis -- mr. mathis did not say any of these things. he 3660 never said "i want help to quit, help me quit, i cannot quit, i'm going to try to quit, i wish i could quit, i wish i had tried to quit, i should have quit, i tried to quit, quitting would be too hard, i'm too scared to try to quit, or i do not think i can quit." but what did the family tell you about mr. mathis and his quit attempts? remember dr. hurt talked about how he formed the opinion that mr. mathis was addicted because he was constantly trying to quit smoking. but the family members came in here and testified that during these attempts to quit smoking, and we will talk about them, the pipes, the cigars, the patches, et cetera, that they never remember him stopping smoking at all except for two of the family members, mrs. mathis and aadron. and they remember him putting down his cigarettes one time when he quit cold turkey. now, the testimony is a little different as to how long he was successful in putting those cigarettes down, one to two days or two to three days, but the evidence that you have, ladies and gentlemen, is that in his 50 years of smoking mr. mathis only stopped and put those cigarettes 3661 down one time in his life and then it was only for a day to three days. can you say a person's addicted when they only put their cigarettes away one time, that they only fight whatever symptoms or withdrawal he may have been having once? how can you say a person is addicted if they do not try to quit? now, the final hurdle is addiction causation. and plaintiff must prove that addiction to nicotine to cigarettes was a legal cause of mr. mathis' lung cancer and death or copd. another way to ask this is was mr. mathis rendered powerless by nicotine addiction so that he had no choice but to continue to smoke until he got lung cancer? i want to start by reminding you the plaintiff admits that mr. mathis bears some measure of responsibility for causing his lung cancer and death. so what does that mean? that means that mr. mathis chose to smoke for decades without making a serious quit attempt. remember, the only time he put his cigarettes down was one time. mr. mathis was not confused about the dangers and addictiveness of smoking. mr. mathis had the ability to quit. mr. mathis had the 3662 responsibility to quit smoking. and mr. mathis could have quit smoking at a time that could have prevented his death. one way to think about addiction causation is, did mr. mathis always have the ability to quit but chose to continue smoking or was mr. mathis rendered powerless by nicotine addiction so that he was compelled to smoke against his will until he died? again, the doctors agree on these two things, addiction does not prevent smokers from quitting, and addicted smokers quit every day, any smoker can quit. and you heard the quit statistics, millions of people have quit in the united states, and millions of those smokers or millions and millions of those smokers quit and some of them, the majority of them were heavy smokers, and they quit smoking while mr. mathis continued to smoke. remember, dr. proctor walked you through this, from 1960 to 1965 there were 9 million. it was 17 million if you go back to the 1950s. by 1970 it is 30 million. by 1974 it is 45 million. it turns out that thousands of people quit every day all during the period -- this is all before 1974, during the period where mr. mathis never even 3663 tried, no pipes, no cigars, none of that, but millions of people are trying to quit, and they do quit. and just because mr. mathis started smoking at a young age does not mean he could not quit. the majority of smokers who quit started smoking under the able of 18. the majority of smokers who quit were addicted. 60 million smokers have quit smoking and mr. mathis was no different than the millions of smokers who have quit. why was he no different? well, his cigarettes -- were the cigarettes he smoked any more addictive than other cigarettes? no. was his brain affected differently than smokers who quit? no. was he exposed to different advertising than smokers who quit? no. did he smoke longer than smokers who quit? no. did he smoke more than smokers who quit? no. but was mr. mathis one of those smokers who was not ready to quit? yes. and we have heard a lot about african-american targeting and menthol cigarettes and whether african-americans are more addicted. there are two things i want you to remember, first, dr. proctor said that african-americans are 3664 less likely to be addicted. would you agree there is a lower prevalence of percentage of addiction among african-americans smokers 18 to 25 compared to white, non-hispanic smokers 18 to 25? yeah. dr. hurt, menthol cigarettes are not more addictive than non-menthol cigarettes. would you agree that all conventional cigarettes are equally addictive? conventional cigarettes, be it menthol, non-menthol? yes. mr. mathis was no different than the smokers who quit. to be successful in quitting, you have to try, you have to be motivated, and you have to keep it up. that is the persistence. and that might be the difference between mr. mathis and the 60 million people who quit smoking. what we have, again, is evidence of one time that he stopped smoking. dr. hurt says he was constantly trying to quit. but the family tells you a different story. there is only one time they remember him putting those cigarettes down. now, the family told you he was trying to stop smoking cigarettes by using these -- these 3665 other things. remember, there was the pipes, the cigars, the patches, the gum. but there is no testimony that he stopped smoking with the pipes. in fact, there is testimony he continued to smoke cigarettes with the pipes, same with cigars, same with patches, and same with the gum. the fact is, if these are quit-attempts, he never stopped smoking. 50 years he smoked, 50 years. it is in the medical records, the plaintiffs claim 50 years he smoked, and only one time around 1978 did he put the cigarettes down and say i'm not going to smoke, and he was successful at it for anywhere from a day to three days. but 50 years go by, that is the only time he stopped smoking. the other things he kept smoking. those are not quit-attempts, if you are still smoking cigarettes. you have to quit. so i'm going to go back -- if i can find where i put it, to the verdict form, oh -- and question number 1, "was mr. mathis addicted to nicotine in cigarettes, and if so, was such addiction a legal cause of his lung cancer and death?" he was not addicted. it was not the legal 3666 cause of his lung cancer and death. the answer to 1(a) is no. the answer to 1(b) is no, not only because he was not addicted, not only because addiction did not cause the copd, but because he did not have copd. so the answer to 1(b) is no as well. well, those are the two questions, ladies and gentlemen, that answer whether or not mr. mathis is a member of the engle class. for all of the reasons stated, he is not. we request that you find that way as well. and i want to end and turn this over to mr. persons who is going to walk you through this verdict form with you. again, thank you for your attention. going after lunch is never the best position to be in, so thank you very much, ladies and gentlemen. closing argument mr. persons: ladies and gentlemen of the jury, good afternoon. it seems like it is been a month or more since i first stood before you and addressed you. let me add my voice to the chorus and thank you for your untired and dedication to this process for being so attentive throughout these proceedings. this system would not function without you, so i want to say thank you. when i stood before you several weeks ago, i said, our objective was to present you with the information sufficient for you to be able to answer those questions on the verdict form at the end of this process. and i believe we accomplished that. i'm going to talk about -- ms. henninger talked about questions 1 through 3. i'm going to talk about the rest of the questions on the verdict form, starting with questions 4 and 5, and they have to do with reliance, "whether mr. mathis reasonably relied to his detriment on any statement made by the defendant r.j. reynolds, that concealed or omitted material information not otherwise known or available to him, not otherwise 3668 known or available to him concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes, and if so, whether such reliance was a legal cause of his lung cancer and death." the next question, number 5: "please state whether mr. mathis reasonably relied to his detriment on a statement in furtherance of defendants' agreement to conceal or omit material information not otherwise known or available to mr. mathis concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes, and if so, whether such reliance was a legal cause of his lung cancer and death." i respectfully submit the answer to both of those questions is no, and i'm going to proceed to tell why. but before i do that, let us look at the jury instruction. and you are going to have these instructions, and i strongly urge you to follow them very carefully. this is instruction number 10, and it says, "reasonable reliance on a statement of material fact that concealed or omitted material information not otherwise known or available to mr. mathis concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes 3669 is a legal cause of injury if it directly and in natural and continuous sequence produces or contributes substantially to producing such injury so that it can reasonably be said that but for the reasonable reliance on the statement of material fact that concealed or omitted material information not otherwise known or available to mr. mathis concerning the health effects or the addictive nature of smoking cigarettes, the injury would not have occurred." and that is a lot of legalese, but i'm going to try to break some of that down. instruction number 11. "reasonable reliance on a statement in furtherance of an agreement to conceal or omit information is a legal cause of injury if it directly and in natural and continuous sequence produces or contributes substantially to producing such injury so that it can reasonably be said that but for the reasonable reliance on the statement in furtherance of an agreement to conceal or omit information, the injury would not have occurred." and what is a material fact? a material fact is a fact that is of such importance that mr. mathis would not have acted as 3670 he did but for the concealment or omission of that fact. and there was no statement. you heard the family members. there was no statement that he received from r.j. reynolds tobacco company or any other entity upon which he reasonably relied. now, the plaintiff has the burden of proof on these claims just like all the other claims. and in order to establish the claim, there has to be a link between the concealment, the statement, concealing information or the agreement to conceal and mr. mathis' death. in other words, plaintiff failed to prove that mr. mathis died because the dangerous and addictiveness (sic) of smoking were unknown or unavailable to him. that is what has to be demonstrated; that there is something about the statement that was made that caused him to die. next instruction. thank you. "however, if you find for the plaintiff on his claims for fraudulent concealment or conspiracy to fraudulently conceal, any damages you award will not be reduced by the percentage of responsibility you assign to mr. mathis." that will be very, very important, because mr. mathis -- mrs. mathis has already admitted that mr. mathis is at fault. and if you were to 3671 find for mr. -- mrs. mathis on either one of these claims, 4 or 5, if you answer yes to either one of those, then that will absolve all fault. there will be no deduction for his fault, even though they have admitted fault. so i urge you, strongly urge you to carefully read these instructions and to -- obviously, to follow them. the bottom line, mr. mathis did not die because the dangers and addictiveness of smoking were unknown or unavailable to him. it does not have to be known, although, the evidence is that he did know it was addictive, and he did know that it was dangerous. but the information has to be available. the information has been available for a long, long time, about the dangers of smoking. their own expert, dr. proctor told you, that for centuries, people have written about, they have talked about, smoking being bad for your health for centuries. it is been known. for centuries, people have discussed the addictiveness of tobacco, and how it is hard to quit, it is hard to give up. in the 1800s, the medical journals started talking about smokers' cancer. back then there was not as much smoking cigarettes so they 3672 were not inhaling, but they were smoking pipes and cigars, and there was mouth cancers and throat cancer and laryngeal cancer. 100 years ago, the schools were teaching children that smoking was dangerous and it was addictive. information about the health effects and the addictive nature of smoking was known and available to mr. mathis throughout his lifetime. you will recall in opening statement i showed you a 1928 edition of reader's digest, talking about the link between smoking and cancer. that was before mr. mathis was even born because he was born in december of 1932. i showed you a board in opening statement, and i want to show it to you again, information, sources of information that mr. mathis had about the dangers of smoking. so we do not have to guess at it, we do not have to look at some circuitous route that the information got to him. these are things that he got directly. we know that in the '40s and '50s, his parents, by his own testimony, or his own statement to his family members, that his mom and dad ever caught him smoking, his words, they would have killed him. that is what he said. 3673 they forbid him to smoke, and that is why he would swipe cigarettes, he would sneak cigarettes. the schools warned against and prohibited smoking. we showed you some of those schoolbooks from florida and from georgia. he was born in hahira, georgia in lowndes county and then moved to florida. and so we showed you the textbooks that were available and used in the schools talking about the dangers of smoking. and then in 1953 to 1956, he is in the united states army. and the military servicemen and women received the stars and stripes. that is the source of their news, whether they are overseas or stateside, they have access to the stars and stripes, also have access to army times in the case of the army. we know that there were articles, during this time period, in the stars and stripes about the dangers of smoking and how deadly smoking is. we know that in 1961, mrs. mathis was added to the church of christ, and we know that that church teaches that the body is a temple and that smoking is wrong. you heard mrs. mathis testify that it teaches you it is a weight on you, and she also told us that she had conversations with her 3674 husband about these teachings from the church. so that is information about the dangers of smoking. we know that in 1974 when mrs. mathis' father was 65 years old, he was born in 1909, he quit smoking, and he quit drinking at the same time. and he told his son-in-law, mr. robert mathis, "man, you should try to quit smoking," and he told him how he quit smoking. he quit smoking using wrigley's chewing gum and prayer. and mr. mathis' response to that was that he smoked a pipe for two weeks. warnings from his own family. mr. mathis told all of his children smoking was bad for them and difficult to stop, difficult to stop. that is addiction. that is another word for it can be addictive. it can be habit forming. it can be hard to stop. and if it is bad for you, that is bad for your health. mrs. mathis beginning in 1965, that was her testimony, she began telling her husband to quit smoking. 1965 she cannot remember that date, that was the date, that was the year that their youngest child was born. the daughter viola goes by shari was born in 1965. from that time forward 3675 she continued to urge her husband to quit smoking. you cannot get a more personal warning than that. we know his newspapers. they took the miami times and the herald. the times came out -- that is a weekly newspaper that came out every thursday. that paper was in their home. the miami hearld they had a subscription to it. we know from the testimony of the family members that he read the paper. that he would usually have a cup of coffee with a cigarette and read the paper. we are going to show you articles from those newspapers talking about the dangers of smoking going back into the '60s and so on. daughter dionne, warned him in the 1970s to stop smoking. "dad, it is bad for you," those are her words. and mrs. mathis warned the children, "smoking is bad for you. smoking can kill you, and it will kill you." i showed the deposition testimony that she gave to that effect. aadron was born in the 1980s. "dad, it is bad for you. you should stop smoking." and then, of course, we have warning labels on the cigarettes themselves starting in 1966 on every pack of cigarettes that he bought or that 3676 mrs. mathis would buy from the supermarket every thursday when she would shop, every pack would have this warning on it, "caution: cigarette smoking may be hazardous to your health." and then we had the surgeon general's report that came out in 1964 warning the family about the dangers of smoking. before the report was even published, they had a conversation about it. the tv news, the mathises watched the news after dinner. that was the testimony of one of the daughters. we know from cbs evening news clips that i've shown you that they talked about the dangers of smoking. so he had all of these warnings that smoking is dangerous and addictive, and he warned others because he warned his children about it. so that is knowledge. that is information about the dangers and addictive nature of smoking. we know that in 1952 that mr. mathis would have been a young man, 20 years old, reader's digest came out with an article called, cancer by the carton, and it is a very, very, powerful title because what it says is every time you buy a carton of cigarettes you are buying a carton of 3677 cancer. you are increasing your risk of getting a disease. you did not have to have access to the research that the cigarette companies were doing or their internal documents to have access to this information. it is available, known or available, and this was available to the public. dr. proctor, the plaintiff's expert, testified that when cancer by the carton came out it started people quitting. people read this, and they started quitting. and this was even before the conspiracy because the judge is going to instruct you the conspiracy was from 1953. "i instruct you the plaintiff has made no claim for agreement to conceal information regarding smoking, health, or addiction before 1953 or after 2000." so even before 1953 information is out there in the public about the dangers of smoking, and i showed you on the board about the stars and stripes. here are just a sampling of all these headlines from stars and stripes between 1953 and 1956 about the dangers of smoking. cigarette cancer tie found, that is in 1954. 3678 smokers hack can kill, new york doc says, that is 1953. doctor links smoking and lung cancer, that is october of 1954. all smokers run high risk of cancer, that is 1956. doctors were asking that tobacco be banned, that was in 1954. information that is known and available. and dr. proctor tells us that, "these news stories about the dangers of smoking scared millions of people into quitting. smokers were fleeing from cigarettes and feared their lives. millions of smokers were quitting, starting quitting, or cutting down. fears about the dangers of smoking drove millions of people to start to quit smoking starting in the early 1950s." but mr. mathis was not one of them because mrs. mathis tells us that throughout the '50s she knows of no attempt that he made to quit, nor in the '60s. it was only in the '70s that he quit for a few days. we know that smokers started quitting by the millions in the 1950s by -- between 1950s and 1965, 17 million americans quit smoking. 13 million americans quit between 1966 and 1970. and the quit accelerated due to people being concerned 3679 about their health. and a lot of it had to do with these magazine articles that were coming out, the public service announcements, the news about the mouse skin-painting studies where they painted the smoke condensate on the backs of the mice, and the mice developed tumors. all of that information prompted people concerned about their health to take the initiative, the personal responsibility to try to quit smoking. then we have 1964 when the surgeon general's report comes out. and these are headlines from papers throughout the state of florida reporting on the surgeon general's report of 1964. and even if you did not read the paper, you talked to people who had read about it who can tell you these things, share the information with you. you do not always have to read it yourself because people share information, especially information this widespread. this is throughout the whole state, all over the state from miami to jacksonville, from jacksonville to pensacola. it is all over the state of florida. and then locally, this is a paper that we know that mr. mathis had access to. this is the 3680 miami herald, the headline, "i quit smoking at 2:00 p.m. saturday." that was when the surgeon general's report was released at 2:00 p.m. that saturday. and they did it that time so that it would be in the sunday paper the next day. this is the sunday paper. "heavy cigarette smoking is the principal cause of cancer of the lungs and larynx and a health so grave as to call for remedial action, a blue ribbon science panel concluded saturday." that is pretty clear. cancer of the lungs, that is lung cancer. and if you did not get that message and you did not have time to read the whole article, here's some things that appeared to the miami news. and this was common, cartoons. these cartoons that just have these drawings. there is one, there is a coffin full of cigarettes. i mean, that message is clear that this will kill you. you cannot be more graphic than that. that is what a coffin is, and that is why they call them coffin nails. that was a slang term, widespread use of that term. and then the next one you have got this cross that is made of cigarettes in the cemetery getting the message across that this is a product that can 3681 kill you. florida health officials said that, "nearly all floridians" -- and this was the florida health notes, this is 1965, october 1965, florida health notes. so october 1965 in florida, they are saying that, "nearly all floridians have heard about the surgeon general's report on smoking and health which was released in 1964." and you remember dr. proctor said that florida was way ahead of other states in terms of addressing this public health issue on the dangers of smoking and publicizing it to members of the florida community and providing smoking cessation clinics. now, 17 million people quit smoking between the '50s and 1965. that was before the first warning ever went on a pack of cigarettes. 1966 was that first warning. and that first warning said, cigarette smoking may be hazardous to your health. and mr. mathis was warned every time he picked up a cigarette pack from '66 to 1970 with this warning. and that is very important because this was the first consumer product, a product that you 3682 consume, you take into your body, that had a warning. it had a health warning. and that was -- it made people aware that this is a dangerous product. now, it is a free country. you want to use it, you can. but with eyes wide open, it is dangerous. the surgeon general is telling you, cigarette smoking may be hazardous to your health. it is a warning. so you can heed it or you cannot. but you are proceeding at your own risk. and this warning was effective. despite all the talk about the advertising and the $250 billion for advertising, these warnings were effective. and how do we know that? because people were quitting. the heaviest period of quitting in u.s. history was between 1966 and 1970. quitting accelerated because smokers got the message. people got the message. and how do we know they got the message? the director of the national clearinghouse on smoking and health, dr. daniel horn, testified before congress and then he gave a speech in syracuse that was picked up. and this was in 1968. he said, "you can stand on a rooftop and 3683 shout smoking is dangerous at the top of your lungs and you would not be telling anyone anything they did not already know." the information was there. the information was there. they got it out to the public. and then it was up to the public whether they wanted to act on it or not. and another way that they got the information out was through these public service announcements. speaker: the moment you stop, in most cases the effects of smoking will begin to reverse themselves until your lungs are nice and clear again. persons: and that is urging people to quit smoking because you start realizing the benefits smoke -- of quitting almost immediately. you remember when dr. hurt was testifying, and i asked him from this podium on cross-examination about a pamphlet that they put out at the mayo clinic about the changes in the human body that take place within the first 3684 24 hours of quitting and then within the first two weeks. improvement in your health, blood pressure lowering, heart rate lowers, all of these things, lungs starting to clear up, all of these benefits of quitting. and that is what these public service announcements were about. just imagine if somebody -- you have heard these things in the news about the dangers of red meat and so forth. suppose on a pack of meat they said it is dangerous to your health? would you heed the warning, or would you go ahead and have a steak? it is up to you. you have to make the decision about whether you want to do these things or not. we talked about norman lear with dr. proctor, and we talked about sanford and son. and the reason i wanted to show that was because that was one of the most popular shows on television back in the 1970s was sanford and son. normal lear, the producer of all in the family, maud, the jeffersons, room 222. those shows addressed social issues that were prevalent in the country at that time. and smoking was a social issue that this country had decided to address. one, by putting the warning 3685 on the pack, but also running the public service announcements and getting the word out about the dangers. and here we have lamont talking to his father fred about the dangers of smoking, and norman lear uses humor to get a message out. and the message here is about the dangers of smoking. (a video clip was played and transcribed as follows:) lamont sanford: did you hear yourself just now? fred sanford. yeah. i asked if you brung me cigarettes. lamont sanford: no. i did not mean now. did you hear yourself cough? i heard you a block away. it sounded like they was tearing up the streets. and you want to know if i brought you some cigarettes? on the way home, i passed something called a breath mobile. you know what a breath mobile is? fred sanford: that is when you spray your mouth so your friend do not turn away. lamont sanford: no. it is -- it is a mobile unit for taking chest x-rays and breathing tests. fred sanford: what is that got to do with 3686 me? lamont sanford: everything, pop. now you get to give them up. you got to give up cigarettes some. fred sanford: for what? lamont sanford: because they are killing you, that is for what. behave, pop. do yourself a favor. give them up. fred sanford: give them up? i enjoy smoking. lamont sanford: say, pop, cigarettes will kill you. do not you believe me? fred sanford: i believe you. persons: well, fred believed him, but he continued to smoke. he continued to smoke. now, in 1970 -- oops -- the warning -- and here is says, "the surgeon general has determined that cigarette smoking is dangerous to your health." that is pretty clear. it is dangerous to your health. now, we know that this warning was available to mr. mathis. we do not have to guess about it because it was on every pack of 3687 cigarettes from 1970 to 1985. and every time he picked up a pack from 1975 to 1985 this warning was on that pack of cigarettes, that cigarette smoking is dangerous to your health. so there is no reason for anybody who was a smoker during that time not to know that it was dangerous because the pack warned you that the product was dangerous. the miami times also warned that it was dangerous. this is september of 1978, and there is an article that says all about drugs. they are talking about the drug nicotine. it says, "it has been observed that the more a person is exposed to cigarette smoke the greater his chances of developing a more serious and dangerous cough. this type of cough may develop into such illnesses as lung cancer and acute bronchitis." information that is known or available at those times. and then next to it, there is this illustration, there is a skeleton basically and -- purchasing a pack of cigarettes, "well, the cost is pretty high, your life." in other words, smoking can kill. and also, the miami times provided information about access to smoking cessation 3688 clinics, how to stop smoking. do you want to stop smoking? they are talking about these different organizations for it that were providing this. and then in particular this one, a five-day plan to stop smoking offered at hialeah, at the hialeah hospital. well, we know that yellow freight, the company for which mr. mathis drove, was located in hialeah, access to smoking cessation clinic. is there any evidence that mr. mathis ever went to the clinic? no. you owe that to yourself. you got a loving family, children urging you to smoke -- to quit smoking. plaintiffs would have you believe that if r.j. reynolds had sent a letter talking about the chemicals in smoke, that somehow that would have persuaded mr. mathis to quit smoking. now, do you need to know the chemical formula for clorox to know that it is dangerous to consume? of course not. of course not. if the product itself tells you that it is dangerous, public service announcements telling you it can kill you, do you need to know that it contains polonium 210? now, in the beginning of 1985 and 3689 continuing to the present time, every pack of cigarettes has one of these four warnings, and these warnings talk about the health effects of smoking. and this one in particular, "smoking causes lung cancer and heart disease, emphysema, and may complicate pregnancy. cigarette smoke contains carbon monoxide. quitting smoking now greatly reduces serious risks to your health. smoking by pregnant women may result in fetal injury, premature birth, and low birth weight." all of these warnings are about the health effects of smoking and the benefit of quitting is on the pack of cigarettes. it is there. the warning is there. the information is there. that provides you what you need to know to make a choice, an informed choice about smoking. and we know that mr. mathis understood the dangers of smoking but chose to continue to smoke. and that is not a criticism of mr. mathis by no stretch of the imagination. that is just what the evidence is in this case, and that was his decision and his alone. mr. mathis warned his children not to smoke in the '60s, '70s, and '80s. starting in 1965 we know that mrs. mathis consistently warned 3690 mr. mathis about the dangers of smoking. starting in the 1970s mr. mathis' children consistently warned him to quit smoking. and we discussed mr. mathis' father-in-law warned him to quit smoking. and at that time mr. mathis' father-in-law was -- this is 1974 -- was 65 years old and mr. mathis in 1974 was 42 years old. a lot of talk about advertising, you heard a lot about it. you saw a lot of ads. but advertising is legal, and the judge is going to instruct you that, "manufacturing, selling, and advertising cigarettes are lawful activities. therefore, i instruct you that the defendant cannot be held liable merely for manufacturing, selling, or advertising cigarettes. it is lawful to advertise cigarettes in the united states of america." and ask yourself: what does advertising have to do with mr. mathis anyway? because his family members testified that they never had a conversation with him where he talked about advertising. he might have seen it, but they had not -- it was not impactful enough to even talk about. here's what ms. aadron mathis had to say. "question: all right. now, you and 3691 your father never spoke about cigarette advertising at any time, correct? answer: no. "question: and you never overheard your father talk with anybody else about cigarette advertising? "answer: no, ma'am." ms. viola stephens story. "question: okay. and you and your father never had any conversations about cigarette advertising, did you? "answer: no, we did not." ms. dionne johnson. "question: okay. never talked with your father about cigarette advertising, correct? "answer: did i ever talk to him about the advertising? "question: yes, ma'am. "answer: no." mrs. hazel mathis. "question: you never had any discussion with mr. mathis about cigarette advertisements, did you, mrs. mathis? "answer: no. 3692 "question: and you never heard any conversations that he had with anyone else about cigarette advertising? "answer: no." i'm going to talk about targeted marketing in a minute, but before i get to -- oh, here it is. before the trial back in 2009 this is what the plaintiff's answer to interrogatories -- the information they provided us. this is 2009. they said, "among others things, benson & hedges menthol was a brand that mr. mathis smoked from 1975 to 1997." from '75 until '97, some 22 years. now, none of the families members could tell you what brands mr. mathis smoked and when, but this was pretty precise, '75 to '97. and then they had a lot of other brands in there, pall mall and a lot of other -- l & m, and a lot of other things. but yet at trial the thing -- the only things you heard about were r.j. reynolds being an early brand -- i mean, winston being an early brand, kool being a brand, philip morris being a late brand, but the main brand 3693 being newport. now, over here the main brand was benson & hedges. so it is a little different from the sworn answer to interrogatory which has benson & hedges 1975 to 1997 versus over here where it is talking about newport. i'm wanting you to focus on newport supposedly because newport targeted african-americans, and we will talk more about that in a minute. let us talk about mr. mathis' beginning smoking. there is no evidence that any targeted marketing caused mr. mathis to start smoking or that youth marketing caused mr. mathis to start smoking. mr. mathis was born in a tobacco-growing community in georgia. in fact, this flyer here says, "tobacco, the weed that made hahira famous." anybody that knows anything about that part of the state of georgia knows how prominent and prevalent tobacco is. it is the most prominent cash crop, especially back in the '30s. and so he does not have to look at an advertisement to have access to tobacco. in 3694 fact, testimony was by mrs. mathis that when she met him, he would smoke roll-your-own when he could not buy the ready rolls from the store. and so the tobacco-growing community, access to tobacco. no one knows when he first smoked his first cigarette really. they were not there. no witness personally has that information. we know that members of his family smoked, that his father smoked, that his uncle smoked, and that his brothers with one exception smoked. we know that he smoked roll-your-own cigarettes, and no one knows why he started smoking. no one knows when he started purchasing cigarettes or when he became a regular or a daily smoker. that is totally unknown, and you cannot speculate or guess to fill in the gaps. it is the plaintiff's burden to put forth proof of things. but what we do know is that it was not targeted marketing that caused him to start smoking. in fact, he started smoking before 1953 when the conspiracy commenced. now, i asked dr. proctor, because there was some suggestion that african-americans or 3695 blacks were singled out for special kinds of advertising. and i asked him about it. i said, "dr. proctor, you would agree that the tobacco companies have marketed and advertised their products to every group in american society and to every subgroup in american society?" and he said, "i cannot think of one they excluded. they marketed to everybody." and i followed up with that, and i said, "i believe you testified on yesterday that before the 1960s cigarette marketing was largely unsegmented, and it was during the 1960s that they began trying to market to or target different groups based on ethnicity, race, religion, income, age, habits, what kind of car you drive, what kind of clothes you wear, and what kind of music you listen to." "answer: among other things, that is correct. that is when it really accelerates." that is when they got more sophisticated about reaching their consumers based on demographics, age, gender, ethnicity, what kind of car you drive, what kind of clothes 3696 you wear, and so forth. "is not it true, dr. proctor, that in the 1950s, '60s, and '70s there was a movement underfoot in the african-american business community and by some members of the civil rights movement to request american companies, including the cigarette companies, to include african-americans in their marketing plans?" "answer: that is true. there were marketing companies that were trying to get the companies really to market to african-americans. and there were civil rights leaders who were urging companies to include african-americans in their advertising," question. "answer: some. i've seen more of these marketing companies doing that." and that was part of the effort to get companies to advertise to the black community. that was part of the whole civil rights segment, that this segment of the community, a significant segment of the community not be ignored, and so the companies responded, and they responded with 3697 their advertising. now, you can compare these ads, and you will have these back there with you, but look at this -- these kool ads. they are identical in terms of the text, in terms of the way they even -- angle at which they are holding the cigarette. the only difference is one's black and the other one's white. same thing with these kool ads down here. the models in this ad are african-american, and then you have got whites over here, a white gentleman over here. the same thing here with these kool ads. and there are hundreds of these examples. they are even wearing the same-colored clothes. and here are more of them, the same thing. you got -- that is a white couple, that is a black couple, a newport. newport was not marketing it exclusively to african-americans. we have got ads where there are white actors or white models, ads where there are black models. and also you notice, there is the surgeon general's warning. so at the beginning of 1971, see for all of these ads, 3698 there is the "surgeon general's warning," whether it is a menthol, whether it is a non-menthol, whether it is a filter king or whatever it is, it is got a warning on it. now, dr. proctor and dr. hurt, i cross-examined both of them about their so-called filter fraud and here is what they said. "no r.j. reynolds documents use phrases like 'gimmick' to describe filtered cigarettes. no documents from the '60, '70s or '80s where r.j. reynolds scientists state they believe smokers are getting just as much tar and nicotine as smokers of non-filtered cigarettes. no documents from the '60s, '70s or '80s in which reynolds scientists state that filters are ineffective." none. in fact, the internal documents from r.j. reynolds, the scientists expressed the belief that he genuinely believed the filtered cigarettes were better for health. they generally believed filters were better. not that it was some sort of a gimmick or that it was a fraud. no evidence that mr. mathis smoked filtered cigarettes because he thought they were safer anyway. there is 3699 no evidence of that. and who was behind the development of filtered cigarettes to begin with? the public health community. they encouraged the tobacco companies to develop filtered cigarettes to start with. the public health community reported that filtered cigarettes were tasteless. they believed that. the public health encouraged smokers to switch to filtered cigarettes in the '50s, '60s, 70, '80s, and into the 1990s. public health community, health and human services, cancer society, they were encouraging people to quit smoking. but if you were going to continue to smoke, smoke filtered cigarettes. that is what they told the community. "there is no evidence that mr. mathis ever relied on any tobacco company or tobacco industry organization in making his decisions about smoking." there is no evidence that mr. mathis heard or saw any statements from any tobacco company or tobacco industry organization or was influenced by such, none; no evidence whatsoever. and so without 3700 evidence you cannot check yes. to questions number 4 and 5, the answer is "no." there is just no evidence to support it. so when we get to -- when you get to question 4, reliance on a statement, the answer is "no." and the same thing is true for number 5, the answer is "no." the court: sorry. i sneezed. mr. wichmann: no. no. the court: i sneezed. i was not saying anything. mr. persons: you want to let them stand for a minute? the court: yeah. jurors would you like to stretch? do you have much more? mr. persons: not a whole lot more. the court: you want to stretch a little. mr. persons: they say they are okay, judge. the court: okay. mr. persons: i guess they had -- now we go to question number 3 on the verdict form. i'm going to move through this as quickly as -- i promise i will. let me see, 3701 that is 4 and 5. number 3, "please state the percentage of any fault that was a legal cause of mr. mathis' lung cancer and death that you charge to r.j. reynolds tobacco company and to robert mathis," and has to add up to one hundred percent. and we will talk about that now. we are going to talk about fault. and we know that mr. mathis, mrs. mathis, ms. mathis has admitted that mr. mathis bears some measure of responsibility but less than one hundred percent of the applicable fault for causing his lung cancer and death." what does that mean? that he bears some fault. we will unpack that or break it down. what it really means is that mr. mathis chose to smoke for decades without making a serious quit-attempt, that is what it means, to be partly responsible or partly at fault. it means that mr. mathis was not confused about the dangers and addictiveness of smoking, because if you are confused, you can have no fault. it means that mr. mathis had the ability to quit, because, if you cannot quit, you cannot have any fault. it means that mr. mathis had the responsibility to quit smoking. absent 3702 responsibility to quit, you cannot be faulted for not quitting. it means that mr. mathis could have quit smoking at a time that would have prevented his death. we know had he quit, he could have avoided the disease that ultimately took his life. and in assigning fault, it can relate only to actions that were a legal cause of mr. mathis' death. reynolds cannot be assigned fault for actions that were not a legal cause of mr. mathis' death; in other words, it is not a comparison of choices, well, reynolds chose to write these terrible things in these memos, these secret documents, what does that have to do with mr. mathis? let us assume that he had access to these memos and these other things of internal company documents. let us talk about that for a minute. suppose he had them? what would have been more influential on mr. mathis, his daughters and his wife telling him he needed to quit smoking or something from r.j. reynolds? if your wife of 41 years, the mother of your children -- the court: we are not -- we cannot put the jurors in the position of the litigants. 3703 mr. persons: well, that is true. i'll rephrase that. the court: okay. mr. persons: if someone's spouse of 41 years, a very lovely person that is indisputable, indisputable is urging you to stop smoking starting in 1965 and continues to do that for 32 years of the marriage, someone you live with, someone you love -- the court: you cannot do that. we cannot. mr. wichmann: let me object. this was violation of the golden rule. the court: sustained. mr. persons: someone he loves is urging him to stop smoking, and he does not heed that warning, would he listen to something from r.j. reynolds? absolutely not. your daughter, daughters, his daughters are urging -- mr. wichmann: objection, your honor, another violation of the golden rule. the court: sustained. mr. persons: his daughters urged him to quit smoking. 3704 mr. wichmann: i'll object. i do not think that was the testimony at all. the court: overruled. the jurors must rely on their own recollection. mr. persons: dionne, "dad, it is bad for you." aadron, "dad, it is bad for you. you should stop smoking." viola, "dad, it affects my sinuses." that was the testimony. it bothers my sinuses. and so he would keep a distance from her, but he would not stop smoking. if that was not enough to cause him to stop smoking, surely nothing r.j. reynolds said or did would have been enough to stop him from smoking. in terms of the fault, the plaintiff has the burden to prove each and every percentage point of r.j. reynolds's fault that caused -- mr. wichmann: your honor, let me object. this was not the law. percentage points, fault, that is way outside the jury instructions. the court: just a moment, please. just a moment. mr. wichmann: may we come sidebar, judge? the court: i'm going to sustain the 3705 definition on the burden was read to you by me. there is no degree of percentage, and it is the instruction that i gave on the greater weight of the evidence, which is instruction 4 in your packets. "greater weight of the evidence means the more persuasive and convincing force and effect of the entire evidence in the case." okay. mr. persons: thank you, your honor. the court: that is the plaintiff's burden. mr. persons: plaintiff has the burden of proof which -- i'm not ready to go there yet. plaintiff has the burden of proof, and when they put these percentages, when you put a percentage of fault on the verdict form in order to assign any percentage of fault to r.j. reynolds. plaintiff would have had to prove by the greater weight of the evidence that such fault should be imposed on r.j. reynolds. that is what that means. that plaintiff has to prove it. it cannot be assumed. it cannot be guessed. it has to be proved. that is all that means. we know that mr. mathis quit cold turkey for two or three days. if you multiply 50 years times 365, you come up with 18,250 days. out of 3706 that time, three days. if you do the math, that is less than 1 percent. of the days he smoked, that he gave it up for three days. so tell me who was at fault. i submit to you a overwhelming amount of fault, in fact, one hundred percent of responsibility is that of robert mathis. we know that mr. mathis had knowledge about the dangers of smoking. just set aside what he was told by his father-in-law and by his wife and by his children, just by the pack itself, it told him it was dangerous. we know he had control over his smoking. both of the experts, dr. hurt and dr. abramson who said that only the smoker can control the smoking. the manufacturer cannot control your going in and buying a pack of cigarettes and smoking, or somebody going in and asking for cigarettes and then lighting up. only the smoker can control that. mr. mathis has a responsibility to choose health over smoking. he had that ability and chose not to do it. okay. i'm making progress. so on number 3 when it talks about assigning, and it says, "please state the 3707 percentage of fault," 0 for reynolds and 100 percent to mr. mathis. i'm going to talk about damages, not because plaintiff has proven their case, but because there is jury instructions on damages and just as soon as i do not talk about damages, i'll be accused of omitting a discussion of damages. but the damages have to be fair and just in light of the evidence in the case, in light of the evidence. and plaintiff has the burden to prove an entitlement to each and every dollar of damages. mr. wichmann: your honor, i object. the court: just a moment, please. mr. wichmann: each and every dollar of damages? the court: just a moment. you can leave that up there. mr. persons: you got to prove -- the court: just a moment. i'm looking at it. members of the jury, i think it goes without saying that a juror is not going to put something on a verdict form that they do not believe has been proven. 3708 so overruled. mr. persons: thank you. you have to prove it. they cannot just come in and ask you for $10 million without proof. that is all i'm saying. and you heard evidence about copd, but the judge is going to instruct you that plaintiff makes no claim for copd so you cannot even consider copd on assessing damages. that is not part of the case in terms of damages. plaintiff is not claiming damages for copd. and as a matter of law, you cannot consider medical expenses, funeral expenses, lost wages or earnings, any pain and suffering by aadron mathis, any pain and suffering by viola story, any pain and suffering by dionne johnson. mr. wichmann: let me object, we are not claiming this, judge. the court: folks. members of the jury, please disregard -- put that back up there because i'm talking about it because the jurors have seen it. there is no claim for medical expenses. there is no claim for funeral expenses. there are no claims for lost wages or earnings. there are 3709 no pain and suffering claims for aadron mathis, viola story, or dionne johnson. so that -- i'm going to sustain the objection. the jurors are to disregard that exhibit. mr. wichmann: your honor, may i approach sidebar, please? the court: yes. now you can take it down. [#deleted sidebar#] mr. persons: for the record that is slide 133. the court: okay. thank you. mr. persons: all right. so the only thing that can be considered for purposes of compensatory damages is pain and suffering, loss of companionship of mrs. hazel mathis, not for -- i mean, mrs. hazel mathis. not for aadron -- mr. wichmann: your honor, let me object. it is the same thing you just admonished him on. the court: no. it is a little different. members of the jury, i think that you realize that the only claims at issue are the ones that plaintiff is suing for. a jury cannot award damages if nobody is suing for them. 3712 so the only thing that the plaintiff is suing for are the damages associated with mrs. mathis, as a personal representative and individually, as stated in the jury instructions. do y'all understand that? yes. so let us move on to a different topic. mr. persons: all right, your honor. i want to wrap up here. the court: just for the record, the jurors nodded their heads affirmatively. mr. persons: it is undeniable that mr. mathis knew that cigarette smoking was dangerous. it was bad for him. that it could kill him. and he took no steps to stop smoking in time to avoid getting a disease. but if you are inclined to award compensatory damages to mrs. mathis, i would suggest to you that $10 million is way, way -- the court: i cannot hear. and my screen is frozen. could you speak a little louder, please? mr. persons: sure. that there is no evidence to support an award of even a million dollars much less 3713 $10 million, but i would suggest to you that if you wanted to award something that it be in the range of $500,000. now, let us talk about punitive damages. question. "under the circumstances, state whether you find by clear and convincing evidence that punitive damages are warranted against r.j. reynolds tobacco company?" i submit they are not warranted. the evidence demonstrates there is no need to impose punitive damages. you may only impose punitive damages for conduct shown by clear and convincing evidence to have been a legal cause of mr. mathis' lung cancer and death. and there is been no such showing. and the burden of proof on punitive damages, unlike the other claims in the case, which is by greater weight of the evidence -- punitive damages is by clear and convincing evidence. that is higher than greater weight of the evidence, but less than proof beyond a reasonable doubt. and the jury instruction says, "clear and convincing evidence differs from the greater weight of the evidence in that it is more compelling and persuasive. 3714 "as i've already instructed you, greater weight of evidence means the more persuasive and convincing force and effect of the entire evidence in the case. "in contrast, clear and convincing evidence is evidence that is precise, explicit, lacking in confusion, and of such weight that it produces a firm belief or conviction without hesitation about the matter at issue." so if there is any hesitation whatsoever about whether punitive damages are warranted, then they are not. the burden has not been met. and for punitive damages, they can only be awarded for harm suffered by mr. mathis, not for harm suffered by other smokers. you may not punish reynolds for harm suffered by anyone other than mr. mathis. punitive damages are in addition to compensatory damages, which fully compensate the plaintiff. and they can only be awarded to the plaintiff and not to someone else. you must not consider the engle findings in determining whether punitive damages are warranted. you cannot even take into account the engle findings in determining whether punitive 3715 damages are warranted. and you can take into account what is called mitigating evidence. and there is a jury instruction on that. and in the interest of time, i will not go through it, but it is in the packet that you will have. and dr. proctor admits that reynolds has spent more than a billion dollars developing heat-not-burn technology to make a safer cigarette, because what we know is the combustion of tobacco is what makes cigarettes dangerous. anytime you burn organic material, tobacco included, it releases cancer-causing chemicals. "burning tobacco is what makes the lions's share of the harm." that is dr. proctor. "in determining whether punitive damages are warranted, you may take into consideration any mitigating evidence. mitigating evidence is evidence which may demonstrate there is no need to impose punitive damages." and we talked about reynolds having spent more than 50 years and a fortune trying to make cigarettes safer. that was dr. proctor's testimony. "from the 1950s to the 1990s, reynolds made 3716 efforts to remove known carcinogens from the smoke, started developing heat-not-burn technology. reynolds spent $1 billion in the '80s trying to develop a less harmful cigarette. those products failed because consumers did not buy it due to the taste." it was a safer product, not completely safe. no cigarette is safe, but it was safer than a conventional cigarette, but people did not -- did not like the taste of it. so they did not buy it. so it failed. you cannot force people to buy things. "smoking rates have declined more rapidly among african-american smokers." this is in mitigation in response to the contention that somehow more african-americans smoke menthol and menthol cigarettes are harder to quit. well, this is the data. "you would agree that the data shows in any the 1970s and 1980s" -- dr. proctor -- "that cigarette smoking declined more steeply among black adolescents than white adolescents? "i would not dispute that. but i just do not know one way or the other." okay. and then dr. proctor said that, 3717 "smoking has become demoralized." in other words it is stigmatized. "it is in decline. the cigarette is a horse-and-buggy technology. it is outmoded and obsolete." and he says, "cigarette smoking will become extinct as smoking is on its way out." so the evidence demonstrates there is no need to impose punitive damages against r.j. reynolds tobacco company. and if you do decide that punitive damages are warranted, we will have a second trial where evidence will be presented and argument will be presented on punitive damages. but i submit to you they are not warranted, and you should answer the question, "no." that is question number 6 on the verdict form -- i'm sorry -- question number 7. i'm sorry. question number 7 on the verdict form, and the answer should be "no" to that one. all right. and i want to wrap up with just two things i'd like to show you, dr. e. cuyler hammond. this is from, i believe, 1954 after he had done an epidemiology study. he was with the american cancer society during his entire career doing research and smoking and health. and here 3718 is what he said on television back then reporting on the research that he had done. dr. hammond: it is now, in my opinion, beyond a reasonable doubt that cigarette smoking greatly increases the probability of developing lung cancer. in my opinion people can be warned of the dangers and they are being warned. what they want to do, whether they wish to smoke or not, is there own business. persons: then we have another broadcast. this was about the surgeon general's report. this is 1964, harry reasoner. play that, please. mr. reasoner: in this kind of a country it comes down to you, whether you like it or not. no one is going to forbid an adult to smoke, and it is now quite clear that no one is going to tell him it is good for him either. the decision is his. the decision and the health that may depend 3719 on it. this is harry reasoner. good night. persons: ladies and gentlemen, it is been a pleasure presenting the case to you, and i again thank you for your kind attention. your honor.