mr. trentalange: thank you, your honor. folks, in a little while, you are going to retire to the deliberation room, and you are going to have three jobs. the first job is to answer the questions the judge gives you. the second job is to make sure everyone on the jury follows the law the judge gives you. and the last job is, before you answer any questions, make sure you explain to each other why you feel the way you do about the answers, your own personal beliefs about the answers to those questions. and next, while -- i'm going to give you some tools that i hope will help you do those three jobs. so the first thing that i need to tell you is -- 4118 kind of explain what this is all about. you have heard some of the judge's instructions. i do not know about you, i've been doing this a long time, but sometimes when i hear jury instructions, it sounds like the teacher's voice in charlie brown; all i hear is wa-wa-wa. so it is easier if we break it down. the engle class is comprised -- a class is just a group of people. and the engle class is comprised of cigarette smokers who, on or before that date, suffered from a disease or medical condition caused by an addiction to cigarette smoking. if you fit that description, you are in that club, that class. so the first question on the verdict form, which you will get and you will have to fill out, "was jane mccabe addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine and, if so, was such addiction a legal cause of her lung cancer and death?" okay. that is the question. what is not the question? sometimes when you are answering a question, it helps to focus on what is not involved in that question. class membership is that question. it is not about choice, ability to quit, knowledge of dangers, brand uses. it is about addiction. so sometimes knowing what is not involved 4119 helps you focus on what is involved. i had a friend who used to introduce himself -- his name was stan musial. he would say, "i'm stan musial, not that stan musial." so what is this about? it is not about those things. it is about addiction. so if you are back there and you are deliberating on that first question, trying to decide about whether ms. mccabe was addicted, and somebody says, well, she had the choice, she could have quit, remind them that that is not part of the first question. first things first, was she addicted? comparative fault is not part of the first question. whether she -- whether ms. mccabe bore some responsibility for her smoking, that is not part of the first question. choice is not part of the first question. so remember, first things first, was she addicted? and the standard by which you are making a decision -- you know, if you are playing a basketball game, you want to know before you start whether you have got to win by two. in tennis, you have got to win by two. that is different than a swimming race where you can finish a hundredth of a second ahead of the person that you beat. so you have got to know 4120 what the standard is. so the standard by which you are going to answer that question, the standard of proof is the greater weight of the evidence. that is more likely than not, whether we are more likely right than wrong. okay? this case is not about doubt. you can have as many doubts as you want on both sides. it is not about being sure. if you are deliberating and somebody says, i'm just not sure, remind them, for every question but the last question, you do not have to be sure, it is the greater weight of the evidence, just which side is more persuasive. you could have as many doubts as you want, as long as you answer the questions -- all but the last one -- based on more likely than not or the greater weight of the evidence. doubt. you see in their documents that we have -- addicted. doubt is the tobacco company's product. doubt has no role in this courtroom, period. "was jane mccabe addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine?" so when you are answering that question, keep in mind, this is not some question about were there 4121 aliens. this is not looking for a unicorn. this is was she addicted to an addictive substance. so when you are trying to determine whether she was addicted, you have to determine, first of all, is that possible; does that happen; is that likely; are we looking for a needle in a haystack or is this something that commonly occurs? and you have these items in evidence. and these pt numbers -- you have a list of what they are. we have bubbled out some quotes from there about nicotine being addictive. they are in the business of selling nicotine, an addictive drug. that is not 1963. they knew it was addictive in 1963. 1972, they are talking about nicotine delivery, because that is what they are doing. and you can write down these pt numbers if you want and look at these documents yourself. do not take my word for it. "nicotine is a potent drug." okay? "our industry is based upon design, manufacture, and sale of attractive dosage forms of nicotine." that is 1972. 1977, "we provide a product that is an essential commodity and a habitual act. put a hungry rat in a cage, put a lever in the cage, 4122 rat will push the lever." rats do not have a choice. smoking the cigarette is the lever push. 1994 -- can we play that? (the video clip was published to the jury in open court as follows:) "let me begin my questioning on the matter of whether or not nicotine is addictive. let me ask you first -- i'd like to go down the row -- whether each of you believes that nicotine is not addictive. i've heard virtually all of you touch on it. just yes or no. do you believe nicotine is not addictive? i believe nicotine is not addictive, yes. mr. johnston. congressman, cigarettes and nicotine clearly do not meet the classic definitions of addiction. there is no intoxication -- we will take that as a no. again, time is short. if you could just -- i think each of you believe nicotine is not addictive. we would just like to have this for the record. i do not believe that nicotine or our products are addictive. i believe nicotine is not addictive. 4123 i believe that nicotine is not addictive. i believe that nicotine is not addictive. and i, too, believe that nicotine is not addictive." (the video clip concluded.) mr. trentalange: each one of those guys worked for a corporation that had documents that revealed, without any kind of doubt, that they knew nicotine was addictive. and they went before congress, took an oath to tell the truth, and -- there is no way to sugarcoat it, each of them lied about whether -- remember that first question: is this reasonable; is this space aliens; is this a unicorn we are looking for or is this substance addictive? 1994, 30 years after documents saying nicotine was addictive, they lied. addiction is a disease. it is not about free choice. these documents are also in evidence: 1967, 1963, 1980, 1989. "cigarette smoking is more addictive than using heroin, hooking two-thirds of the people who ever smoke. we cannot defend continued smoking as free choice if the person was addicted." 1980, of course they have got to deny addiction. 4124 they cannot defend continued smoking as free choice if the person was addicted. these pt numbers, they are in evidence. you can take a look at them for yourself. but you heard from dr. michael herkov. and we can play this excerpt. testimony clip of michael herkov, ph.d., was published to the jury in open court as follows:) "q. first of all, did you reach a conclusion about whether or not dorothy jane mccabe was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine? a. yes, i did. q. and what is that conclusion? a. she was. she was severely addicted. q. this jury has to make all the decisions, except one, based on more likely than not or the greater weight of the evidence. do you hold that opinion more likely than not? a. yeah, it is -- it is much more likely than not. absolutely, yeah. i think the evidence, as we go through the case, is pretty clear." testimony clip concluded.) mr. trentalange: dr. michael cummings. 4125 (the videotaped trial testimony clip of kenneth michael cummings, ph.d., was published to the jury in open court as follows:) "q. and have you had an opportunity to review certain depositions in this case of the witnesses. a. i have. q. and did you review some medical records? a. i did. q. and was there sufficient information for you to render whether or not you believed that she was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine and the level of that addiction? a. yes, there was. q. and what is your opinion in regards to the r.j. reynolds cigarettes that she smoked? a. there is no doubt in my mind that she was addicted to the cigarettes she smoked, including the r.j. reynolds cigarettes. and so she was addicted to nicotine in the cigarettes that she smoked." testimony clip concluded.) mr. trentalange: jane mccabe -- the answer to that question, jane mccabe was more likely than not addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine. addiction, remember, is defined as a chronic 4126 relapsing brain disease that is characterized by compulsive drug seeking and use despite harmful consequences. that is not my definition. that comes from the national institutes of drug abuse. while nicotine is the key chemical compound that causes and sustains the powerful addicting effects of cigarettes, other ingredients and design features make them even more attractive and more addictive. you heard about -- you heard testimony about how the ph of cigarettes was manipulated and adjusted to make it more inhalable so that nicotine could be free-based and it would be more potent. "the powerful addicting elements of tobacco products affect multiple types of nicotine receptors in the brain." you heard testimony about that. and you heard that adolescents' bodies are more sensitive to nicotine, and adolescents are more easily addicted. 85 to ninety percent of smokers start before the age of 18. their brains are not fully developed at that point in time. up to ninety percent of regular smokers are addicted. you heard that from dr. cummings. dr. cummings has devoted his life to tobacco control and prevention. when the surgeon general has a 4127 question or wants somebody to edit his report, he does not call dr. barnett; he calls dr. cummings. and dr. cummings will tell you about nicotine -- or did tell you about nicotine dependence, equally nicotine addiction, and the prevalence of that phenomenon. testimony clip of kenneth michael cummings, ph.d., was published to the jury in open court as follows:) "q. based upon your skill, experience, knowledge, and training in this field, what percentage of smokers who smoke at least a pack a day for multiple decades -- 20, 30 years -- are not addicted? a. how many are not addicted? q. yeah. a. i would say zero. q. and in all your years working in clinics, working in your peer-review literature involved in research with other scholars in your field, have you ever seen or researched or read or heard about a smoker who smoked two to three packs a day for 50 years and was not addicted? a. no." testimony clip 4128 concluded.) mr. trentalange: there are other issues in this case. you heard about them. they were trotted out before you about ms. mccabe's alcohol use. alcoholics are three times more likely to be addicted to nicotine. smokers are four times more likely to be addicted to alcohol. so mrs. mccabe was a human being with all of the failures that human beings have that make them human. the evidence is really unrefuted that she tried her best, but she had some conditions. she had some situations going on that created an interplay between alcohol and nicotine. and that made nicotine more potent to her and predisposed her to addiction. alcoholics are three times more likely to be addicted to nicotine. and nicotine is addictive. the surgeon general, in his 1998 report, which is in evidence, says that cigarettes and other forms of tobacco are addicting. nicotine is the drug in tobacco that causes addiction. the pharmacologic and behavioral processes that determine tobacco addiction are similar to those that determine addiction to drugs such as heroin and cocaine. we have got dr. herkov, dr. cummings, c. everett 4129 koop. and here is what c. everett koop said. this is in evidence. (the video clip was published to the jury in open court as follows:) "the surgeon general, c. everett koop, has issued two major reports on smoking; one on the dangers of secondhand smoke, the other on nicotine addiction. the tobacco industry disputes both reports as more political than scientific. we have been told so frequently by the cigarette industry that smoking is a matter of free choice, you start when you want and you quit when you want, but anybody who has ever smoked knows that is not true. what does the record, the long-time record, say is the most dangerous age to get hooked on tobacco? indications are very clear that the people who are most heavily addicted to nicotine and have the greatest trouble quitting are those who began smoking at the age of 14 to 16. i think the studies all over the world, in every country and every culture, the younger you start, the greater the addiction and the more difficult it is to quit. now, you said that you considered tobacco as 4130 addictive as cocaine or heroin. is not that an overstatement? no, i think the evidence is very clear, if you understand what we are talking about. addiction is a specific physiologic problem. and the manner in which you become addicted to nicotine is exactly the same manner in which you become addicted to cocaine or to heroin. and that even after you have quit and you think you are clean, that there is a tremendous tendency to relapse. there is no such thing as a safe cigarette. there is no such thing as a quality death." (the video clip concluded.) mr. trentalange: ronald reagan's surgeon general. nicotine receptors in the brain, you heard testimony about how they are affected. nicotine smoke is inhaled. it goes to the lung, to the lungs, oxygenated, pumped by the heart into the brain. it takes seconds for nicotine to hit the brain. it affects dopamine receptors. it affects a bunch of other neurotransmitters; serotonin, epinephrine, acetylcholine, vasopressin, glutamate, and one of the endorphins, b endorphin. it has an immediate effect on mood. 4131 and what is that effect? well, when these nicotine receptors are full, you feel good, you feel normal, you are not nervous or stressed. but they do not stay full. they get empty and you feel stressed, jittery, nervous, you crave cigarettes. you just feel out of sorts. some people say that they smoke to relieve stress, without realizing that the stress is caused by not having nicotine in their nicotine receptors. so the idea that you are smoking to relax misses the mark. you need to relax because you are stressed. and you are stressed because nicotine is out of your system. and withdrawal -- withdrawal is from cigarette to cigarette, from pack to pack, from sleeping to waking, and there is no cigarette. anybody who has ever smoked for long periods of time will tell you, there is no cigarette like that first cigarette in the morning. one of the things that dr. herkov and some other folks talked about was the his, the heaviness of smoking index, used to evaluate the extent of addiction, how bad the addiction is. there are two questions: how soon after you wake up do you smoke your first cigarette and, then, how many cigarettes do you smoke a day? 4132 for jane mccabe, she was highly addicted. she smoked immediately upon waking up, certainly within five minutes. and she smoked more than 31 cigarettes a day. there are 20 cigarettes in a pack, so she smoked 40, 50 cigarettes a day for 50 years. she was highly addicted. now, you do not have any specific criterion that you are told that you have to use when you are deciding whether or not ms. mccabe was addicted. you can use your common sense and experience. there are a number of sources that have been suggested to you. the most restrictive one is the dsm. that is the one that the defense picked to try and describe addiction. that is okay, we will use that. according to the dsm criteria, which are the most restrictive criteria, jane mccabe was addicted. dr. herkov told you that. she met -- you needed to meet six or more symptoms to be highly addicted, have severe disorder. jane mccabe met between seven and 11 out of 11. dr. herkov told you, for four of them, he was kind of on the fence. he was not sure. but for seven of them, no doubt. she met seven out of 11 criteria, based on addiction -- based on meeting seven out of 11 criteria in the dsm-5, the most restrictive definition of addiction, jane 4133 mccabe was highly addicted. and that is really consistent with common sense, right? she started smoking cigarettes, the testimony is, between the ages of eight -- i'm sorry -- 11 and 14. by 14, high school, she was a persistent daily smoker. we know that nicotine made structural changes in her brain that made it more likely for her to keep smoking and harder for her to quit. she smoked two to two-and-a-half packs of cigarettes a day for 50-plus years. she was exposed to millions of doses of nicotine. each cigarette contains about ten puffs. that is -- each puff is a dose of nicotine. she took in millions of doses of nicotine over the years. it would be foolish to say that somebody that took in millions of doses of cocaine or heroin over the course of 50 years would not be addicted. it is just implausible that somebody that took in millions of doses of nicotine in the form of a cigarette over 50-plus years is not addicted. in this photo, she was already a persistent daily smoker. she smoked first thing in the morning. she smoked in bed. she kept an ashtray by her bed. she got up to smoke in the middle of 4134 night. she smoked while she was pregnant with her children. she was caught smoking at the convent. she barely made it through church services. you heard about how she was fumbled and was preparing her cigarettes and her matches when she went out the door. and she chain smoked, according to people that were in a position to observe her chain smoking. people that were not there obviously did not see that. but remember, absence of evidence is not evidence of absence. somebody's not in china, it does not mean china does not exist. cannot see china from here, but china exists. we know it from other people. we know from the people who were in the position to see her chain smoking that she chain smoked. this is her when she was a nurse in orlando at orange memorial hospital. there are other genetic factors that predisposed her to smoking and addiction. she had first-degree relatives who smoked. they want to talk about the fact that she had a father and uncles. well, her father smoking genetically predisposed her to starting and continuing and being addicted to nicotine. remember, she needed a nicotine patch to quit, 4135 and the nicotine patch was not available until 1992. romayne mccabe. she is kind of almost a double for jane mccabe. this is the lady that was with her when she was a young smoker. she went to school with her. she is a year older than ms. mccabe. and she will tell you that she smoked and she considered herself addicted, and she considered her good friend to be addicted, too. testimony clip of romayne mccabe was published to the jury in open court as follows:) "q. did you personally feel like you were addicted? a. yes. q. why did you feel like you were addicted? a. because i wanted a cigarette first thing in the morning and craved for cigarettes during the day. q. all right. and did that ever go away? a. no. q. up until the time you quit, which we are going to discuss later on, did you feel you yourself were addicted? a. yes. q. now, from your vantage point of lifelong 4136 friends with jane, your smoking history together, your being together, your seeing how she was smoking and how much she was smoking, did you consider jane addicted to cigarettes? mr. carter: objection, your honor. calls for speculation, lay opinion. the court: overruled. the witness: yes." testimony clip concluded.) mr. trentalange: so one of the instructions that was towards the end -- i do not know if you heard it, but in evaluating a witness's testimony, you get to look at things like their intelligence, their experience, their frankness or lack of frankness, and the reasonableness of their testimony in light of all the other evidence in the case. and for expert witnesses, you do the same thing that you do for lay witnesses. and you also are told in the instruction -- and by the way, you get to take these instructions, the written ones, back to the jury room with you. so you can check these out while you are deliberating, if you have any instructions [sic]. but for expert witnesses, you know, there is a 4137 saying, you do not check your common sense at the door when you go back into the jury room, and you do not check your common sense. you get to take that back with you. and i'll tell you, common sense ain't that common, but it is the most important thing that you are going to have -- the most important lens that you will have in evaluating the evidence. and with respect to expert witnesses, the judge has told you, and you will see in the written instructions, that you get to evaluate the opinions of experts in light of all the things that you use to evaluate lay witnesses, and you get to compare their testimony to the rest of the evidence in the case and whether it is consistent with your own common sense and experience. and based on those things you can accept it, reject it, or give it the weight that you think it deserves. so the rest of the evidence in the case, compared to dr. barnett's testimony. every single witness that testified in the case -- dr. herkov, dr. cummings, romayne mccabe, jim mccabe, melinda norman, rosemary borter, polly edwards, susan beddingfield -- they all told you that they thought mrs. mccabe was addicted based on their personal observations -- i'm sorry. dr. cummings 4138 and dr. herkov did not have personal observations. but the people that did, the people that were there on the ground told you that their mother or their friend was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine. the doctor who was paid almost a million dollars, has not written anything on addiction, has not given lectures on smoking and addiction, has treated just one patient who came to her deliberately for smoking problems, she says that mrs. mccabe was not addicted. she found zero out of 11 factors in the dsm applied. she said during a period of time, maybe one applied. you get to compare that testimony and determine whether that testimony is reasonable. does that make sense to you? does that make sense to you, that a woman that has not written anything, is not noted for her expertise in tobacco, is approached, prepared for two years before she testifies, and she comes in and says -- first of all, she picks the most restrictive criteria for addiction and then she tells you she meets zero. really? zero? smoked for 50 years. mike cummings is the foremost authority, arguably, on tobacco control in the world. and he 4139 says he is never seen a smoker who was not addicted who smoked as long and as hard as mrs. mccabe was. so consider that when you are evaluating the reasonableness of dr. barnett's testimony. interest in the outcome of the litigation, interest in the outcome of the case, that does not just apply to the people who are plaintiffs. that applies to people who testify for the defense. does she have an interest? doggone right she is got an interest; she wants to keep receiving cases like this. mr. belasic: objection, your honor. attacking the witness. the court: overruled. mr. trentalange: she wants to keep receiving the compensation that she is receiving. and she is received a lot of it. fifty percent of her income at this point is derived not from treating patients, but from testifying and doing work in connection with tobacco cases. so consider that when you are considering the instruction about how to judge credibility. so we know that addiction was a -- i'm sorry -- that she was addicted. so the next question -- next part of that question is, was addiction more likely 4140 than not a cause of her death? did it cause her continued smoking, lung cancer, and death? and the evidence is much more likely than not that it did. she more likely than not had lung cancer. you heard from dr. villa and dr. schiff that she had lung cancer. there is really no dispute about that. the records say it. there was some cross-examination that seemed to suggest that you ought to doubt that. but there is really no evidence. there is a difference between evidence and argument. your decision has to be based on evidence. so you heard from dr. schiff. now, out of all the people that testified who are health care providers, he is the only guy that met mrs. mccabe. he was her treating physician during the period of time when she had the -- when he had the unfortunate occasion to tell her she had cancer and she was going to die. this was her doctor. testimony clip of ron d. schiff, m.d., ph.d., was published to the jury in open court as follows:) "a. i do have an opinion. q. what is that, sir? a. the opinion is that, well beyond a 4141 reasonable medical probability or certainty, that lung cancer was -- that cigarettes were the cause of her lung cancer." testimony clip concluded.) mr. trentalange: so we know she had cancer. we know that cigarettes caused her lung cancer. you have not heard any contrary testimony from anybody in this case. she presented to the hospital in august of 1995. and dr. schiff told you they did what they do. somebody comes in. they have got a productive cough. he took down the history. basically, what is going on, ms. mccabe? what brings you here? she had a cough. she was coughing up blood before she came. it had stopped at the time of her presentation. so what do they do? they looked at her. she had a large pleural effusion, in a patient with greater than a hundred pack-years of smoking. so these are doctors. and even though this is 1995, and a year earlier cigarette heads had denied addiction and denied the causal link between -- they were still denying that cigarettes cause cancer in 1995. okay? but the doctors knew by 1995, and they did not have any interest. so they looked at this. 4142 you know, when you hear hoof beats, think horses, not zebras. somebody smokes cigarettes for 50 years and she is got something, a foreign object in her lungs, got to -- first thing we got to worry about is whether or not this is a malignancy, whether or not this is cancer. so that is what they do. and you heard that she went through a bronchoscopy, because they go from least invasive to most invasive. the bronchoscopy was not determinative. she ended up having to have this operation, a thoracotomy. they go in, spread your ribs, take out a piece of your lung. they did that with her. it is called a biopsy. there was a frozen section that is done intraoperatively, and it revealed a large cell carcinoma. that is the cell type. they sent that to pathology, and it came back consistent with a diagnosis of poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma. that is a smoking cancer. and that is what she had. and that is what caused it. she went on to develop metastasis. now, dr. schiff reminded us -- and as soon as he did, the next witness, one of the daughters, broke his rule. cancer gets its name from where it starts. so she did not have brain cancer. she had lung cancer that 4143 metastasized or spread to her brain. so do not be confused by that when you get instructed about whether or not she had lung cancer. if somebody says, no, she had brain cancer and she had bone cancer, remind them that cancer gets its name from where it starts. and even though it spread to her bone, it is still lung cancer. it is metastatic lung cancer in the bone. if somebody says, no, she had brain cancer, remind them it is metastatic cancer from the lung that spread to the brain. okay? and that is what dr. schiff said. there is no contrary evidence. that is not disputed by anyone. cancer that starts in the lung and spreads somewhere else retains its name, even though laymen, including myself, sometimes get confused by that. so it spread to the brain. she decided that she was going to forego invasive or drastic treatment because, basically, she had a death sentence. she tried some experimental treatment in mexico. and she is within her right to do that. desperate people do desperate things. and she was a little bit desperate. she did not want to die. but she knew that chemo and radiation was going to be brutal. she was a nurse. she was familiar with it. and she chose not to undergo it. and everybody in 4144 this case, i think, agrees that we have got to respect that choice. but she ended up dying 11 months after her first diagnosis. and the death certificate that is in evidence tells you she had adenocarcinoma of the lung and metastatic cancer. that is just what the witnesses told you. that is just what i went over. so we know that she died of lung cancer, and we know that the lung cancer was caused by cigarette smoking. so did addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine cause or contribute substantially to jane mccabe's lung cancer and death? let us hear from dr. cummings on generally how you make that call. testimony clip of kenneth michael cummings, ph.d., was published to the jury in open court as follows:) "q. and, doctor, i want you to assume that there is a medical doctor who will give medical testimony that smoking caused lung cancer. okay? a. okay. q. and i just want you to explain to the jury, in general -- just in general, if you could explain how addiction is a cause of lung cancer and death in 4145 individuals. a. sure. nicotine addiction is what causes somebody to have the repeated exposures to the many harmful chemicals in cigarette smoke. every puff on a cigarette does dna damage to the cells. and the repeated accumulated damage to the cells is what eventually results in a normal cell converting to a cancerous cell, which ultimately leads to the development of cancer." testimony clip concluded.) mr. trentalange: so that is the chain of events. that is how it happens. so let us hear from dr. herkov. testimony clip of michael herkov, ph.d., was published to the jury in open court as follows:) "q. do you believe that her addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine was a substantial contributing cause of her heavy smoking over that 50- to 60-year period. a. i would say it was -- it was her addiction to nicotine that made her smoke. she is not -- yes, absolutely, it is the addiction to the nicotine that has her smoking. 4146 q. and you believe that more likely than not? a. absolutely. q. and beyond that, how certain are you? a. i mean, that was clear to me that it was her addiction to the nicotine. that is why she smoked. q. i want to phrase it another way. are you saying that, but for the addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine, she would not have smoked as long and as hard as she did? a. yeah. if all this -- if it is not for the brain reward, if it is not for the withdrawal, if it is not for all the changes in the brain we have talked about that is due to the addiction to nicotine, then she would have little reason to smoke. q. and so, therefore, she would not have? a. i do not think she would have. q. and do you hold that opinion more likely than not? a. yes." testimony clip concluded.) mr. trentalange: and dr. villa also puts it together for us. 4147 (the videotaped trial testimony clip of luis villa, m.d., was published to the jury in open court as follows:) "a. there is absolutely no doubt that this is a primary lung carcinoma, highly likely that it is associated with this history of smoking. q. how confident are you this primary lung cancer was caused from smoking in this case with this women's hundred pack-year history of smoking? a. way beyond any doubt. this is -- it is classical. if this lady, ms. mccabe, was addicted and that was the cause of her necessity to continue to smoke, then addiction is related to the cancer and to her death. q. when you say 'related,' do you mean more likely than not it was a substantial contributing cause of her lung cancer and death? a. definitely more likely than not, yes." testimony clip concluded.) mr. trentalange: so there you have it. she was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine. that is why she smoked. and her smoking caused her lung cancer and death. 4148 we had to give you that testimony in pieces, because addiction experts are different than medical experts. so the addiction experts have to testify about addiction, and the medical experts, the pathologists and the treating doctor, had to testify about the medical part. but you can put it together. it is not that complicated. you are going to get an instruction on causation, and this is some of that language. i'm going to take a few minutes to go through it, because it is a little bit confusing. it is put together by a bunch of lawyers who are trying to be precise. and it is precise, but you have got to kind of take it a little bit at a time. so an addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine is a legal cause. i want to point out why that "a" is highlighted. as my seventh-grade teacher told me, that is the indefinite article, not the definite article. okay? it does not exclude other causes. it is a cause, not the only cause. "a legal cause of lung cancer and death, if it directly and in natural and continuous sequence produced or contributed substantially to producing such lung cancer and death so that it can be reasonably be said that, but for the addiction to 4149 cigarettes containing nicotine, the lung cancer and death would not have occurred." so it does not have to be the only cause. did it basically set in motion a chain of events such that -- like dominoes. you knock down the first domino, it causes the loss, the knocking down of the last domino. there can be as many dominoes in between as you want, but pressing that first domino caused all the dominoes to fall, including the last one. and it is the last one that matters. okay. and when i say negligence need not be the only cause, there is actually an instruction that talks about -- just in this case nobody points out the definite article and the indefinite article, the instruction tells you. and these causation instructions, you are going to see them for every claim. they are going to recur in the jury instructions, and they are going to get repetitive. it is the same interpretation each time. "in order to be regarded as a legal cause, addiction to cigarettes need not be the only cause." you are going to hear that about negligence, you are going to hear that about strict liability, you are going to hear that about concealment -- 4150 fraudulent concealment, conspiracy. every count that is in there -- there is four counts -- causation applies, and it is the same instruction. what it is, it is got to be direct and continuous and need not be the only cause. so it need not be the only cause. it can operate in combination with the act of another, some natural cause, or some other cause, if the negligence contributes substantially to producing the death. so some other cause. well, if somebody says, well, she would not have got addicted if she did not drink alcohol, well, that is some other cause that preexists. there is something called the eggshell plaintiff. if you hit somebody in the head and they got an eggshell -- mr. belasic: objection, your honor. mr. trentalange: and their head and skull -- mr. belasic: not -- not a jury instruction. this was argued. the court: let us move on, please. mr. trentalange: you take the plaintiff as you find them. okay? so if she is got a predisposing condition that made her more likely to be addicted, they are responsible for -- mr. belasic: objection, your honor. this was 4151 argued yesterday. the court: let us move on, please. mr. trentalange: so if it operates in combination with the act of another, some natural cause or some other cause -- that is what the instruction is, some other cause. as long as those dominoes go together. so in plain english, more likely than not, did she get lung cancer and die, in large part, because of her addiction to smoking cigarettes? that is what that "but for" is, substantial contributing cause. it is a cause, not the cause. what does it mean to substantially contribute? i talked about the dominoes. think about a peanut butter and jelly sandwich. without jelly, it ain't a peanut butter and jelly sandwich. it is only one out of three ingredients, right, but it substantially contributes to a peanut butter and jelly sandwich, because, but for jelly, it is not a peanut butter and jelly sandwich. if you go to the -- to someplace, a sandwich shop, and you order peanut butter and jelly, and they come back and there is no jelly on it, you are going to say something because it is not what you ordered. 4152 so addiction needs to substantially contribute to what happened to this lady. and i think we know what "substantially contributes" means. somebody says it was not the only cause, remind them it does not have to be the only cause as long as it substantially contributes. this is what it looks like. directly produces or contributes substantially to lung cancer and death. addiction causes the smoking, causes the lung cancer, causes the death. think of them as dominoes falling down. there can be other causes. somebody says, she did not just smoke because of addiction, she smoked when she was stressed. she did not just smoke because she was addicted, you heard that she liked it. well, all those things can happen at the same time as long as addiction was a substantial contributing cause. addiction need not be the only cause. she smoked when she was going through her divorce. you heard that testimony. so what? as long as addiction was a substantial contributing cause, we meet the test. so the answer to the first question on class 4153 membership is yes. really, the standard is greater weight of the evidence. if you look at the evidence, there is much more than the greater weight of the evidence in this case. but if somebody says, i have my doubts or i'm just not sure, remind them, that is not what this is about. more likely than not, jane mccabe was addicted to cigarettes causing nicotine, and that caused her lung cancer and death. so once that happens, i talked about -- i think i talked about in jury instruct -- or jury selection. if i did not, let me talk about it now. think of it as that first question as the key to a room. once you answer that first question yes, you get the key to a room and it is the engle room and you walk into that room and there are the engle findings. and those engle findings came from a case that took place in 1999 and 2000, was tried over the course of a year, and the jury, believe it or not, just like you, heard way more evidence. we have only given you a fraction of the case -- of the evidence that was in the engle case because we do not have to prove everything once we prove addiction. and we have done that based on the evidence. and so you get to go into the engle room and you get the benefits of what that jury found after 4154 hearing a year's worth of testimony and looking at many times more exhibits than we have given you. no. 1, smoking cigarettes causes lung cancer. specifically, adenocarcinoma, the type of cancer that is involved in this case. no. 2, the nicotine in cigarettes is addictive, the thing they denied for 50 years. no. 3, r.j. reynolds tobacco company placed cigarettes on the market that were defective and unreasonably dangerous. every cigarette they placed on the market when used as intended caused disease and death. 4, r.j. reynolds tobacco company concealed or omitted material information not otherwise known or available knowing that the material was false and misleading or failed to disclose a material fact concerning the health effects and/or addictive nature of cigarette smoking. no. 5, r.j. reynolds tobacco company agreed with other entities to conceal or omit information regarding the health effects of cigarettes or their addictive nature with the intention that smokers and the public would rely on this information to their detriment. no. 6, r.j. reynolds tobacco company was 4155 negligent. no. 5, they did those things. they concealed information. they conspired to conceal with other entities with the intention. they wanted other people to believe what they were saying and what they -- and not have the information they were concealing. you are going to hear some suggestion that did not work with jane mccabe. their specific intention was that it work with jane mccabe and everybody like her. so when you hear that argument and you evaluate that evidence, remind yourself that that was their intention and they spent a lot of money and devoted a lot of time and resources to making it happen. was smoking cigarettes manufactured by r.j. reynolds -- see, we have to prove that they are their cigarettes. that is important because they are not responsible for cigarettes they did not make. so we have to prove that cigarettes manufactured by r.j. reynolds tobacco company were the cause. we know that cigarettes. were they their cigarettes. and the evidence in this case, this is what she smoked. now, you did not hear lucky strike in the jury 4156 instructions, but there has been a stipulation that they are responsible for lucky strike, and dr. cummings told you she smoked lucky strike. they were manufactured by a predecessor to rjr. there is no dispute that they are responsible for lucky strike. these are the brands she smoked, all but merit were r.j. reynolds. 85 percent of the cigarettes that she smoked over the course of 50 years were manufactured by this defendant or people they now own. and dr. villa told you, there is no question that you cannot separate out one cigarette from another. it is a substantial contributing cause of her lung cancer and death. so the cigarettes manufactured by r.j. reynolds tobacco company were a legal cause of jane mccabe's lung cancer and death. so we get to the third question, and this is a hard question. this is where you have to compare the fault of jane mccabe to r.j. reynolds tobacco company. and you heard the judge instruct you that when you do that, it is only with respect to the nonintentional torts. that with respect to the intentional torts, there is not going to be any reduction, okay? 4157 so with respect to the two claims, that is negligence and strict liability, r.j. reynolds tobacco company's fault and jane mccabe's fault. remember, when jane mccabe started smoking, she was between 11 and 14 years old. she could not drive a car, she could not rent a house, she could not sign a contract. she could not do that until she was 18. there was not a caution on cigarettes until 1967, so she was smoking for more than 20 years before a caution went on a pack of cigarettes. and well after that, the cigarette industry, through their spokesmen, through their -- the tobacco industry research committee, and other entities continued to deny that smoking caused cancer. so let us take a look at her conduct. let us think about where she was in various points in time. she bears more responsibility later in time than earlier in time. there is no question about that, if you are going to be fair and reasonable. so you get to decide. my suggestion to you, if you think this is right, go with it. if you think that it is wrong, you know, i cannot -- you have got -- there are a bunch of you. each of you have been here observing things that we all missed, okay? 4158 so i defer to your collective wisdom and your recollection of the evidence in this case. this is just a suggestion, but it is a starting point for discussion anyway. ninety percent and ten percent. so the fourth question, please state whether r.j. reynolds tobacco company's concealment or omission of material information about the health effects or addictive nature of smoking was a legal cause of lung cancer and death. and remember when you are answering this question, you have already got a finding that they did it, okay? so if somebody says, i do not remember concealment, remind them, it is already been determined. the other engle jury and the original engle case made that determination, and you have got to accept that. you took an oath to follow the law and this is the law of this case. once you find addiction, that finding is as if you reached it yourself. so we know they did it. did it have an effect? and that is the same thing with no. 5. there was an agreement to conceal, what we call a conspiracy. there is a engle finding that they did that. we know that they did that. the other engle jury heard more evidence and reached that finding. 4159 you have to accept it as if it was your own decision. so did it cause harm? did she rely on it? did it work, basically? this is the stuff that they concealed. this is the kind of stuff i think you would like to know if you are putting cigarettes in your mouth and you are smoking around your children. would you like to know about addiction? would you like to know that it is a drug before you put it in your body, okay? we know that they knew all this stuff, and this is what they hid. this is stuff you would kind of like to know. this is stuff that if you are taking a drug, you know, there is -- there is more information on the side of a bottle of aspirin than they ever put about these effects. you know, you would watch commercials for drugs where they are marketing drugs, half of the commercial is about the side effects that they tell you about the drugs. they did not do any of that. they did not reveal any of that to jane mccabe, okay? and they knew that most of those who smoked for any significant time would like to stop. many, but not most, of those who would like to stop smoking are able to do so. they knew. they knew. that is 4160 1982. they knew back then that they were selling an addictive product. they knew about ph. they manipulated ph. they designed, engineered, and manipulated cigarettes to promote and sustain addiction. think about that. think about that. they designed cigarettes to be addictive. this is not an accident. you know, this is not selling some product that you think is good for people and finding out that it is bad for people and taking it off the market. this is not cyclamates. this is not any of the things that have been recalled, okay? these are people deliberately, you know, engineering a product to be addictive. why? i'll tell you why. because you are going to die if you smoke it. you got to keep you smoking it. and then we have got to go get young people, replacement smokers to replace our loyal customers because our loyal customers are going to die from what, from the thing we are giving them. they knew, and they said in their internal documents. you know, some of this stuff, you got to read a couple times because it is a little bit hard to believe. did that really say that? without the chemical compound, the cigarette 4161 market would collapse. pm. that is a co-conspirator. philip morris is not the defendant in this case. if somebody says philip morris is not the defendant in this case, remind them they are one of the conspirators. it is as if r.j. reynolds did it themselves, because they agreed to conceal together. they are partners in crime, so to speak, okay? without the chemical compound, the cigarette market would collapse. the chemical compound is the designed, engineered and manipulated cigarette. and we would all lose our jobs in consulting fees. you heard the about taking tobacco -- i'm sorry, nicotine out of cigarettes. 1972, if we move toward reduction or elimination of nicotine from our products, then we shall eventually liquidate our business. they were worried about going financially abrupt, and in the process, they went morally bankrupt. they marketed cigarettes to kids. they lied, denied, and conspired and concealed what was going on. they had a plan. hook them young, set the hook deep. hence the addictive properties of their product. 4162 deny the truth. giving a psychological crutch to addicts. you know, there is a saying among addicted people or recovering people that denial ain't just a river in egypt. denial is part of the addiction. disease, the disease of addiction. people want to hear anything that -- that will support that they are doing. people -- you do not die in your own dreams. you do not want to think that your own conduct is wrong, okay? people look for anything to support what they are doing. and so this psychological crutch, they are much more receptive to the information that says what they are doing is okay than the information that says they are not. think about it yourself. which do you want to hear more, a compliment or criticism? which is easier to listen to, "you look great today" or "you got spinach in between your teeth"? i mean, answer that question honestly. it is -- the answer's obvious. okay? "we cannot ever be comfortable selling a project -- product which most of our customers would stop using if they could. that is to say, if the exit gate from our market should suddenly open, we 4163 would be out of business over night. if people could ever stop smoking cigarettes, we would be out of a job, we would be out of business." i got a problem with my clicker here. there we go. and as i said, they marketed to youth. now, you know, i do not know if you have ever had the experience of being up late at night and watching those commercials for "feed the hungry children" where they have, you know, really emaciated kids and just horrible conditions, flies and filth. it is hard to look at that. i confess, i change the channel. this is a case where you cannot change the channel. you got to look at this. you got to look at this. what they did here, you know, a lot -- lot of intellectuals have a debate about whether there is really such a thing as evil, whether evil exists in the world. mr. belasic: objection, your honor. inflammatory. mr. trentalange: this is bad. this is reprehensible. you get to decide the reprehensibility. 4164 this is reprehensible conduct. marketing to kids, a product that you know is going to kill kids, if that does not justify punitive damages, then we should rip up the statute book that has punitive damages in it, because it does not mean a thing. "our company is to survive and prosper, we must get our share of the youth market." and make no mistake, they ain't talking about kids 21 to 24. 14 to 24 is the age group. "this will require new brands tailored to the youth market. the fragile developing self-image of the young person needs all of the support and enhancement you can get." are you kidding me? "the fragile developing self-image of the young person needs all the support and enhancement it get." they are going to groom -- they did groom kids to smoke. they wrote to high school students. and they lied about it the whole time. the whole time, they said they were not doing it. the whole time. the 14 to 20 market, in hopes of uncovering the secret of this instant popularity. that is a 1980 document. "to increase our young franchise to ensure increased and longer-term growth for camel 4165 filter, the brand must increase its share penetration among the 14 to 24 age group." now, that is 1975. 1984, younger adult smokers are the only source of replacement smokers. i do not know about you, but 1984 was not that long ago to me. 1984, we had put a man on the moon and given -- space travel became boring. moon -- moon shots became boring by 1984. okay? and they are talking about recruiting kids 14 to 24. they got movie placements. and then we got the filtration business. okay? they put filters on cigarettes that did not filter a doggone thing, and they lied about it, and they were patting themselves on the back about it. they said in 1961, "present technology does not permit selective filtration of particulate smoke." 1976, the smoker of a filter cigarette was getting as much or more nicotine and tar as he would have gotten from a regular cigarette. pt3678, 1966, "the illusion of filtration is as important as the fact of filtration. give the smoker a psychological crutch. intercept him or her on the way to quitting." goes back to 1954, the frank statement. okay? 4166 they got together and they made promises. they broke them all. they told people -- and, you know, you heard questions about, did your mother ever mention the frank statement? no. she did not mention the title of her history book, but i'm pretty sure she knew who george washington was. okay? the frank statement was meant to get the buzz out. we call it a buzz today. today, you get a buzz out with twitter and other -- other stuff, you know. social media. back then, you did it with newspapers that had circulations that were large enough. they put an ad in over 400 newspapers. every city that had a population or a circulation over 25,000. and that was a big deal. and it was reprinted and talked about and they made promises. our products are not injurious to health. they lied. they said, if we ever find out something that is addictive or -- i'm sorry -- anything that is injurious in our product, we will take it out. they said the public health was paramount. it was not. they lied. people relied on that, okay? it continued. and you can look at all of these 4167 exhibits. i will not sit here and read all of them to you. but i want to talk about this letter. if we go back, in the right-hand corner, there is a letter to a fifth grade class in 1990. "a number of your fifth grade students have written r.j. reynolds commenting that they do not feel our company should allow the use of our brand names on children's toys and candy cigarettes." and then they go on to deny a link between smoking and cancer. and they say that they still need -- that there are many unanswered controversies surrounding smoking and the fundamental causes of diseases often statistically associated with smoking. we believe those questions -- and i'm paraphrasing -- can only be determined through much more scientific research. "our company intends, therefore, to continue to support such research in a continuing answer -- in a continuing search for answers. we appreciate your passing this information along to your students." i mean, if it were not so serious, it would be comical. their research were their tobacco fronts with their paid-for researchers. and they were not interested in the truth. they were interested in continuing the controversy. and they wrote to fifth 4168 graders. they wrote to fifth graders. that is reprehensible. they continued to say they did not know. (the video clip was published to the jury in open court as follows:) "take the controversy about cigarettes. in the 91st congress, a house committee heard testimony from leading experts on smoking and health. the record shows that many of the country's most respected doctors openly challenged anticigarette claims. i have to disagree with you in that we do not know what causes the elements that have been attributed to cigarette smoking. cigarette smoking does not cause cancer; yes or no? it is not know known whether cigarettes cause cancer. it has not been causal established. cigarette smoking, no causal relationship between cigarette smoking and emphysema? despite all of the research to date, there has been no causal link established. the case is still open. the jury has not come in. it may not be harmful? you are not convinced? 4169 it may be or it may not be. we do not know. do cigarettes cause cancer? i do not know if they do or not. i'm not in a position to give you a does or does not answer. okay. they agree that smoking causes lung cancer. do you agree? it may. do you know whether it does? i do not. we do not know what causes cancer in general right now, so i think that we may find out it causes cancer and we may find out some relationship which is yet to be proven." (the video clip concluded.) mr. trentalange: so while this is going on, we have the public health community, the surgeon general's office, and they are doing their jobs. they are trying to promote public health. you heard in opening and you heard from dr. cummings about president kennedy commissioning the first "surgeon general's report on smoking and health." and so what happened? that process goes on on the one hand. the public health community is trying to look into these 4170 questions seriously. the tobacco folks are way ahead of them. they are way ahead of them in terms of research and knowing their product. so while it is going on, the surgeon general is trying to save lives. and the cigarette folks are bashing the surgeon general. "in 1972, we believe that the number one problem is the extent to which these officials" -- talking about the surgeon general -- "knowingly mislead the american public." so we got people that are actually misleading the american public and what are they doing? you know, they say the best defense is a good offense, right? they hurl accusations at the surgeon general saying the surgeon general is misleading the american public. okay? 1988, i mean, this is not one isolated event. you heard in opening some of the documents are taken out of context, all that stuff. you got the context. 1988, "claims that cigarettes are addictive are irresponsible and scare tactics." really? 1988. ronald reagan -- the end of ronald reagan's second term. try to remember where you were at that time. okay? 4171 1988. they are still doing it 1972, 1988. bill dwyer in 1979. you saw that cut in evidence where he comments about the surgeon general's report and he talks -- he said something about "god help us if the secretary of hhs ever decides to give up alcohol, because we will all have to be teetotalers." okay? joseph cullman in 1971, he talks about lower-birth-weight babies, and that is okay, because they are just as healthy as the babies of nonsmokers. i mean, it is just -- it is just -- again, it is hard to believe. it is so far out there that with the passage of time, it is hard to believe. but these things really happened. and, of course, the waxman hearings which you have seen several times. so they are on tv, they are taking up oxygen, and they are putting out this message. make no mistake about it, it resonated with people who wanted to hear that kind of message, because it allowed them to continue smoking. it gave them the psychological crutch that they needed. so more likely than not, jane mccabe relied to her detriment on the concealment or omission by rjr of material information not otherwise known or available, or their failure to disclose material 4172 facts concerning the health or addictive nature of smoking. more likely than not, r.j. reynolds' agreement to conceal information about the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes or both was a legal cause of her death. okay. we know that. we know that they spent a ton of money on advertising. we know that tens of millions of people died while they were perpetrating their campaign of deceit. okay. think about what they would have done, think about what would have happened if they did what they said they were going do on the frank statement. if they put public health paramount. there would have been no room left for controversy, there would have been no debate, there would have been no doubt, and nobody would have been able to, with any kind of intellectual honesty, engage in denial. there would have been a clear and present danger. there would have been the highest threat level. there would have been maximum deterrence, maximum motivations. okay. think about asbestos. nobody could create a controversy about that. that is why it is not used anymore. if they would have done what they said 4173 they would have done, this would not have happened. we would be living in a different world. so these are the people that were involved. this is not an isolated event. these are not documents taken out of context. these are all the people and this is who they did it to. and you could pick a mosaic. you know, they have done t-shirts with, you know, individual pictures of people to form a big picture, you know, like the iraq war dead or something like that with a number. you could do a mosaic with all the faces of the millions of people that died due to what the cigarette companies did. and you could cover several buildings in tampa with that mosaic of pictures that size. okay. you know, kind of like the aids quilt. you could do a quilt with a little photograph like that. if you had a photograph that size, for everybody that smoking and the cigarette industry killed by their deceit, you could blanket tampa. this is just one of those people. she is just one. it is just like you landed on that picture on the composite and you got to hear about the jane mccabe case. but there are millions of other cases just like it. and that is -- 4174 mr. belasic: objection, your honor. mr. trentalange: -- that is something -- mr. belasic: objection. millions of other cases. there certainly are not. the court: let us move on, please. mr. trentalange: there is something you get to consider. it is a specific jury instruction. you get to consider the harm to others in determining reprehensibility. so i'm telling you this so you can realize the harm to others that happened in this case. that happened by this deceit and this concealment. and, again, this is that cause instruction. it is the same instruction. you will see it repeated over and over again. okay. can i get the elmo? mr. philipson: it is in your system. mr. trentalange: oh, it is? okay. never mind. so this is the same instruction. i'm not going to go over it again. you get the picture. so the cigarette industry has spent a quarter of a trillion dollars -- trillion, t-r. i do not say that often. that number is a big number. a quarter of a trillion dollars. $250 billion on cigarette 4175 advertising. in this case, they are going to argue to you that it made no difference for jane mccabe. think about that. you heard those guys. those are pretty smart guys. they went to good schools. they are intelligent, good businessmen. okay? they are definitely concerned about their bottom line, right? you saw the documents where they are talking about profitability. these are not people that throw money away on things that do not work. and you will see documents in evidence, they are back there, where they evaluate the effectiveness of their advertising campaign and they say that it works. you saw that graph of smoking that we went to and we saw the dip and then we saw the campaign after they got together at the plaza hotel, put out the frank statement. you saw how sales went back up. that is not an accident, folks. you know, it went back up in response to the advertising. now, they denied cause and effect on cancer. they are going to deny cause and effect on advertising. there is a cause and effect. okay? what the industry concealed. tobacco industry counsel and committee for tobacco research. 4176 that is what those initials stand for. they launched that conspiracy in 1953. hired hill & knowlton to put out the pr for them. they hired scientists and doctors to mislead the public about the health effects and addictive nature of smoking. they misled the surgeon general. the surgeon general relied on the industry that it was regulating for some information. and they misled the surgeon general. they had already studied nicotine and knew it was highly addictive. they studied and targeted teenage smokers. and they knew that 80 to 90 percent of all smokers start as teenagers. they still do. they knew that fifty percent of all smokers would die from a smoking-related illness. think about that. one out of every two regular smokers, all smokers, i'm sorry, die from a smoking-related illness. think about an airline industry where half of the flights crash. mr. belasic: objection, your honor. the court: move on, please. mr. belasic: approach. the court: approach the bench, please. 4177 (the following bench conference took place outside the hearing of the jury:) mr. belasic: all right. so with mr. trentalange here in the week of hearings we had with judge barbas, we specifically talked about his use of the airline crash analogy. and that was in the evers case. specifically talked about it with him here. judge barbas ruled that out. mr. trentalange: can i see what he is pointing at? mr. belasic: there is the quote where he ruled it out. all right. second, your honor, it is even worse. when they gave us their demonstratives, one of the very last demonstratives was the jumbo jet going down, 400,000 deaths. during opening, we gave that to baron and asked that he take it out and showed him the barbas ruling, the judge barbas ruling. i'm sorry. baron took it out. so baron, their assistant, takes it out and then this lawyer gets up and violates judge barbas's ruling. so we move for a mistrial. mr. trentalange: judge -- the court: mr. trentalange. mr. trentalange: what we were talking about in 4178 those hearings was a demonstrative aid. we had a picture of a jet. okay. in the evers case -- the court: that is been removed. mr. trentalange: that is been removed. the court: very good. mr. trentalange: that is what we agreed to remove. the court: i'll deny the motion for mistrial and give a curative instruction. thank you. mr. trentalange: and for the record, your honor, i object to the curative instruction. the court: i'll note your objection. mr. trentalange: and if i could, for the record, point out that argument that that was improper argument was raised in the case of rjr vs. evers. it went up to the second district court of appeal, they argued that was improper, and the second district court of appeal rejected that argument. so that argument has been specifically proved -- the court: they can reject it again if they want to. that is fine. that is their job. thank you. (end of bench conference.) the court: ladies and gentlemen, the reference 4179 to a jumbo jet is improper. jury is to disregard it. let us move on, please. mr. trentalange: so think about this industry that knows that fifty percent of its smokers are going to die from a smoking-related illness. think about an industry that knew that smoking was killing half a million americans every year and persisted in telling lies about its product. now, one of the things that is determined once you find out class membership and you decide that r.j. reynolds' products caused ms. mccabe's lung cancer and death are the negligence and strict liability counts. and you are entitled to assess punitive damages based on that as well, so consider the fact that they manipulated the levels of nicotine to keep smokers addicted and buying their cigarettes. that is separate and apart from the conspiracy or the concealment, the deliberate manipulation of nicotine levels. there is 70 cancer-causing agents in every puff of smoke jane mccabe inhaled. there are 9,000 chemicals like arsenic, cadmium, and phenols in cigarette smoke. rjr knew that filtered cigarettes were no safer and they purposely misled the public 4180 about the safety of filters. we have already talked about that. so let us talk about whether or not it was okay for ms. mccabe to rely upon the statements of the cigarette smokers -- i'm sorry -- the cigarette companies. let us talk about whether she reasonably relied and whether they expected her to reasonably rely on those statements. (the video clip was published to the jury in open court as follows:) "throughout your tenure with american, it was not only american's position, but your position, that cigarettes were not injurious to health. is that accurate? through my tenure? yes. yes, that is so. that is something american tobacco wanted the public to believe; is that correct? yes. it is a statement that american tobacco takes great reliance on? we issued that statement, yes. we want them to believe it. as far as you are concerned, a person is 4181 justified in relying on that statement? yes." (the video clip concluded.) mr. trentalange: that was the american tobacco company's ceo at the time. and r.j. reynolds has taken over and is responsible for american tobacco company. so in terms of the concealment, conspiracy to conceal, you should check "yes" on both questions based on the overwhelming evidence in this case. so now we get to damages. and this is where we shift gears. we stop looking at the tobacco company, r.j. reynolds, and their conspirators, and we shift focus to the victims of their conduct. and we have to look at the compensatory damages in this case. and under the law, each surviving child is entitled to compensatory damages. compensatory damages are different than punitive damages, because they focus on the person who is harmed. okay? mrs. mccabe is not the person that was harmed in this case, although clearly she was harmed for purposes of punitive damages. but the people that you have to compensate are the survivors under the wrongful death act. the survivors are defined in that statute as 4182 her children. and they are adults and grown up now, because this happened so long ago, but the court has explained to you that is the way this case has shaked out. okay. that is nobody's fault. so compensatory damages in this case are pain and suffering, loss of companionship, relationship. and damages in this case are meant to fix what can be fixed, put back what can be put back, and make up for what cannot be fixed or put back. this is jane mccabe. those are her children when they were young. those are her children when they were older. i put this up here because there is a tendency to detach one's self from people involved in this case. it is called cognitive dissonance. it is almost a defense mechanism. when you deal with painful subjects, the tendency is to minimize or look away. we talk about jane mccabe and her family in the abstract. i want you to remember these are real people with real emotions and real feelings. they eat, they sleep, they go to the bathroom, they do all the things people do. they have got dreams and aspirations and they are real. they are not just a name on a page or a verdict form. and they have been living all this time since their mother died and 4183 since you saw them in the courtroom. and they have been experiencing ranges of emotion during that period of time. i put these pictures up here to remind me to remind you of that. so i want to tell you the time for sympathy is over. we told you this is not about sympathy for or against either party. this is the time for compensating harms and losses. this is the time where you award damages in dollars to fairly and adequately compensate each of the survivors. and i put the estate, but that is wrong. the estate does not have any monetary claim for the harms and losses they suffered. now, your job is to weigh only the harms and losses in this case. you cannot consider any outside factors. so if somebody says that is too much money for one person, remind them their verdict has to be based on the law and the evidence, not any outside factors. if somebody says that is going to change the way they live, remind them that is not a proper consideration. your verdict has to be based on the evidence and you just have to weigh the harms and losses. compensate. words mean things. sometimes we 4184 use them without remembering what they mean. compensate comes from the latin "compensare," hang at the same level, scaled to hang at the same level. so what you are doing is putting the harms and losses on one side of the scale and you are putting an amount of money on the other side of the scale that causes the scale to hang at the same level in terms of putting back things you can put back, fixing things that can be fixed. and if you cannot fix it or put back, putting an amount of money in there that makes up for the fact that you cannot fix it or put it back. so -- i'm sorry. let me go back to these questions. so let us talk about these people. you heard them testify. and you get to decide the amount of damages that is appropriate for each of them. and here is my suggestion to you. each of them, you saw, reacted differently and testified differently. so i do not know whether you want to award the same amount for each one of them. i think if you make an individual determination of the damages for each individual survivor, that is the best thing to do. and then talk among yourselves about what amount is appropriate. 4185 this is a substantial case, this is a big case, these are serious damages, and i think -- this is a suggestion to you -- that you work in a range between two and a half and three and a half million dollars per survivor, so that you work in that range. they are all her children, they were all affected differently, but that is probably a good range to work within for each survivor. you heard mr. mccabe. the questions are -- i just did not write out the question for each one of them. but the question is going to be the same for each one of them on the verdict form. the total amount of any damages sustained by jim mccabe, james mccabe, for the loss of parental companionship, instruction and guidance, and for his pain and suffering as a result of her death. let me talk just a little bit about jim mccabe. jim mccabe testified last in the case and he talked about his mother and he talked about visiting her grave. and i just want you to think about what he said and think about the times that he is done that, going early in the morning at times to her grave. and you are there now as we are thinking about it. the air is so still. it aches like the place 4186 in your mouth where the tooth was the day after you went to the dentist or like your heart in your bosom when you stand on the corner waiting for the light to change and you think about the way things were and might still have been if what happened had not happened. that is the kind of ache they feel. that is real. that is compensable. you know, we live in a civil society and this is a civil case, so that people who are injured can do the civil thing and not take the law into their own hands or -- you know, so that they can have their losses addressed by a jury of their peers. so somebody says to you pain and suffering is not real, remember, there are people who during jury selection did not think they could follow the law. the judge sent them home. the law in this case allows for pain and suffering. and there is no more significant loss than death. i mean, that is it. you know, there is a -- there is a clint eastwood movie called unforgiven, and there is a line in that movie where clint eastwood said, "it is a hell of a thing killing a man. you take away all he has and all he will ever have." well, it is a hell of a thing killing a woman with cigarettes that you manufacture. you take away 4187 all that she will have and all she will ever have and you leave a hole in the lives of her children that cannot ever be filled. yeah, that -- things get better. time heals things to a certain extent, but there is a gap. you know, you throw a pebble in a pond and it sends out ripples. and the ripples are still being felt in this case. and you can be cynical and you can be skeptical or you can be sincere in doing your job and looking at the harms caused to this family by this defendant. and i'll tell you something, the instruction about treating corporations the same way as you treat individuals, both are persons in the eyes of the law, amen. treat this corporation the way you would if johnny red -- if johnny reynolds did all these things. if there were a man sitting over there instead of a corporation that did all of these things, i want you to treat that corporation the same way you would treat that man. do not be afraid -- do not let them hide behind a corporate veil. do not give them any different justice. do not give us any different justice, okay, because different justice is injustice. 4188 treat them the same way you would treat a guy off the street who did that, because at the end of the day, they are a person in the eyes of the law. and there is no exception for corporations. if somebody back there says, you know, they are a business, they are a corporation, that is the way they act, you got to expect. no. uh-uh. not in this country. what they did just was not right, whether they are a corporation, a limited liability company, a partnership, or a person. what they did was wrong and what they did hurt people. so those are my suggestions for damages in this case when it comes to compensatory damages. those are damages where the focus is on the survivors to fix what can be fixed. okay? those are compensatory damages. now, we get to question 11, punitive damages. and that is the part where we focus on the defendant and its wrongful conduct and all the evidence that you got to hear about what they did and how they lied. please state whether you find by clear and convincing evidence that punitive damages are warranted against r.j. reynolds tobacco company 4189 under the circumstances of this case. and the jury instruction on clear and convincing evidence is, "clear and convincing is evidence that is precise, explicit, lacking in confusion, and of such weight that it produces a firm belief or conviction, without hesitation, about the matter in issue." he who hesitates is lost. do not get lost. okay? this evidence, if this is not a punitive damages case, then there is not a punitive damages case. okay? the evidence in this case that you heard was that there are 500,000 deaths a year from cigarettes. that is 1369 deaths per day. one out of every two smokers dies prematurely because of cigarette smoke. that is 30 million people over the course of time. 30 million people. that is all -- that is more people than all the wars in the united states history. you could not fill all the veteran cemeteries with the people that have died from smoking. mr. belasic: objection, your honor. improper. the court: let us move on, please. mr. trentalange: that is a lot of people, 30 million. i'm not sure that the human mind can grasp 30 million people. you know, there is a point at 4190 which numbers lose their meaning. 30 million sounds like it is close to 31 million, but it is not. it is a million less than 31 million. so there is a point at which it is really hard, when you are talking about big numbers, to really understand what we are talking about. but if you break it down, 1,369 deaths per day, do the math on how many that is an hour die from cigarette smoke. that goes to their conduct. do you find by clear and convincing evidence that the damages -- that punitive damages are warranted in this case? so ask yourselves, is it okay -- is it okay -- what i tell people that i was responsible for, that i'm supervising, that i'm teaching, that i'm instructing, that i'm coaching, would i tell them it is okay break the rules, would i tell them it is okay to lie about it, would i tell them it is okay to sell a product that kills people? mr. belasic: objection. the court: sustained. let us move on, please. mr. trentalange: is it proper -- mr. belasic: objection, your honor. the court: move on. 4191 mr. trentalange: is it proper to act like that? that -- that is really the question here. what it all boils down to is do they deserve to be punished or do they deserve not to be punished? that is what punitive means, punishing them, trying to get them to not do this anymore and to realize what they did was wrong. that is the purpose of punitive damages, to deter such conduct. okay? you got to think about the conduct in this case and whether or not it needs to be deterred. so ask yourselves, is this conduct okay, is this the kind of conduct that we tolerate in a civilized society, or is it not? do we want people who head corporations to lie, to conceal, to get together with other corporations to lie and conceal, or not? it is up to you. you decide whether this is okay. i'll tell you that if it -- that it is just not okay. it is not okay to act like this under any circumstances. and clear and convincing evidence, you know, one good thing about this instruction is it tells you and highlights and reinforces the greater weight of the evidence is a lesser standard. okay? 4192 because it -- the instruction will tell you and contrast the greater weight of the evidence. greater weight of the evidence is a lighter standard, much lighter, but this standard is met based on the evidence in this case. the only -- the only evidence that you have in this case are the defendant's documents and dr. cummings' testimony about the conspiracy. and you saw the documents. you can read them for yourselves. it is unrefuted, unrefuted testimony about really bad acts over a really long period of time killing a really big number of people. it is as bad as it gets. you cannot engage in hyperbole when you are talking about this conduct, because it is as bad as it gets. you cannot exaggerate how bad this conduct is. so the answer to the question no. 11 is "yes." check that box. and let me just tell you that if you do not check that box, you might as well just give them a gold ribbon, tell them a good job, we approve of what you did. and you cannot tell them that. cannot tell them that. your verdict has to be based on the law and the evidence in this case. it is clear, it is precise, 4193 it is lacking in doubt. they need to be punished for what happened. you know, sometimes -- i told you at the beginning of jury selection, i talked about the symbol, the statue of justice. she is got scales in one hand, she is blindfolded, and she is got a sword in the other. she is got a sword in the other. and this is the time to use the sword. mr. belasic: objection, your honor. inflammatory. mr. trentalange: this is the -- the court: overruled. mr. trentalange: this is the time to use the sword. this is the time to punish wrongful conduct. you folks are the ones to do it. it is a hard job. it is a hard job. but it is the right job. thank you. oh, let me just go through this. this is just a graphic. i think you get the point. you are probably slided out at this point. thank you very much. mr. trentalange: thank you, your honor. may it please the court. folks, i've got a lot of stuff to go over because i want to not waste your time and i want to directly address what was said by counsel. a couple of times you heard the judge say that i'm going to instruct you on that. he gave you instructions. mr. belasic told that you there was no 4330 evidence of prior quit attempts. and, frankly, that is just plain wrong, because you heard testimony from the witness stand from two people who told you that their mother told them that she had quit before. what is with the patch? it went like, what is with the patch, mom? i'm trying to quit. how come you did not tell us? well, i tried before a couple of times, and i was not able to do it. that was given under oath. the evidence in this case consists of the sworn testimony of the witnesses, all exhibits received in evidence, all facts that were admitted or agreed by the parties, and any fact of which the court has taken judicial notice. when a person gets up on that witness stand and subjects themself to perjury charges if he does not tell the truth and tells you something, that is evidence. it does not become not evidence because you are on one side or the other. it is evidence. you can argue against it, you can argue not to believe it, but it is just not right to tell 4331 jury that that is not evidence. that is absolutely evidence. and if you believe it, you can base your decision on it. so that was evidence. that is the first thing. the second thing, let us -- let us talk about the simple truth in this case. and before we get to that, let me just tell you, you know, reasonable is a word that you hear about in the law and common sense. and -- and there was an admission of partial responsibility in this case because the position of the plaintiff in this case is it just would not be reasonable to say that ms. mccabe, as a nurse, smoked for as long as she did and did not bear even 1 percent responsibility. the phrase "it takes two to tango," we believe that. and we are not going to try and put something over on you and make some disingenuous argument or take some position. if you remember the deposition testimony of mr. mccabe, who is not a lawyer, he was a police officer for -- for most of his life, most of his adult life, okay, but he is not a lawyer. so he was asked, do you think that your mom is responsible, in one part of the deposition. 4332 and then a few questions later, i had to stand up and say, rule of completeness, and they read the rest -- or they showed you, took them a while, but they called up that clip -- mr. belasic: objection, your honor. took them a while. the court: sustained. mr. trentalange: i'm just trying to refresh your recollection about the events. but you remember that it was shown to you on a video and there was a gap in between the first questions -- first question and the second question. that is not really that important other than to remind you of what happened. but when he was asked the rule of completeness questions, questions went like, did your mother do everything she could have done to stop smoking? no. she could have done more? yes. he said that back at the time. this is nothing new, folks. this is not a new position that we just decided we were going to take. that is been the position since well before that deposition. okay? so -- because it is just not reasonable when something like this happens. you know, you look for your part in things. and ms. mccabe had a part in it. it would be 4333 disingenuous for us to suggest otherwise. but let us talk about the simple truth about addiction. if you look at this exhibit from -- it is the american journal of psychiatry. they made a big deal about their witness is a psychiatrist. okay? their psychiatrist, i guess, was not aware of this article, but this is from 1963, "heavy cigarette smokers thus appear to be true addicts." she said the heaviness of smoking does not impact whether or not you are addicted. well, it does to the people who publish the american journal of psychiatry, a peer-reviewed publication. "heavy cigarette smokers thus appear to be true addicts." it is a drug addiction. it is got different withdrawal symptoms. you know, you do not get cirrhosis from smoking. so, you know, you do not get dts from smoking. you get a different set of symptoms when you are withdrawing from cigarette smoke. next slide. doctor -- you want to talk about reasonableness? now, this is a medical doctor. and remember, dr. herkov is not a medical doctor, 4334 but he is a professor -- former professor, used to be professor at the university of florida. he taught psychiatrists during their residency. now, as you can tell, dr. barnett did not go to the university of florida medical school, because if she did, she would not be testifying as she represented here, that somebody who smoked five packs a day for a long period of time was not addicted. mr. belasic: objection, your honor. there is no basis in the evidence for that. the court: sustained. mr. trentalange: your honor, she testified to that. the court: i realize that. but the university of florida comment. let us move on. mr. trentalange: okay. she went to the university of south florida. she was never a student of dr. herkov. dr. herkov taught at the university of florida. sorry. she went to the university of south alabama medical school. she did her internship and residency at university of south florida. if i misspoke, i was saying she never took dr. herkov's class, okay? but he did teach medical students. 4335 so you have to ask yourself is that reasonable, does that make common sense? i mean, you could smoke five packs a day for decades and not be addicted, when the journal of psychiatry say that heavy smokers appear to be addicted, true drug addiction? next slide. okay. this legal cause business, i mean, the instruction is as straightforward as that could be. it has to be a legal cause, natural and continuous sequence. i mean, if you want to try and create doubt, you can create doubt. but remember, it is the greater weight of the evidence. you can have as many doubts as you want. you cannot speculate about what would have happened if. we have the facts in this case, and they are what they are. okay? she smoked for a long time because she was addicted. "she" being ms. mccabe. smoked for a long time. started when she was either 11 or 14 or somewhere in between. that is the evidence from somebody who was there with her. and that is romayne mccabe. she said she does not know if it was her first cigarette, but she was there when a whole group of them were smoking about around age 11. she is 87 4336 or 88 years old right now. she is not clear on that. but she knows, certainly by high school she was smoking a half a pack or more a day. so that is the testimony, that is the evidence, and that is consistent with the behavior in this case and what happened. it takes heavy smoking to cause lung cancer. but for the addiction, if she was not addicted to nicotine, would she have smoked two to three packs a day for approximately 53 years -- that is a hundred plus pack-years -- and developed lung cancer? common sense tells you no. people who are not addicted do not continue to smoke cigarettes for 50-plus years. next slide, please. concurring cause. it does not have to be the only cause. defense counsel gave you a bunch of examples, hypotheticals. the evidence in this case suggests the possibility of other causes, that she smoked when she was stressed or because of her divorce. but there could be more than one cause. you do not escape responsibility because somebody else contributed to the harm or something else contributed to the harm. that is not the way it works. that is why we have this concurring 4337 cause instruction. there could be more than one cause. next slide. our burden is the greater weight of the evidence, the more persuasive and convincing force and effect of the entire evidence in this case more likely than not. if you were on the street and somebody asks you about someone that smokes cigarettes for 50-plus years and got lung cancer, how hard would it be to decide that question? here, you have got the benefit of evidence. it is even easier to answer that question. and it is just tipping the scales. this is not about whether there are doubts or whether you can come up with theories that are not supported by the evidence to suggest some other cause. next slide. believability of witnesses. that is the instruction. look for it. i'm not going to read it all to you because i do not have enough time, frankly, to do that. so let us go to the next slide. but these are the folks that have testified. and you have got to ask yourself, who do you believe? in addition to the lay witnesses, 4338 dr. herkov has published in peer-reviewed journals. he is a co-author of a book chapter on nicotine addiction. he is a former university of florida professor, taught psychiatry residents, taught nurses, taught physician assistants. he evaluates professionals on the issues of substance abuse for state agencies. he is done competency evaluations in murder cases. he told you about that. and literally, he is made decisions that affect people's lives and death -- life and death. that is one of the folks that testified that ms. mccabe was addicted. now, he does not treat, but he refers. and the reason we did not bring a treatment person is because ms. mccabe did not get treatment. she is dead. okay? this is not a case about whether the treatment was appropriate or what treatment was warranted. this is a question about identifying whether or not she was addicted. and dr. herkov is an expert at identifying whether people are addicted and then making the appropriate referral, precisely because he cannot prescribe medication and he is not a medical doctor, but he is somebody that identifies whether or not people are addicted. 4339 dr. cummings, you heard about him. he is treated over 10,000 patients for nicotine addiction. 10,000 patients, published 450 or more peer-reviewed articles. he is a contributor to almost every surgeon general report since 1988. and you can read the rest of it. and then you have got dr. barnett, who touted the fact that she was board certified in forensic psychiatry and board certified in addiction psychiatry. but she is so up on those two specialties that she let her certification lapse for four years and, i think, five years, respectively. and she is certified in geriatric psychiatry, addiction psychiatry, forensic psychiatry, and general psychiatry. so if you have got four specialties, how can you really be a specialty in one thing? you know that phrase, "jack of all trades, master of none"? she is also involved with a sleep apnea program now, and she spends fifty percent of her time testifying in tobacco cases. before 2007, she would never written or published on tobacco issues, cigarette and health issues, nor has she done so since. but she met with tobacco attorneys, 4340 prepared for two years to testify, and now that is what she does. and i'm not calling her a liar. i'm just saying that she is influenced by the fact that she is being paid. i do not know if it is a chicken and egg thing; i do not know which came first; i do not know whether she was predisposed to testify the way that she did, whether she had those preexisting beliefs on addiction and that is why they went to her and met with her or vice versa. but i do know that her qualifications do not stand up and her opinion testimony does not fit with the rest of the evidence in the case and it is counter to common sense. next slide, please. nicotine addiction is the most substantial ingredient in their business. and these are documents, okay? i showed them to you before. but nicotine addiction is a big deal. and they know about the addictive properties of nicotine, and they denied it over and over again. and i guess the argument with respect to reliance is, we are so unbelievable -- believe us now when we tell you that we were so unbelievable that nobody would believe us when we spoke. that is basically 4341 argument. and nobody would believe us. next slide. so this idea that reynolds cooperated with the public health authorities, okay, this is the rest of that story. this was the -- the tobacco working group was the public health group that was looking into safer cigarettes. and this is from philip morris -- i'm sorry -- from r.j. reynolds about their participation with the tobacco working group. and here's their plan. "after careful consideration of the views of the tobacco working group" -- that is the twg -- "of the tobacco institute staff with regard to the public relations and political effects of the public withdrawal from" -- i'm sorry -- "tobacco working group. it was concluded that the research directors cannot withdraw. we should take steps to give the industry as much protection as is possible and, at the same time, remain in the tobacco working group. to best meet this goal, a three-point proposal was adopted." so they are going to give the industry as much protection by staying in this government group as possible. "when called by gori" -- that is the government guy -- "scientific directors declined 4342 to concur with or comment on gori's recommendations. remind gori that the scientific director's role is to provide expertise with respect to tobacco and smoke chemistry. some companies will decline to respond other than in writing and will state the above in their letters. dr. gori should also be informed that the scientific director does not accept the premise that smoking is harmful." so that is their cooperation. and then they say, "scientific directors will informally try to persuade gori to eliminate or modify those proposals which are propaganda oriented rather than scientific, e.g." -- that is for example -- "cessation clinics." so in 1973, they are talking about how she never went to a cessation clinic, she never tried to quit. their cooperation is they are working with this government agency and they have got their people at the group and their people have an agenda. and the agenda is, let us try and privately get rid of what they call propaganda. and they are talking about cessation clinics as propaganda. that is how they are cooperating. next slide. 4343 this has to do with filter. okay. "today's filter-tipped lower tar and nicotine cigarettes produce lower rates of lung cancer than do their higher tar and nicotine predecessors." that is the '81 surgeon general's report. the surgeon general did not have their documents yet, folks. the surgeon general did not get to see what you saw. that is why the surgeon general relied on that cooperation, but did not get the whole story. okay? and this is what they knew. "health filter may have some prestige value. the public has been conditioned to accept the filtered effects of charcoal in other fields, and when charcoal was added to cigarette filters, it proved to be an effective advertising gimmick. filter-tipped smokers, health reasons are apparently the primary reason, at least the stated reason, for smoking filtered tips. the tabulations reveal the highest interest in trying filter-tipped cigarettes is shown among the younger smokers. health factors again show up as the basic reason for people trying them." next slide. but we know what the surgeon general did not know, because he did not get to see these 4344 documents. "the illusion of filtration is as important of the fact of filtration. in most cases, however, the smoker of a filtered cigarette was getting as much or more nicotine and tar than he would have gotten from a regular cigarette. he had abandoned the regular cigarette, however, on the grounds of reduced risk to health." so this is what the surgeon general did not see. this is the point they pulled the wool over the public health authority's eyes. that is why this is so outrageous and needs to be punished. okay? and you are supposed to treat them the same way you treat an individual. does not matter if people changed jobs at the corporation. the corporation is the same corporation, just like an individual is the same individual. does not matter that it was a long time ago and that they are regulated now. the point is, they were not regulated for years and they got away with this stuff. next slide. is that it? okay. so this is a review of internal reports regarding cigarette smoke, ph, and sales trends, 6/24/96. okay. '96, remember. 4345 program 247, legal and regulatory responses. they are in litigation at the time this is written. okay? so let us look at the date on that first. back in december of 1969, they said, "invalidation of some reports in the research department. we do not foresee any difficulty in the event a decision is reached to remove certain reports from research files. once it becomes clear that such action is necessary for the successful defense of our present and future suits, we will promptly remove all such reports from our files." so if there is litigation, they are going to do a document dump; what we would call shredding today. we will remove them from the files if we need to. "as an alternative to invalidation, we can have the authors rewrite those sections of the reports which appear objectionable." folks, that is what they did in litigation in 1996. mr. belasic: objection, your honor. there is absolutely no evidence of that. the court: the jury will rely on their recollection of the evidence and the instructions 4346 of law that i give them. mr. trentalange: you get to make inferences and reach deductions -- make deductions. when somebody tells you that they need to -- if they need to, if they get in litigation, to rewrite a report and then you have a report like that while they are in litigation, i'd submit to you that it is a fair inference that they did what they told you they were going to do. these are the documents. these are the things that they said to each other when they thought no one would ever find out. these are the things they say when nobody's listening. next slide. in terms of the stuff -- we saw that reference to carcinogens. "carcinogens are found in practically every class of compound in smoke. present technology does not permit selective filtration of particulate smoke." those documents are in evidence. "none of the chemical substances listed therein, to our knowledge, has been found by scientific research to be harmful to the health of the smoker in amounts reported in smoke." when he told you they disclosed the list of 4347 carcinogens, they also told the folks that they were disclosing those carcinogens to that "none of the chemical substances listed, to our knowledge, has been found by the scientific research to be harmful to the health of the smoker in the amounts reported in smoke." that was a lie. that was an outright lie. so they listed the carcinogens, he is right, but it is a partial truth and it leaves out the fact that they also said that in the amounts in the cigarette smoke, it was not cancer causing. and they knew that was false. now, is that the kind of information that somebody who is going to smoke relies upon? absolutely. this is going to give you cancer versus this is not going to give you cancer. next slide. awareness versus belief. and mr. belasic showed you polls about awareness. have you heard or read a story about smoking causing cancer? that is like, have you heard or read a story about aliens? everybody's heard or read a story about aliens. that is a different question from whether you believe there are aliens; right? so let us look at what the figures were. have 4348 you heard or read anything about ufos? yes, ninety percent; no, ten percent. but do you believe in ufos? pt2050, our 1970 public opinion survey, showed that a majority, 52 percent, believed that cigarettes are only one of many causes of smokers having more illnesses. it also showed that half of the people who believed that smokers have more illness than non-smokers accepted the constitutional hypothesis as the explanation. in other words, it is just something in them, the way they are made up. next slide. so i'm going to jump to something else while we pull that up. let us talk about cause and effect and what happens, all right? this is in evidence. we showed this to you. this is total cigarette consumption, male lung cancer rate, female lung cancer rate. okay? they are talking about whether or not something would make a difference. we know it made a difference. this is the mouse paintings right here. this is when the report comes out in life magazine. we see that downward trend. 4349 this is when they start their campaign, the fraud, deception, deceit, concealment. this is when the meeting takes place and we see a spike in cigarette sales. okay. every time a bad news story comes out, they respond with a publicity campaign. every single time. so we know it works. and with respect to filters having health benefits, well, if that is true, then when the filters came out and took off, you would expect the cancer rate to drop. but it did not drop. the cancer rate keeps going up. the cancer rate keeps going up until this drop right here, okay? and then it trails off because it lags behind cigarette smoking. so there is the evidence and what happened as a result of their campaign of advertising. and brand usage has been established through testimony. there is no question about it. rely on your recollection. obviously, people did not remember things as clearly when they were younger or when they were not around and they had to rely on habit and practice. but these were the brands that were involved. and every single brand except merit, 85 percent of her cigarette smoking, was 4350 manufactured by the defendant in this case. so let us talk about ctr. and by the way, ctr was disbanded. why would you disband something if it was such a good thing? it was disbanded. ctr began as an organization called tobacco industry research council. it was set up as an industry shield in 1954. ctr has helped our legal -- this is one of their documents. they are saying it was set up as an industry shield. "ctr" -- that is committee for tobacco research -- "has helped our legal counsel by giving advice and technical information which was needed at court trials." ctr supplied spokesmen. okay. "bill shinn feels that special progress are the best way that monies are spent on these projects. ctr has acted as a front." their words, not mine. it is pt2268 if you want to look at that document for yourself. next slide. while you are doing that, let me talk about damages. mr. belasic, i guess, had some problem with my suggested -- suggestion to you of 4351 two-and-a-half to three-and-a-half million for each surviving child. i told you that was a range that i was suggesting you to work in, that you should rely upon your own recollection of the evidence. he did not give you any suggested range, okay, other than zero. i do not think zero is borne out by the evidence. this is a significant loss. this is a significant case. we spent significant time talking about it, and we are talking about significant damages in the case. you have been given no other suggested amount. so if you think that those amounts are too high, lower them. if you think that they are too low, raise them. i defer to your collective judgment. you are going to get an instruction that the -- the only instruction is that there is no precise standard for these damages. you should amount an award that is fair and just in light of the evidence. so that is what the law is. and if that instruction is lacking, i apologize, but that is the actual instruction. it is not an easy thing to do. fair and just in light of the evidence. 4352 for nearly 20 years, this industry has employed a single strategy to defend itself on three major fronts; litigation, politics, and public opinion. while the strategy was brilliantly conceived and executed over the years, helping us win important battles -- and it is only fair to say that it is not, nor was it intended to be, a vehicle for victory. it is a holding strategy. it is and has always been. and what is that strategy consist of? no. 1, creating doubt about the health damage without actually denying awards. let us talk about the warnings. the federal trade commission, june 30th, 1967. the effectiveness of cigarette labeling. there is virtually no evidence that the warning statement on cigarette packages has any significant effect. they knew it was not going to have any significant effect. the clerk: five-minute warning, counsel. mr. trentalange: they know it does not have any significant effect, but it is a real good thing to say when you are in between saying "choice," you say "choice" as many times as you want or can, and then you throw in something about the labels, it is 4353 got surface appeal. but anybody who knows anything about addiction knows that addicts look for things that support their addiction, look for the psychological crutch. they knew it. they knew it and they acted upon it, and they pat themselves on the back about it. and this information was out there in 1967. next slide. mr. philipson: that is the next one. mr. trentalange: okay. that is the last one? mr. philipson: no, there is one more. mr. trentalange: okay. the failure of the warning statement on packages to have any discernable effect on cigarette consumption is easily explainable. the warning statement on the package alone has proved to be ineffective mainly because few people seem to pay attention to it. romayne mccabe testified to that. you saw her deposition. they did not play all of it, but they told you, or she told you, that she did not pay any attention to the warnings. they call them warnings even when the first one was only a caution, not a warning. 4354 1981, ftc report on advertising. they say that we cannot point to a specific statement, okay? "there are two major objective indicia of the ineffectiveness of the current warning discussed in detail below. first, staff's investigation of consumer knowledge has demonstrated a substantial portion of the public remains uninformed about the hazards of smoking. "second, tests conducted by the ftc indicate that the warning is neither noticed nor read by the vast majority of people." so real briefly, to award punitive damages on no. 11, you do not have to find either concealment or conspiracy. there is strict liability in this case for making a defective product. and if the conduct is reprehensible, you can still get to question 11 on the verdict form. now, the evidence in this case should dictate that you answer "yes" to questions 4 and 5 -- did i say question no. 11, the last question? fraud and conspiracy, those questions should be answered "yes." now, there is something called blanketing the airwaves or flooding the airwaves and the wallpaper effect. the federal trade commission 4355 did a staff report. cigarette advertising reaches virtually all americans who can either read or understand the spoken word. cigarettes are advertised on both network and spot television, on radio and magazines and newspapers and outdoor media and by means of many types. so pervasive is cigarette advertising that it is virtually impossible for americans of almost any age to avoid cigarette advertising. as stated above, youth is also exposed to cigarette advertising. during the week of january 11th, '67, the aforementioned 60 network programs played before 322.7 million viewers under the age of 21 years. these included 151.1 million viewers age 2 through 12 and 141 million viewers age 13 through 7 -- 17. folks, if she ever read even one sentence in reader's digest -- and given the paucity of articles that -- that were available during the applicable timeframe, she clearly was exposed to cigarette advertising. and romayne mccabe said in her -- in her testimony, that the reason both she and jane mccabe started smoking was because it was glamorous. they saw it depicted as glamorous in 4356 the movies, okay? so there is direct and indirect evidence, what is called circumstantial evidence. fingerprints are circumstantial evidence. dna is circumstantial evidence. you do not have to have eyewitness testimony to prove a case. you can have circumstantial evidence. circumstantial evidence does not have bias or interest or any of those things that eyewitnesses have. the circumstantial evidence in this case is what they did and what she did in response to it and what everybody else in the country did. now, i've got about 40 seconds to tell you something, so i'll talk even quicker. this stuff is outrageous. this is really, really bad conduct that took place over a really long period of time. and just saying choice and trying to blame the smoker for what she did should not absolve the tobacco company of any responsibility for what it did over a long period of time. those people that -- that they said were lessons to mrs. mccabe, her uncles, they killed them with cigarettes. they killed yul brynner. 4357 mr. belasic: objection. the court: sustained. mr. trentalange: they died of cigarette smoking-related diseases, as did yul brynner, as did edward r. murrow, as did all the other people that you heard about, and the rest of the 30 million dead. that is reprehensible conduct. this choice thing, just like they said back in their documents, they cannot really effectively argue choice if the smoker is addicted. and this smoker was addicted. and that was their plan all along. i thanked you at the beginning of my opening statement. i said we would walk together on the path towards justice for jane mccabe. now, i'm going to have to leave you. you are going to have to take the rest of that walk on your own. i urge you to do the right thing, and i wish you god speed.