mr. belasic: thank you, your honor. way back when we started this case, a couple minutes into opening statement, i told you the following, that -- what if smoking was the cause of her lung cancer? that is not really at issue in this case. and the issue in this case is, was addiction to cigarettes the legal cause of her disease. mr. trentalange says they presented two medical experts, schiff and villa. and they talked about the medical cause of her disease and they said 4199 smoking causes cancer, cancer was the cause of her death. that is not really at issue. there is not a dispute about that. what is at issue is what you are going to decide here: "was jane mccabe addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine and, if so, was addiction a legal cause of her lung cancer and death?" if you look at this question, it has the word "and" in it. the first question is actually two questions. first, was she addicted? but then even if you find that she was addicted under whatever definition you choose to apply was she addicted, was the addiction a legal cause of her lung cancer and death? and so the issue in this case, and the premier issue, the first issue, is not whether smoking caused the cells in her lung to change or whether smoking caused her lung cancer and lung cancer caused her death. that is not in dispute. the issue is not the medical cause, but whether addiction was the legal cause of her lung cancer and death. now, you heard this morning, well, that addiction is a choice. choice has nothing to do with addiction. ladies and gentlemen, i suggest that the evidence you heard is exactly to 4200 opposite, because you have to decide if addiction was the legal cause of her death. and if she had the ability to quit, if she had the ability to choose to quit and to choose to continue, then addiction did not cause her lung cancer and death. now, why do i say that? every one of the family members, the family members who testified -- and including romayne mccabe, the sister-in-law -- said either that it was jane mccabe's own business to smoke or that they regarded it as her personal decision to smoke. those were the family members, including the five family members who are suing, we now know, for between 12 and a half million and 17 and a half million dollars. and those family members said that they regarded it as her personal business or her personal decision. now, how strong was the belief of the family members, mr. mccabe, the four daughters, romayne mccabe? well, we know how strong it was because, first, they told you over and over again, we saw from the fact witnesses, they did not tell their mother to quit smoking, not once. they did not tell her smoking was dangerous, not once, except for five-year-old granddaughter jenna. now, why did not they do that? no one is 4201 blaming them. they do not have to warn her. but why did not they do that? and that is when they told us under oath, they did not tell her to quit smoking and they did not warn her to quit smoking, even though they thought she was addicted, because it was her business, because it was her personal decision. now, those are not words that some tobacco lawyer cooked up. i did not write them down on a notepad and come in here. that was the testimony of the people who loved her. so the people who now say that they should receive between 12 and a half million and 17 and a half million dollars are the same people who told you under oath that it was their own mother's personal business or their own mother's personal decision. and i'm going to go over that testimony later. mr. trentalange: before you do, i have an objection, your honor. may we approach? the court: approach the bench. (the following bench conference took place outside the hearing of the jury:) mr. trentalange: judge, there was a pretrial ruling on blaming the victims. that is exactly what just happened. he is blaming the victims for failing to warn their mother and pointing out that they are 4202 going to get compensation and suggesting they should not get compensation because they are the same people that failed to warn their mother. the court: that is not how i heard the argument. mr. trentalange: that is how i heard it, and that is why i'm objecting. the court: okay. overruled. mr. trentalange: you are overruling the objection. okay. (end of bench conference.) mr. belasic: we talked about dominoes this morning -- or you heard about dominoes. let us talk about addiction and a legal cause. what does addiction mean? how does addiction cause cancer? you are going to hear later -- dr. cummings told us nicotine does not cause lung cancer, so we know it is not a direct cause. how does addiction cause cancer under their theory? well, dr. schiff, dr. herkov, dr. cummings -- not dr. schiff -- they say, well, addiction is the reason she smoked. but you did not hear any evidence that addiction prevented her from quitting. addiction did not force her to go to the store and buy a pack of cigarettes. it did not force 4203 her to light the cigarette. it did not force her to put it in her mouth. and when you consider that -- put aside the expert testimony. the people who knew her and saw her, the children, romayne mccabe, they thought it was her business and her decision. so the suggestion is, well, addiction makes you smoke, and then smoking causes the cancer and it is just a straight line. well, it is not a straight line. now, i love dominoes. i did not know we would talk about dominoes today, so i did not bring enough. if i put dominoes in a giant row here and i stretched them all the way back, if i put the dominoes close enough together, i click over the first domino, we know what happens. all of them go down in a row. but if we do this, if we pull one domino out and there is enough space, five or six dominoes might fall and then none of the rest of them will fall, because it breaks the chain. and the evidence in this case is that mrs. mccabe always had the ability to break the chain. whatever they say is this chain of causation, there is no denying that she had the ability to quit. we know she did. even dr. cummings, even dr. herkov never said 4204 that addiction somehow made it impossible to quit. remember what they talked about? well, addiction is smoking a lot of cigarettes, addiction is smoking last thing at night, addiction is smoking first thing in the morning. they did not say, because they could not say, that it was impossible for her to quit. and the people that knew her best thought whether she could quit and whether she should quit was up to her, that it was her business and her decision. but, yet, they are the same people that are suing for money. and i would argue they should not be compensated for their mother's decision. now, there was some talk about sympathy, and then mr. trentalange rightfully suggested that you, of course, cannot base your decision on sympathy. but let us get real. the testimony in a case like this, when you see that a mother died, there is no denying that all five of them loved their mother. no one is suggesting that she was not anything but a good person. and in this world, we all have to face the death of our loved ones, or we all have. and what happens when loved ones die is you usually hear -- 4205 often hear people say things like, i wish he had taken better care of himself, i wish he had watched his weight, i wish he had dieted, if only he had exercised more, wish he had not smoked, wish he had not drank. and that type of hindsight is absolutely natural. and it is absolutely painful to look back in hindsight and say, i wish my loved one would have done something different. well, that is the case here. now they are looking back in hindsight and they are second-guessing a decision that they themselves said was her decision, that they could not make for her. they are second-guessing a decision. and i suggest that when you look at all of the evidence, they should not be getting two or three million dollars each, 12 million or 17 million dollars for what they themselves believe was mrs. mccabe's decision. now, even when mrs. mccabe first started smoking, she knew she was not supposed to smoke. we heard that she and romayne hid their smoking from the parents. we heard from romayne that smoking was prohibited in high school, so she knew right off the bat you are not supposed to smoke; it is barred at 4206 the high school. mrs. mccabe said that they were sneaking around even in high school. by the late '40s, she was in nursing school, and she was at the nursing school that the top lung cancer expert in the country was at. we are going to go over that evidence. she was at the nursing school where ochsner was saying that lung cancer was causing smoking [sic]. this was not hidden. she was right there in school. by the '50s, she was warned by the nuns. and no one says that the nuns gave her health warnings. but we heard very specifically from mr. mccabe, from dr. cummings, the nuns caught her. they gave her a lecture, smoking was a vice. she knew even then she was not supposed to smoke. by the '50s, we know that the lung cancer was in the news. you are going to see the evidence that almost everyone in the country had heard that smoking caused lung cancer. meanwhile, she was doing surgery or assisting in surgery. we know that in the '60s -- and this is 30 years before she developed lung cancer -- she was a county school nurse. and i'm going to show you some of the evidence that suggests that she had to be aware from that job that smoking caused lung 4207 cancer. because in '63, the schools, the same county schools she was the nurse for, were running an anticancer program that even dr. cummings admitted told the kids smoking caused lung cancer. now, did -- do we have a videotape of her attending that? do we have an audio recording of her discussing that? of course not. but come on. she was responsible for the school's nursing program. the same schools that she was the nurse for were running programs telling kids that smoking caused cancer. use your common sense there. there is no way she missed that. there is no way she missed it. the kids were being taught what she already knew. in '64, it was official. we know the surgeon general said that there -- that smoking caused lung cancer. and that was 30 years, 30 years before she got lung cancer. she had 30 years to take that domino out of the chain, 30 years to break the chain. and there is not one expert in this case that said she lacked the ability to do it. and her own kids said that that decision was up to her. now, whatever bad things the tobacco companies did and however upset, if you are, at what the tobacco companies did, that does not change what 4208 kids thought was her decision and what the evidence shows was her ability to quit smoking. 30 years before she develops lung cancer, there is a warning on every single pack. and no one in this case can say -- can pretend that she thought smoking was safe or that she thought smoking was not bad for her, that she thought smoking was not dangerous. it was right there on the pack every day for 30 years. that is a decision our society made. ban cigarettes like florida did at the turn of the century, no. cigarettes are legal. the government requires a warning on the pack. she saw it. we know that she had dramatic personal warnings, dramatic personal examples of what could happen. she took care of uncle george with emphysema. her uncle bernard died of lung cancer. that was almost 30 years before she came down with lung cancer. she knew. there is no one that can dispute that she had firsthand evidence that smoking could kill. the kids all knew that too. and that is how the testimony came out from the children. so they knew it. 4209 mr. mccabe, in fact, said one of the reasons he never smoked was the uncle george experience was so disgusting, left such an impression on him. the kids all knew it. they did not warn her not to smoke. and why? because they believed it was her choice. they knew that she was aware, just like they were. and they left the decision up to her because it was her decision. we know she went into rehab at '69. we know she did not ask anyone. there is no evidence she ever asked anyone for help in quitting smoking. by 1970, there was another warning, and still here, she is 25 years away, 25 years away from that horrible day when she gets diagnosed. 25 years for her to break the chain, 25 years for her to quit. we know she could quit. we know no expert said that addiction stopped her or -- from quitting or forced her to continue. 25 years to break the chain. next one in this evidence shows addiction was not the legal cause of her lung cancer. her decision to smoke for the 40 or 50 years and that smoking was. that is the medical cause. addiction was not a legal cause. 4210 we learned something from one of the children, that mr. mccabe warned his kids in the '70s when she is still smoking. and think about that. that is 20 years before jane mccabe is going to get lung cancer. and her husband is in the same household. they are living together every day. she is seeing him. he is talking about "cancer sticks." we know he, himself, quit ten years earlier. and, again, your common sense and your knowledge of the family, is there any possible way that this trained nurse and addiction professional who saw her own relatives pass away from smoking in the '60s, whose own husband is running around telling the kids about "cancer sticks," can anyone seriously say that she was tricked or deceived? now, did she read every single internal document from a tobacco company, the documents the plaintiff's lawyers want you to be mad at? of course not. but did she know, just like her own husband, that smoking could cause cancer. when she saw uncle bernard go down, did she know it could kill you from emphysema when she saw uncle george pass away? of course she did. the children told us. by '85, there were new pack warnings that were 4211 even more specific. they had no effect on her. and in '93, she quit smoking and she never smoked again. now, at any time in that chain of events, she could have quit smoking. that is what dr. barnett, who is seen hundreds or thousands of substance abuse patients, not just the one, she told you that she had seen up to hundreds or thousands of substance abuse patients, hundreds of patients with smoking issues. and, yes, only one person came in and said, that is the only thing i want. that is the only board certified addiction professional medical doctor in this case. and she told you quite frankly, she has received cases from tobacco companies where she says, this smoker is addicted. you heard that testimony. in the instructions that you will get, you will have the written copy. it says -- right off the bat, there is an instruction on legal product. and, obviously, making cigarettes is legal, selling cigarettes is legal, and advertising cigarettes is legal. and the judge is instructing you, reynolds cannot be held liable -- that means forced to pay money -- merely for manufacturing, selling, or 4212 advertising cigarettes. the companies have a legal right to be in business. now, there is a lot of discussion about the engle findings and this other jury. remember, you are the only jury that is ever heard any evidence about mrs. mccabe. that previous jury did not hear anything about mrs. mccabe. and if you look on this form, you are not going to be asked the same questions the engle jury was. we are not retrying those. this is jane mccabe's trial. the questions on the verdict form are about jane mccabe, jane mccabe, jane mccabe. none of those findings here determine whether or not r.j. reynolds should pay millions of dollars to the children for the death of their mother when they themselves say it was the mother's decision to smoke. now, what did we hear about when she started smoking. and, obviously, the evidence is a bit sketchy. first of all, none of the children, obviously, were there when she started smoking. romayne mccabe was the only person who was there. and romayne tells us, right off the bat, she was not there when mrs. mccabe started smoking. in fact, she said 4213 there was a small group of kids, and she was not sure if she was in it. and i want to go over some of the things that romayne mccabe told us. but first of all, no dispute, romayne mccabe, an elegant, charming woman, she certainly was very candid about what she remembered, what she believed, and what she did not remember. and here's what she said. the first thing she said is that she did not see mrs. mccabe smoke before high school. she said she was not certain. they asked about the group. then mr. uiterwyk asked her, well, what about the eight or ninth grade? turns out mrs. mccabe says, in the eighth or ninth grade, that is when jane mccabe was in orlando. and so the first time she definitely saw her smoke was in high school. now, could she have smoked, stolen a few cigarettes from her parents, snuck some cigarettes at 12 or 13, sure. but when she gets back, she is in tenth grade. and think of that. tenth grade is when you get your driver's license. tenth grade is 15 and 16. after you finish tenth grade, you are two years away from -- from finishing high school. you are not 11 years old in high school, you are not 12 years old in high school. what romayne mccabe said -- and mr. uiterwyk 4214 asked her these questions. he said, was she a regular smoker? she said, well, when the cigarettes were available, when they had money, and she said they were sneaking around. and they had to sneak around because they could not smoke at school. and she said, when they were available, when they had money, they smoked. no one -- no one in this case claimed she was smoking two packs a day in high school. and romayne mccabe says they were sneaking around to smoke even what they could get when they had money. now, romayne said that she personally -- remember, mr. trentalange said she is sort of like a double. and i agree. in some ways, because she is the only one who was there, in some ways, it is almost like romayne mccabe is a proxy for or substitute for jane mccabe. but, you know, let us not be confused. these are two separate people. and romayne mccabe does not know why she started smoking. and, in fact, romayne said she personally never tuned in to cigarette advertising. she said she remembers it in the movies, but she personally was not influenced by advertising. 4215 so we asked her, did jane mccabe ever tell you that she started to smoke or continued smoking? and she answered no. there is no claim from romayne mccabe that an advertisement made jane smoke, let alone an advertisement that was false. because, again, in the 1940s, it was legal to have an ad. now, you look at those ads, and those ads are weird. you think, if they ran today, we would all get mad and maybe you are mad just seeing them, but it was legal to put an ad, it was legal to have, just like everyone else, an ad that had santa. it was legal to put a celebrity in an ad. and there is no evidence that those ads were concealing information way back in the '40s. and i'm going to talk about that in about 30 seconds. now, romayne continued and said, when it came to the movies, she and mrs. mccabe never discussed smoking depicted in the movies. and that is why romayne said she has no idea why mrs. mccabe smoked any particular brand. in fact, she is the only person that could have known and could have had firsthand knowledge what she smoked. and what you heard from her was mrs. mccabe -- jane mccabe's dad smoked unfiltered camels and they snuck some cigarettes. so you get a few unfiltered camels that 4216 they snuck. but then she was asked, well, what brand? she said, i do not remember brand. i did not pay attention to brand. there is no evidence in this case from the eyewitness that she smoked unfiltered camels for any length of time. there is no evidence from any eyewitness that she smoked lucky strikes. there was no evidence from any eyewitness in this case that she ever smoked kent. even dr. cummings, who is just relying on hearsay, even dr. cummings says that kents was just an occasional brand. the people who were there, the only person who was there does not know what she smoked. and romayne was very candid. she said that both she and mrs. mccabe enjoyed smoking. and she said her opinion was based on the decade she knew her, from the 1930s until the 1990s. and she said that ms. mccabe enjoyed smoking. now, we know that mrs. mccabe started smoking sometime in the 1940s. plaintiffs have a conspiracy claim in this case. and it is undisputed, undisputed, as dr. cummings told you, that there was this meeting 4217 at the plaza hotel in new york, december 1953. that is what he said over and over again. what he calls the conspiracy, this agreement, this meeting, was december 1953. she started smoking sometime in the '40s, years before that. now, obviously, there was no way that an action in december 1953 caused her to smoke years before. and when i asked dr. cummings, he agreed with me. we do not have a time machine, so there is no way; it is impossible for what they say is the conspiracy, for this agreement in 1953 to have caused mrs. mccabe to smoke. there is no evidence of any concealment of health information when she started. what dr. cummings talks about is 1953. the documents that he showed you from 1953, '57, '60, there was no evidence in this case that in the 1940s, when ms. mccabe started, that the conspiracy existed. it did not exist for another ten years. there is no evidence in this case that the companies concealed something. and that is plaintiff's burden of proof. dr. cummings did not claim, well, in 1943, you had some duty to tell people that smoking caused 4218 lung cancer. he did not claim that. there is no evidence of that. what they are talking about is something that happened years later. and it is impossible for things that happened in the '50s to have caused her to smoke in the '40s. romayne mccabe tells us, did not start smoking because of advertising. there is no evidence that there is any concealment in that advertising. frankly, there is no evidence at all that any statement by r.j. reynolds or another tobacco company caused her to start smoking. and that is what we know from the eyewitness. now, dr. cummings says, oh, smoking is inevitable. and he put up -- how many ads did you see? ad after ad after ad after ad after ad. and no one denies there was a lot of advertising. it was all over the place. and no one denies -- did mrs. mccabe see ads? i presume she did. no one's going to dispute she saw ads. but plaintiff's burden of proof, though, is to say that she was actually caused to develop cancer because of something that was concealed, because of some false statement or something that was hidden. was it inevitable? no. first thing, this is from dr. cummings. in 4219 1940s -- and remember he looked at the birth group that -- that jane mccabe was in. in the 1940s for the people who were born at the time that she was born, at age 12, less than 1 percent of kids smoked. it is not like there was a nation of 12-year-olds smoking in 1945. less than 1 percent did. by the time people in her age group were 14, in the 1940s, about when she started smoking, because that is tenth grade, a little later, only 2.8 percent were smoking. now, those are the statistics from dr. cummings. those are the statistics when mr. paige came up. i was done with cross-examination, mr. paige came up, and he put those statistics in front of dr. cummings. so this idea that she was surrounded or the whole nation was inevitable that a 14-year-old smoked, no, 97 percent of 14-year-olds did not smoke. well, what happens when you are adults? in the '40s, when she started smoking, dr. cummings agreed that only 25 percent of adult women smoked in the 1940s. there we go. this is when i was cross-examining him. only 25 percent of adult women smoked. 75 percent of adult women 4220 did not smoke. so if you looked around in the community and the nation, three out of every four adult women were nonsmokers. three out of every four adult women saw the same ads. they were living at the same time and they made a decision not to smoke. jane mccabe made a different decision. no one is blaming her for that decision, but she cannot escape responsibility for that decision, just like the 75 percent who chose not to smoke. so the idea that it is inevitable, one out of four ain't inevitable. three out of four is the landslide majority of women in the '40s chose not to smoke. well, did it go up in the '50s? dr. cummings said in the '50s, adult women, 36 percent, or about one out of three, smoked. but 64 percent, two out of every three women, did not smoke. it was not inevitable. the tobacco companies could not wave a magic wand and put pretty women in an ad and force people to smoke. it is just ridiculous. people have minds, they have the ability to choose. we are all bombarded by advertisements, and it does not make us go like a 4221 robot to the store. neither did she. she made a decision that most women did not make. she made a decision that the vast majority of women did not make. she chose to smoke. now, they are saying, in effect, that she is not responsible for that. romayne mccabe told us that she never saw jane mccabe try to quit smoking. she told us that mrs. mccabe never, not once, from the '30s, when she first met her in the first grade, to 1993, when she quit smoking, not once did she ever tell her close friend and sister-in-law, not once, that she wanted to quit. she never told her that smoking was hard to quit, and mrs. mccabe never saw her try to do anything. and we know -- i do not have to keep repeating it. obviously, it is an important fact. we heard over and over again, every single one of the five children, romayne mccabe, their own experts agree, no one ever saw her try to quit smoking until the 1990s. no one ever saw her put aside her cigarettes for even an hour, said jim mccabe. finally, what romayne told us is that her -- that in her opinion -- and that is what we were asking for -- she and jane regarded smoking as their 4222 own business. and when she was asked, she agreed that she regarded jane mccabe decision as her own personal decision. her family made different decisions. her father, leon, we know he was the police chief. obviously, her father had been smoking for many, many more years than her in the 1940s. he is smoking the same brand that they claim, without actual proof, that she smoked, unfiltered camels. and he chose to quit. there is some dispute, was it in the middle of world war ii -- remember, this is when i asked dr. cummings. and i wrote this down. was it in the middle of world war ii, as james mccabe thinks, or was it after world war ii, as dr. cummings thought based on his review of the sworn testimony? whatever it was, she knew her father. she had to know he would quit. she was living with him during world war ii. and he made a different decision. tobacco companies did not take his mind because in the 1940s there was a picture of a slinky woman in a cocktail dress. again, that is just ridiculous. he made his own choice. and there is no evidence that she could not have chosen to do exactly what her father did. 4223 and, again, it is not blame. we have personal freedom. we have personal responsibility. to mention the other half is not blame. we know in the late '40s, there she was. that is the big -- one of the largest hospitals in the south where she attended nursing school. and we know that dr. ochsner -- dr. cummings agreed with me, ochsner was, in effect, a giant. he was one of the leaders of the antismoking movement. he was one of the very first scientists and doctors in the united states to study a link between lung cancer and smoking. and he did it all, he did it all, dr. cummings said, at new orleans charity hospital. i asked dr. cummings. he said it is true; she could have passed him in the hallway. now, am i claiming she sat down and had a conversation with him? of course not. but she is going to school at a place where the most famous doctor in the whole hospital just happens to be the most famous antismoking doctor in the whole country. that is from dr. cummings. and she is going to school at this hospital. remember, she is a regular newspaper reader. no one denies that. she is going to school at this 4224 hospital with dr. ochsner there when dr. ochsner's lung cancer reports are being reported in the newspapers. it was not a secret that smoking could cause lung cancer. and the idea that that is something that a tobacco company wrote, but they did not mail to her, caused her to smoke, that does not make sense. this was out there. this was not secret. we know in the '50s she was warned by the nuns not to smoke. again, it is not a health issue. the rule was you could not smoke, it was a vice. she was in surgery as a nurse assisting. dr. cummings agrees she is a regular newspaper reader of the tampa tribune and the other newspapers where she lived. dr. cummings agreed that one of the magazines she read regularly was life magazine. now, here's what i talked about in 1963. how can the plaintiffs claim that mrs. mccabe missed this? come on. she is, for the county health department, the school nurse. she has the responsibility for the health and welfare of the children. obviously, she is going to be tuned in to the health instruction that the kids are getting in the schools. we know that of the 11 counties, pasco county -- 11 counties, 275,000 school children in 4225 pasco county, can anyone seriously suggest that she did not realize that the children were being taught smoking causes lung cancer with the american society? could she possibly have missed that? she could not miss it, because the next -- the next year, everyone found out. this was front-page news. it was the front-page news story. you saw it from the florida health department, that they said, quote, nearly every adult floridian, unquote, had seen this. the surgeon general announced. that is 30 years before she developed lung cancer. that is 30 years. if this -- if causation is really dominoes, that is 30 years that she could take a domino out, that is 30 years that she can stop that link, that she can remove that link in the chain, and that she can quit smoking. her husband quits in the '60s. and what is so important about that is, obviously, he is exposed to everything she is. he is seeing the same ads in the '60s that you saw. he grew up in the same environment. he is reading in the newspaper. whatever was out there, he was exposed to it just like her. and he is smoking the exact same cigarettes. now, there is no evidence that the companies 4226 did something in the 1960s that made it impossible for either of them to quit. he was smoking the exact same cigarettes, and he quit. he quit smoking salems. she made a different choice than her husband. she cannot be blamed for her choice. but you know what? she has to be credited for her choice. she has to be held accountable for her choice. and the children obviously wish she made a different choice. we all have sympathy, but that cannot be the basis for decision. that same time her husband's quitting in the mid '60s, the school kid program in pasco county is talking about -- mr. trentalange: excuse me, your honor. i'm sorry. may we approach? the court: approach the bench, please. (the following bench conference took place outside the hearing of the jury:) mr. trentalange: i think he just said -- and i need to preserve the objection. i think he just referred to the children and said they need to be held accountable. i may have heard that wrong, but -- she made that choice, they made that choice, they need to be held accountable. 4227 the court: i do not see where he said it about the being held accountable. mr. trentalange: okay. the court: just the children wish she made a different choice. we all have sympathy. she cannot be blamed. she cannot be blamed for her choice. she has to be credited for her choice. she has to be held accountable for her choice. (end of bench conference.) mr. belasic: now, as i was saying, she made a different choice than the husband. part of what you have do in this case is determine whether she will be held responsible for that choice or whether her children can come into court and say that the tobacco companies are very bad people and they wrote bad documents and they should get money for her choice, something they thought was her choice. here is the warning. her husband's quitting in the mid '60s. the surgeon general has said to everyone in the country -- national news, every adult heard it -- that smoking causes lung cancer. and now there is a warning on her pack. and the children that we asked, they all say, no, she did not do anything in response to a health warning. dr. cummings admitted she never -- there is no 4228 evidence -- she never made an effort to quit in response to a health warning. the only time she decided to quit was when her granddaughter jenna was telling her to quit and she knew she was not going to be able to see her any longer. that is when she decided to quit. we know about the -- obviously, the immediate and emotional example. so think what that had to be like for her in the '60s. twenty years earlier, back in the '40s, she is going to school where the lung cancer giant is where, where the lung cancer reports are in the paper. all throughout the '50s, you can see all of the reports that were out there. and then in the '60s, within just a period of years, the surgeon general says it causes lung cancer. her own husband quits in the mid '60s, and she sees two other uncles die of smoking-related disease. right in her face, she saw a choice. her husband chose to quit. he is not here suing. the two uncles, we do not know if they quit or not. they died of smoking-related diseases. that is the choice that she had to make. and nothing that the tobacco companies did stopped her husband from quitting, just like nothing that the tobacco companies did 4229 stopped jane mccabe from putting the cigarettes down. but she did not want to. by '70, there was a new warning. that is 25 years before she developed lung cancer. thirty years of warnings on the pack before she passed away. we know she was an addiction professional. we know that her title was director of alcohol and substance abuse services. so this is a woman who worked daily with the concept of addiction, a woman who worked daily with the concept of treatment, remedies, quit plans, all of the things that you would do to try to get people to quit alcohol or to deal with other substance abuse. she is in charge of all of that. and dr. cummings said, "she would understand addiction." there is a lot of smokers in this country. maybe some smokers were fooled. maybe some smokers did not know. but a woman who was a professional nurse for 50 years and a woman who was an addiction professional for 20 years, i submit to you, they have the wrong plaintiff. this is not someone who was tricked or who did not know that smoking was dangerous, who did not know that smoking caused cancer. she saw it for herself with her own family, with her own uncle. she understood addiction. 4230 that is their expert. now, basically, this is a fraud case about addiction. and so you have the plaintiff's expert saying the plaintiff understood addiction. that is not a good case. that is not the right plaintiff. maybe there are others. in '76, her daughter rosemary quit. and, again, each of the children, each of the daughters was asked, you quit smoking? you believed smoking was dangerous? you believed you were addicted? you believed your mom was addicted? but nonetheless, the daughters quit smoking. the kids were quitting all around her. when asked, why did not you intervene and tell your mom, they said, well, it was her business, it was her decision. they are absolutely right. it was her decision. by '85, the warning was there that said smoking causes lung cancer. that is ten years before she developed lung cancer. and, again, the evidence is she made no effort to quit. one of the things you are going to see after we break for lunch later in the afternoon, the plaintiff's claim for fraud, for this concealment, requires them to show that if the companies had 4231 acted differently, that but for whatever it is they say were concealed, that mrs. mccabe would have changed her behavior, mrs. mccabe would have acted differently. now, can anyone really claim that if mrs. mccabe got a little bit more information, that if mrs. mccabe was told smoking could be dangerous for her or that it caused cancer, that she would have changed her opinion and that she would have quit? because we know going back to the '40s, that she had information that smoking caused cancer. we know she saw it personally. we know she saw it in the most emotional way. we know she knew about quitting. and we know that every single time we asked the kids, they said she never made an effort to quit, that they saw. so we know how she reacted to information. health information was not going to change mrs. mccabe's mind. and that is fine. we do not blame her for that choice, but this case is about holding her responsible for that choice. the only thing that got her to quit was granddaughter jenna. in '85, the same year -- the same year that the lung cancer is on the warning pack, right on the pack, her daughter melinda quit smoking. 4232 in '92, susan beddingfield, the third daughter, quit smoking. here is what the evidence told us. that not only did melinda, the daughter, say, you cannot smoke around jenna, but jenna, a five-year-old in 1993, was warning her to quit smoking. now, a five-year-old would say, smoking bad for you, do not smoke. a five-year-old asked her granddaughter -- or her grandmother to quit. and we know what she said in response, because one of the daughters told us. she said she knows and she is going to do something about it. and she did do something about it. and for the first time in her life, she made a motivated decision to quit. and all during those years, all during this link in the chain, all during this long line of dominoes, she could have made the same decision to quit. there is no expert in this case, including their experts, that says that she -- that it was impossible for her to stop earlier. the only board-certified addiction psychiatrist, the president of the florida psychiatric society, says that she does not meet the criteria and there is no doubt she could have quit smoking earlier. your honor, i think this is a good breaking 4233 point. [#deleted recess#] mr. belasic: thank you, your honor. good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. before we go any further, i just want to say on behalf of everyone here, i want to thank you for what you have done. i know that this is your third week away from jobs, family, and of course, your personal life. and i know it is not what you expected, maybe not what you signed up for, but it is what you volunteered for, and it is what you swore an oath to do. and as judge barbas, who started this case, said, the jury system is probably the most important underpinning of our constitutional rights. and it is not just the parties here that could not do without you, we could not have a court system without citizens as civic-minded as you. so on behalf of everyone, thank you for your time. one other thing. when i'm done in, let us say in an hour, mr. trentalange will get up and he is going to have 30 minutes to finish up. so the plaintiffs in these cases, they get the advantage of going first, and they get 4241 advantage of talking last. so whatever mr. trentalange says, i've said my piece. i'm not going to be able to say anything. i ask you one thing: you have seen the evidence and you know what evidence i think is important; of course, you know what evidence you think is important. when you hear mr. trentalange talk for that half hour, think about, if you would, what i might say and the kinds of evidence that i might point to, the witness testimony that i talked about. so i want to start -- when i was done, i was talking about what romayne mccabe had said about starting smoking around the time that jane mccabe had and how, despite the fact that she grew up with her and that they saw each other almost every day in high school -- went to high school together and were smoking together and then she knew her all the way into the '90s -- she never heard once that ms. mccabe started because of advertising or anything else. i want to play that testimony for you. this is romayne mccabe. (the following videotaped trial testimony clip of ms. romayne mccabe was played before the jury.) "q. did jane ever tell you why she decided 4242 to start smoking? a. no. q. jane did not tell you she started smoking because of cigarette ads, did she? a. no. q. she never said that she continued to smoke because of a cigarette ad, did she? a. no. q. she never said that she started smoking because of statements from a tobacco company, did she? a. no. q. she never told you why she became a daily regular smoker, did she? a. no. q. she never told you that she was making any smoking decision -- amount, brand, whether to quit or not to quit, any smoking decision at all -- based on something the tobacco company said, did she? a. no." (video clip concluded.) mr. belasic: so that is romayne mccabe. you heard some of the witnesses say, "well, she was private." she must have done something 4243 that would be helpful to the plaintiffs, but she never told us. these were kids in high school. does anyone here think for a second that if jane mccabe started smoking because of an advertisement? remember, it has to be a false advertisement, an advertisement that concealed something. does anyone think for a second that her girlfriend romayne would not have known about it? ms. romayne was obviously very straightforward in what she knew and what she remembered, and that was her testimony. we know that no one ever saw her make an effort to quit before. you heard that over and over and over again. but the reason i think it is important here is because in a case going this far back, it is unusual to have eyewitnesses that span the whole time. romayne mccabe is 88 years old. if you heard someone was born in 1929 and started smoking in the '40s, you probably figured there would be no one around to tell the story. but no, romayne was there and she saw her and knew her for 60 years. and she never once -- never once saw her close friend and sister-in-law ever make any effort to 4244 quit smoking and neither did any of the children and they told you that repeatedly and consistently. and when they called their experts up here and i asked them, the experts agreed no one ever observed her make any effort to quit until '93. now, two of the daughters say, "well, i saw the patch on mom and mom said, 'i did not tell you about the patch. i tried to quit before.'" and i put up invisible quit attempts, not because i'm trying to be a smart aleck, but because these are alleged quit attempts that we know nothing about, that no one ever saw. and that if these conversations took place -- remember, there were three other children. none of the other three children could confirm these conversations. none of the three other children had ever heard their mom say that she wanted to quit. there is no evidence that, for example, their mom came up to them in the 1970s and said, "i wanted to quit." we know there is evidence that she wanted to quit alcohol. and she made no secret of that, and she went for professional help. so these are invisible quit attempts. and if 4245 the plaintiffs are going to try to argue to you that this is a woman that tried to quit a lot, really? when? we do not know. how often? we do not know. how long? did she put the cigarettes down for a minute? for an hour? we do not know. that is not evidence. the evidence based on eyewitnesses that span 60 years, from the 1930s to the 1990s, is that she never made an effort to quit. and the definition -- one of the definitions of addicted smoker, that the experts agreed upon, is someone who quits multiple times and then fails and goes back. think about it. alcohol; she quit multiple times, failed, went back. they call that a relapse. that is what the experts say is the hallmark of addiction. we do not have any of that evidence here for her smoking. there is no evidence that she ever stopped smoking for a period of time and then went back to it. i think you heard mr. trentalange say, well, you know, she was on the operating table having a kidney removed. she must have stopped then. that is true. i do not think anyone claimed she was smoking while she was under anesthesia. but 4246 there is no evidence that she stopped for any length of time and then relapsed. and if this truly is this severely addicted smoker that dr. cummings and dr. herkov say, then where is the evidence that meets their own standard, a smoker who chronically relapses? we do not have any evidence she ever quit. what happened when she did quit, 1993? did she relapse? did she go back over and over failing, smoking again? no. every single witness, including all the eyewitnesses, says she never relapsed. first motivated quit attempt, never relapsed. that is not definition -- that is not addiction even under the plaintiff's deposition. so let us talk about the evidence on question 1. and remember, it is two parts, because it is was she addicted, first part; and, if she was addicted, was addiction a legal cause of her lung cancer? not was smoking was the cause of her cancer, but was addiction a legal cause. let us talk about the first part. right off the bat, there is no evidence that any of ms. mccabe's own doctors diagnosed her as addicted. there is no medical record that says 4247 that. there is no testimony that any of her doctors ever found her addicted. none of the children say any of her doctors even said it. the doctor -- okay. the doctor who treated her who testified was dr. schiff. and remember, he is the guy who did the treatment plan. he generated one document. he recommended chemo and radiation. he did not testify about addiction at all. in fact, they had to give him a hypothetical. they had to say, dr. schiff, hypothetically, if she was addicted -- and that is because he is a cancer expert. he was not an expert on addiction. so we know dr. schiff never diagnosed her as addicted. there is no evidence that any of her doctors. so when they called michael herkov, the psychologist, to the stand, i wanted to probe if he was relying on some doctor's opinion. and i asked him, well, who was her family physician? he did not know. who was the doctor who knew her best? herkov, the guy that they called? he did not even know. there is no evidence that any of her own doctors. so what you have, then, is the witnesses the plaintiffs called. and after all of the witnesses 4248 that the plaintiffs called -- this is undisputed -- there is not a single medical doctor, no m.d. in this case who testified that ms. mccabe was addicted. and the reason is, these first two gentlemen are not doctors; they are not medical doctors. they have ph.d.s, and that is why they refer to themselves as doctors. but they did not go to med school. they are not m.d.s. they do not treat patients. these are the two medical doctors. dr. schiff, he gave no testimony on addiction at all. and dr. villa gave no testimony on addiction at all. and he was straightforward with mr. quinlan. he said, not an expert on that at all. he is a cancer expert. so the two medical doctors did not testify on addiction. so now here's the first witness they called, michael herkov. he is not an m.d. he has a ph.d. in psychology. he never went to med school. he cannot prescribe drugs. he cannot give a medical diagnosis. and here's what he said. and, again, this is not a question i asked him. this was not a trick question. this is what he responded to mr. trentalange. he said, "i do not really treat substance abuse disorders." 4249 i should have put the next sentence. what he said was, "i do not really treat substance abuse disorders. i treat almost all other disorders." but this is a substance abuse disorder case, and this is who the plaintiffs chose to bring in, a man who is not an m.d., who is not a medical doctor, who cannot give a medical diagnosis of addiction, and who does not even treat substance abuse disorders. remember what he said about his practice? he used to be a professor, an academic at the university of florida. now he is got a private practice. he told me that he sees between one and three patients a week. that is it. so imagine, in an entire week, he might see one patient. now, he told me, well, he spends one day out of five on patient care. those must be some pretty long sessions. from one to three patients a week, that is all he has. and he does not treat any of them for substance abuse disorders, because he says he does not treat it. he gives those to other doctors, medical doctors, doctors who really specialize in medical treatment. dr. cummings, not a medical doctor. no doubt that he is -- he is a researcher. he is a 4250 scientific researcher. but his ph.d. is in education. it is in public health education. so he is a great academic. he is a great lecturer. and there is no doubt that he knows a tremendous amount about documents from the tobacco companies. but he is not a medical doctor. he did not give a medical diagnosis. what was his definition? dr. cummings, this was his definition. he said he wanted to use nida. nida is the national institute of drug abuse. it is the federal government's drug abuse specialty agency. and he said that the hallmark of their definition is that it is a chronic relapse disorder. and chronic means -- acute is temporary; chronic means that it is repeated, that you relapse over and over. and that is what i was talking about just a few minutes ago. we did not see her relapse over and over. she was not the kind of smoker who would quit for a week and then go back, and quit for two weeks and then it gets really bad and then she has to go back, the kind of smoker, the struggling smoker that we have all heard about and that many of us probably know. that was not her. she was the kind of smoker who made, according to her 4251 eyewitnesses, according to her family, no effort to quit until 1993. and then she did not relapse at all. if she is as severely addicted as they say, they should have evidence that she is been relapsing, quitting and going back. instead, she is batting a hundred percent. the first time she is motivated -- and everyone agrees they know of no other effort to quit and they know of no other effort to quit that she is motivated to quit -- she bats a thousand, one for one, and she never goes back. so she does not meet relapse. and without relapse, what does addiction mean? addiction does not mean that you cannot stop smoking. and the experts agree it does not mean that. you can stop. but if addiction means that you do not even relapse, then what is preventing her from quitting before? now, we called dr. barnett, and you heard mr. trentalange talk about her. first off, right off the bat, she is the only m.d., the only medical doctor in this case. and more importantly, she is the only one who is certified, who actually has a specialty degree. 4252 all right. let us go back. so she is board certified in addiction psychiatry as well as forensic psychiatry, which is psychiatry and the law. she is the only one who sat down for specialized training, the only doctor in the case, and the only doctor who specializes in addiction medicine. and so right off the bat they say, well, she is been paid a lot of money. and mr. trentalange literally said she says what she says in order to get money. that is it. unbelievable statement with no evidence to back it up. now, let me ask you this. if money means a person's lying -- because, you know, that is clearly what he was implying -- dr. cummings makes a lot more than her. dr. cummings has pulled down 1.2 million in just four years; 200,000, 250,000. i did not call him a liar, because he is well paid. judge their testimony on their background, on their training, and the credibility and all of the other measures that you use to judge them. she went very specifically, ms. mccabe did not meet the medical criteria for addiction. now, dsm-5, that diagnostic and statistical manual, those are the medical criteria that doctors use, 4253 not people who are professors like dr. cummings, a ph.d. in health education, and not someone who does not even treat substance abuse disorders, like michael herkov. that is what the doctors use. and she said that ms. mccabe did not meet the medical criteria for addiction. and one of the obvious reasons she said is, addiction requires a pattern of use -- a pattern of use of the substance that causes substantial impairment and distress. and you heard us spend a lot of time, both me and mr. trentalange, about that requirement. clinically significant, which means so bad you need treatment. clinically significant impairment or distress. now, you saw some examples from dr. barnett. obviously, a person who is a heroin addict who loses jobs, relationships, family; someone who cannot fulfill their duties; someone who is physically impaired and has their judgment impaired. nothing of the sort occurred with smoking. she went about her business. she could smoke and do her job at the same time. she could smoke and enjoy it. she was not impaired. on the other hand, you saw an example of alcohol where she would be impaired to the point 4254 that she had to be hospitalized for the dts, and she had to seek professional treatment. and none of this is a criticism. no one here -- especially if mr. trentalange comes up and talks about this, no one here is trying to say, you know, she was an alcoholic, so do not vote for her. that has nothing to do with it. you are entitled to know the facts. and here you have two substances that she used, one she wants to quit, one she does not want to quit. she wants to quit drinking, so she goes for help. she does not want to quit smoking, so she never goes for help. one she tries to quit and relapses. that is addiction. alcohol. one she tries to quit only one time and she succeeds, bats a hundred percent and never relapses. that is not addiction. one, she has significant withdrawal, dts that made her to go into the hospital. the other one, the only withdrawal they can even claim is, quote, that she was fidgety -- fidgety or a little agitated or a little snappy. of course, dr. barnett said addiction was not the cause of her injuries. the evidence in this case is she chose to smoke and then she chose to quit. and in between, when everyone around her 4255 was quitting and she was getting the warnings from the family, from her uncles dying, on the pack, no one says she ever made the slightest effort to quit. in fact, both dr. barnett and the eyewitnesses said she enjoyed smoking. that is what romayne mccabe told us, that smoking relaxed her and it calmed her. she liked it. if she did not like it, would not she have made an effort to quit in over 50 years? if she did not like it, would not she have stopped for even an hour before she quit for good and never went back? now, you heard that one of the major factors in addiction -- it is not the only requirement, but one of the major factors is withdrawal. are you so physically or psychologically dependent on a substance that when you stop using it, you have a medically significant reaction? no question -- no question she had that with alcohol. we know she was hospitalized. she had the dts. rosemary, i believe it was, is the one who confirmed that. but these are not my words. these are the words of dr. cummings and her children; fidgety, a little snappy, a little agitated. now, i do not want you to think i'm making fun of her or that this means it is easy to quit. i 4256 have no doubt, based on the testimony -- based on the testimony, there is no doubt that she was irritable when she stopped smoking. and no one is saying that it was easy, that it was a one-foot clap that it was some extremely simple process. but this is not medically significant withdrawal. being fidgety is not like going through heroin withdrawal. being snappy is not like getting the dts when you do not drink and go into the hospital. all of us, unfortunately, get fidgety or snappy or agitated. and if all that -- if all it took was irritability to prevent us from accomplishing a goal, none of us would get out of bed in the morning, none of us would have finished school. we would not be able to go to work because we get irritated, we get snappy. but you know what? that does not force you to a lifetime of behavior. and being a little snappy did not cause her to develop cancer. it did not force her. whatever she claims the withdrawal is, whatever her family claims, that does not make an addiction a legal cause of her cancer. and we know that she never smoked again. so the fidgetiness, the snappiness, the agitation, it was not enough for her to go back. and she only 4257 wore the patch for a short period of time. after she took the patch off, she never went back because she wanted to quit. and these medically insignificant -- and i say medically insignificant symptoms never prevented her from quitting. once she made up her mind, that was more important than being fidgety. and, again, that is not the definition of addiction. based on what the experts have said, including the plaintiff's expert, the definition of addiction would be someone who has significant withdrawal, who goes through chronic relapses, quitting and starting up again, a tortured-type smoker. we do not see anything like that with her. i've talked about these differences. she did not want to quit smoking until '93, and she did. she never sought help. the withdrawal symptoms were minimal compared to alcohol. and, of course, when she ultimately quit, she quit smoking. she did not quit drinking. now, remember the testimony from dr. barnett? and i was at the elmo. there was the american academy of addiction psychiatry paper that mr. trentalange had used, and i went through dr. -- through that with dr. barnett. and it 4258 said -- first of all, smoking did not cause her to have a drinking problem. r.j. reynolds did not cause her to have a drinking problem. and there is no jury -- there is no legal instruction in this case -- you can look at the instructions -- that says, well, if she has a drinking problem, that means it is on r.j. reynolds. no. she was responsible for her drinking, just like she was responsible for her smoking. smoking did not cause that problem. and, in fact, we went through using mr. trentalange's paper, and dr. barnett agreed; sure, if you quit smoking, it does not interfere with your drinking. smoking does not -- stopping smoking does not make you drink more. in fact, it helps. well, she did stop smoking, but she did not stop drinking. she made two different choices. when her daughter asked her after a period of years -- remember, the children's testimony was different about how long she would quit drinking after rehab. then she went back, and she was drinking light beer. and when her daughter asked her and said, you know, you cannot drink, her answer was, yes, i can. and then her daughter said, why? and her answer was, because i want to. 4259 now, this is not a lawsuit against an alcohol company. this is a lawsuit against a tobacco company. and the evidence is that if she had a substance abuse problem, it was drinking. and the evidence is that r.j. reynolds is not responsible for her other issues. all right. here's -- that is the -- let us talk about the second part. let us assume she is addicted. let us assume that you -- that i'm just wasting my time here; you have already decided that she is addicted. all right. what does addiction mean, and does it make it a legal cause? their experts say, well, addiction is smoking first thing in the morning, you know, as if you waited a half hour, you would not get lung cancer. their experts are talking about, well, if you smoke late at night or you smoke a lot. and the testimony was that the amount, the number of cigarettes you smoked, that does not make a difference whether you are addicted or not. but does that make addiction a legal cause? and here's one of the instructions that you are going to get. you will be able to read it in the jury room. that in order to find that addiction was the legal cause of lung cancer or 4260 death, it has to occur directly and in a natural and continuous sequence, produces or contributed substantially. and i want you to think about whether or not addiction could really ever be a direct cause of somebody's cancer. there is no dispute in this case that it was smoking that -- mr. trentalange: object, your honor. may we approach? the court: approach the bench, please. (at sidebar.) mr. trentalange: judge, the statement was, i want you to think about -- i want you to think about whether addiction could ever really be a legal cause. we know these cases are specifically authorized by the supreme court. so, obviously, they can be, otherwise summary judgment would have been granted. it is improper argument to ask that question and make that suggestion, and it is contrary to the engle findings and this whole engle progeny litigation. mr. belasic: there are no engle findings that addiction causes disease. the engle findings are that smoking causes disease. that is why we are having these lawsuits. 4261 the court: the jury will rely on the instructions i give them and their recollection of the facts. thank you. overruled. mr. trentalange: overruled? the court: yes. thank you. (sidebar concluded.) mr. belasic: all right. so as i was saying, i want you to think about whether addiction could directly and in natural continuous sequence cause lung cancer. let us talk about ms. mccabe. no dispute in this case, as i said from the beginning, when it comes to smoking, the total amount of smoking, whether it was 40 years or 50 years, we do not dispute that was the cause of her cancer. the issue -- that is what the doctors said medically was the cause of her cancer. the issue now is separately, what was the legal cause and, particularly, was addiction a legal cause? addiction is not smoking. we know that. we know that it is different definitions. her decision to smoke and her decision to not quit until 1993, her behavior in smoking for 50 years, if she does not choose to smoke, if she chooses to quit like her father does, if she chooses to quit 4262 like her husband did, she does not develop lung cancer. and not even the plaintiff's experts said that addiction, whatever they defined it as, forced her to smoke. it did not make her go to the store. it did not make her light up. it did not make her smoke all of those cigarettes. so let us look at some more evidence. i put "admits" in quotes here, because when mr. mccabe took the stand, the very first question he was asked by his attorney was whether he admitted that his mother was responsible in part for her injuries -- whether she, in part, was the cause of her injuries. and he said yes. and you saw what happened when i got up. i had to show him a videotape where just six months ago, under oath, he said, no, my mother has zero responsibility. those were his literal words, zero responsibility. and i asked him why he changed. you heard his answer. i asked him. what happened in his mind that in six months. you remember if that was a satisfactory answer, and you determine what the plaintiffs were talking about when they claim now that she is responsible when he swore under oath six months ago, his mom had nothing to do with it. but now, 4263 they admit that she was the cause of her own injury. well, if her behavior, if her failure to quit was a cause of her own injury, then does not that mean the plaintiffs are conceding she could have quit? we do not have to guess. we know she could quit. she did. and so when he says -- you saw him when i asked him, that -- we had to play the videotape -- did she do everything in her -- in her power to quit? of course not. did she try to quit before 1993? no. he is conceded that. even the plaintiffs are not disputing that she could have quit and could have quit earlier. one of you asked dr. cummings a question or wrote a question, and the judge asked dr. cummings, can nicotine by itself cause lung cancer? and the answer is, no, nicotine does not cause cancer. let us go back to the legal instruction. addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine is a legal cause if it is directly and in a natural and continuous consequence. well, we know it is not a direct cause. nicotine by itself does not 4264 cause lung cancer. we know it is not a direct cause, it is an indirect process at best. and that is what dr. cummings admitted. cannot be a direct cause. you are instructed to follow those instructions -- to follow the instructions. the instructions require it to be a direct cause. now, we talked about the dominoes. if she stopped smoking in 1951 or 1963 or 1972, that chain of dominoes stops falling. and we know that it is not rare. she was not the only one who quit. you heard that 60 million people alive today used to smoke, and they have now quit. and we know that when she was smoking, millions and millions were quitting around her. and so there is really no dispute that she could have quit back in the '60s. 30 million people quit in the '60s. the reason i pick that date is in 1964, that is 31 years before she got lung cancer. she got that in 1995. and 30 million people in that period, the next 15 years, were quitting. she was not one of them. those people smoked the same type of popular brands of cigarettes. they smoked modern 4265 cigarettes with the additives and the ingredients. those people were there when advertising was being done and whatever the tobacco companies and the surgeon general were saying, and they quit. of course, there is no evidence she did anything. even after the pack warning in 1966, again, about 30 years before she gets diagnosed, 13 million people quit, and she was not one of them. and it was not because she was addicted, it was because there is no evidence she did anything to quit, and there is no evidence that anyone who knew her then even thought she wanted to quit. we know that she was surrounded by family members who quit. this is when i went through the family members who quit with dr. cummings. and we know each of them made different choices. and they were exposed to the same advertising, the same things in the press. they smoked the same type of cigarettes. her father was the person that she took the cigarettes from. her husband smoked salems, just like her. her daughter, who quit, smoked light cigarettes. they all quit. the difference was not just luck or happenstance. it was not because the tobacco 4266 company did something different. the difference was that these people, her loved ones, made a different choice than her. and so that is why ms. mccabe is here. that choice. now, dr. cummings wrote this smart move pamphlet, and we know it is a stop quitting guide. and one of the things that he showed is the testimonials. "i always thought it would be impossible to stop." he agreed that is not true. next sentence, "anyone can do it if they set their mind to it. a positive attitude is important." and you remember when -- when mr. paige was here -- when mr. paige was here that second week and he put the testimony of dr. cummings on, he asked him, you know, if that was a true statement, anyone can do it, positive attitude is important. dr. cummings said, yes, it was. it would not be -- if it was not true, he would not have put it in his book. here's another one from a three-pack-a-day smoker. and again, this is dr. cummings. this is what he is writing as a guide to quitting. terry, the three-pack-a-day smoker says, "you have to make up your mind to stop." mrs. mccabe did not 4267 make up her mind to stop until '93, and then she did. there were some relapses and some weight gain. absolutely no evidence that ever happened. that is the kind of thing that perhaps a nicotine-addicted person would. she said the important thing is to stop. and then this is what dr. cummings wrote, "develop a plan." she never did that until 1993. "change some habits." she never did, whether it was drinking or coffee or reading the paper, things she associated with smoking. no evidence she ever made any effort to change her habits, and there is no evidence she ever made a commitment to smoke. even her children, and certainly romayne mccabe, do not claim that she was ever committed to quitting until 1993. and here's what dr. cummings concluded. if you answer yes, do you want to stop? are you willing to make changes? can you put up with some uneasy moments? he said, "if you can answer yes to all three questions, you can stop smoking." that is what he wrote, and that is what the american cancer society says. 4268 so i showed dr. cummings a slide. they were joking about this photo. and it says, anyone can quit if they make up their mind to do it. and i asked him, sir, is not that true? this is a quote from dr. cummings. he tells me, no, it is not true. no, it is not true. and so here's what you saw next. it is dr. cummings under oath. (the following videotaped trial testimony clip was played before the jury.) "q. you have testified in the past that anyone can quit if they make up their mind to do it; right? "a. i have testified to that, yes." (video clip concluded.) mr. belasic: he changed his testimony for this trial. he was under oath in both trials, gave different testimony for this trial. then i asked him this: the success rate for people who really want to quit and stick to it is one hundred percent? and this time he agreed. in fact, he said that is what he tells people in his clinic. now, let us say that jane mccabe might have tried to quit. let us make up some quitting attempts. there is no evidence, but she might have 4269 tried to quit a couple of times or three times in those 50 years, and then on the fourth time, she got it right. and that would mean that she needed to spend parts of four days -- four days out of 50 years making an effort to quit. would we consider that a significant impediment to quitting? if someone told you, i went on a diet in 1955 for a day and then i went on a diet in 1968 for a day and then a couple years ago for a day, would anyone seriously say, wow, you are really making a committed effort to try to lose weight? if someone said, i went on the treadmill yesterday for about an hour, and you know what? that is the second time i've done it in 20 years. we would not say that was a serious effort to exercise or a serious effort -- a serious commitment to quitting. but in this case, we do not have four quitting attempts in 50 years. we would have to make up that evidence. there is no evidence. there is one quitting attempt, 1993, the only time she was ever motivated, and that is it. but what is amazing is, she succeeded that time. not a heavily addicted smoker. 4270 you build up these 40 years of addiction that dr. cummings talked about, she took that patch off. she never went back because she cared with about jenna and because she made up her mind. she had changed her mind. her success rate was one hundred percent. and if her success rate is a hundred percent, then addiction is not a legal cause of her lung cancer. because as the testimony is, she could have quit smoking at any time. and here's what the department of health and human services said. this is years after -- this is a 2002 document. this is many years after surgeon general koop was saying, well, if you are a smoker, it is probably not a choice. no. in fact, the -- the united states department of health and services, the public service that the surgeon general's office is located in, says studies suggest that everyone can quit smoking. so the difference between somebody who tries to quit 20 times and goes back to it and jane mccabe, our smoker in this case, is the decision she made. now, here's the way her own smoking was 4271 described by the people who knew her. and the five people who now we know are asking for two-and-a-half to three-and-a-half million each. they say it was her decision -- romayne, her daughter melinda, her daughter rosemary, her daughter susan. they say it was her business, romayne again, and the plaintiff james mccabe. that is what they think, her business, her decision. and they said they felt so strongly about that that they did not interfere. they did not tell her to quit. they did not tell her, hey, quit like i did. they thought it was her decision and it was her business. and they were right. what would have happened if she had quit when her father quit? what would have happened if she had quit when her husband quit? well, here's dr. cummings telling you, within a year, your risk of lung cancer begins to go down. a lot of other good things happen. circulation damage is repaired. but within a year, your risk of lung cancer begins to decrease. now, they brought dr. villa to address this. and dr. villa did not talk about how he had any background in statistics or epidemiology. 4272 there was a question from one of you about -- about how do they -- how can you say that a smoker got cancer from smoking if most smokers do not get cancer at all? he talked about statistics. so we know he had some familiarity with statistics. let us go to the source. let us go to what the surgeon general says, no friend of the tobacco companies. let us go to the source. here's what the surgeon general said: "ex-smokers experience decreasing lung cancer mortality rates" -- so your death from lung cancer goes down -- "which approach the rates of non-smokers." how long does it take to get down to the rate of a non-smoker? ten to 15 years of cessation. so she gets lung cancer and is diagnosed in 1995. she quits two years, two-and-a-half years, we do not really know when in 1993, could be up to two-and-a-half years, could be two years. this is when she quits. this is when she develops cancer. the surgeon general says that after 10 or 15 years of quitting, a smoker's risk of lung cancer death goes down to approach the rates of a non-smoker. so let us take 10 or 15 back. ten years would 4273 be 1985, right? 15 years would be 1980. could she have quit in 1980 or 1985? well, if she could quit 15 years later, 13 years later, sure she could. their own experts do not claim she could not have quit. dr. barnett said that based on all the evidence, she could have quit at any time earlier. did she know the risks in 1985? well, in '85, it said on the pack, lung cancer is caused by smoking. it said right on the pack. that was one of the warnings. so she knew the risks. by '85, that was 20 years after uncle george -- almost 20 years after uncle bernard died of lung cancer, almost 20 years after uncle george died of emphysema. it was almost 20 years after the warnings. it was more than 20 years after her -- after the county health department was working in her pasco school system to do the cancer program for the students. so there is no doubt that she had personal knowledge and personal warning, and there is no doubt she had the ability to quit. now, people make choices all the time. we make choices about what to eat, when to sleep, whether to exercise, whether to go on a diet. she 4274 made the choice to continue smoking. and all of her family around her say that she made no effort to quit. same thing in 1980. would not have been any harder to quit back then. it was even earlier and she knew all the risks, lung cancer from uncle george, the warnings that were on the pack. she had the ability to quit. and if she quits in '80 or '85, her risk of lung cancer mortality goes down to that of a non-smoker. here's one other, 1981. that is the surgeon general again. after ten years of cessation, meaning ten years after quitting, the risk of lung cancer begins to approach that of one who has never smoked. so let us -- let us -- let us be conservative and say it is 10 or 15 years. if she quits by 1980, then she does not develop lung cancer. her risk is no greater. if she quits by '85, her risk is no greater. so what does choice have to do with it? they say, well, choice is not an addiction. they are two different things. yeah, but you have to answer this question, was addiction the legal cause of her cancer? 4275 she had the choice to quit, she had the ability to quit. and if she did quit, the surgeon general says her risk goes back, basically, to normal. for those reasons, for those reasons, her smoking over a lifetime and her decision to smoke and her decision to never try to quit until 1993 was the cause of her lung cancer and death. it was not what they call addiction. so you should vote "no" on that. one other thing. when she quit smoking in 1993, was she addicted? the plaintiffs said yes. in fact, they say she was severely addicted. okay. so that first day, she goes 24 hours without smoking. was she addicted? plaintiff's experts say yes. so was addiction causing her to smoke that day? no. that is the first day she quit. was it causing her to smoke the day before. plaintiffs say yes. what they do not explain is how the next day, suddenly addiction is not causing her to smoke, and the second day and the third day and the fourth day and the week after that and the month after that and then the next year, '93 into '94, and the next year. 4276 her cigarettes did not change, her brain did not change, the nicotine did not change. she changed her mind. and when she changed her mind, her ability to choose, her choice, her decision -- her own kids who say it is her business and her decision -- that was more powerful than whatever you want to call addiction. and whether you said she was addicted or habituated, that it was a habit or a dependency, once she truly made that committed choice, it did not have an effect. it did not make her smoke. you have to ask yourself what kind of cause is that? how can something cause me to be injured when if i make up my mind and make a committed effort, then it does not have any effect on me? because that is what happened to her. she never relapsed. addiction did not force her to smoke. she was not some out-of-control smoker who could not stop. jane mccabe could, and jane mccabe did. now, on the second question. again, from the very beginning of this case, i've said that whether smoking in general was the cause of her lung cancer, that is not disputed. this is different, though. this is whether r.j. reynolds 4277 brands was the cause. and so it was their burden to prove that she smoked that. and i submit to you the plaintiff has failed to meet his burden of proof in several areas. and the first is, if she started in the mid '40s, there is some testimony from an eyewitness, romayne mccabe, that they snitched some camels. there is that testimony. after that, ms. mccabe was asked, what brands did jane smoke? she did not know. she is the eyewitness, there is no testimony. none of the children knew what she smoked in the '40s or the '50s, and obviously, they were not eyewitnesses. the earliest that the children remember is 1960 smoking of salem. and let us be clear, several of the children say they remember that. the children were born from 1956 to 1960. so in 1960, james mccabe was four years old. he says he has a memory of his parents smoking sometime in the early '60s. some of the daughters said that they -- and that is it. so you have this 20-year gap. what was her first regular brand? nobody knows. plaintiffs did not produce evidence. when did she become addicted? if she met 4278 criteria for addiction, when did that occur? nobody knows. dr. cummings did not bother to tell us that. dr. herkov, the psychologist who only sees one patient a week, who does not even treat substance abuse disorders, he did not tell us that. what was the brand that she was addicted to? was it something that r.j. reynolds made? no. it was not that at all. we know that from around 1980 to 1990 she smoked philip morris brand. and how do we know that? well, first of all, there was testimony from the children. the testimony varied that she either smoked this philip morris brand for about ten years or maybe six years. when i asked dr. cummings that, he told me flat out 1980 to 1990. this is what dr. cummings told me, from 1980 to 1990. so basically, remember, if she quits in 1980, she does not get lung cancer. her risk goes back. by '95, when she does get cancer, her risk would have been back to normal. that is when she started smoking philip morris. that is testimony from dr. cummings. now, there is some testimony a little later, some testimony a little earlier. but after 19- -- 4279 at 1980, she can avoid her cancer by quitting. and we know from the surgeon general and the evidence in this case, that if she quits as late as 1985 -- there is no dispute in 1985 she is smoking a philip morris brand. not addicted to any r.j. reynolds brand. we know if she quits in 1985, she can avoid her lung cancer. and so for that reason, we submit that the plaintiffs have failed to meet their burden of proof. you should vote "no" on no. 2. now, let me show you the third question, and that is the allocation of fault. you only get to this question if you have already found yes on 1 and 2. so i do not think you are going to get here. but if you do, you are going to have to decide what percentage to charge to jane mccabe and what percentage to charge to r.j. reynolds. so just think about the facts, the choices, and what she knew during her life and who was responsible. in the '40s she already knew she should not smoke. she hid smoking. it was prohibited in the high school; she did it anyway. in the '40s she is at nursing school with the lung cancer giant; the articles are in the paper, 4280 the most famous anticancer researcher in the country. she is right there, articles in the paper frequently talking about lung cancer. in the '50s the nuns tell her not to smoke. she does anyway. in the '50s lung cancer news was all over in the popular magazines while she is working in surgery. she is a county school nurse at a time -- sorry -- at a time that they are running cancer education programs with the american cancer society in the pasco county schools that she services. no way she missed it. by '64, 30 years before, she is been told and every american has been told that the surgeon general says smoking causes lung cancer. by '66, 30 years before, she is being warned every single day. and think about that. there are not a lot of products -- consumer products that are not prescription drugs that have that kind of warning or have had that kind of warning for that long. we are here in 2016, and that warning came out 50 years ago. that warning came 30 years before she got the cancer, and she saw it on every single pack. it was there every single time. as we know -- once she saw uncle george die and uncle bernard die, can anyone seriously think 4281 that as a nurse exposed to what she had been exposed to, the fact that the testimony of the children is that they attributed it that the family knew and believed that they died with lung cancer? can anyone seriously say that by the 1960s she did not know that smoking was dangerous, she did not know the risk of smoking, the risks that she was taking? and remember, when her two uncles are dying of smoking-related diseases, her husband quit. james mccabe said that his dad quit in the mid-'60s. can anyone dispute she knew the risks? she made that decision. by the '70s, she is ignoring the new warning. her own husband is talking about cancer sticks 20 years before she gets cancer. there is a warning that directly says cancer on the pack; she ignores it, makes no effort to quit. and then she quits smoking again. and i'm going to submit to you -- and we talked about it -- that the idea of partial responsibility for your own actions just does not make sense in this case. now, you heard from opening statement, when plaintiff's attorney got up here, that he took partial responsibility -- 4282 partial responsibility for ms. mccabe in conjunction or in combination with the tobacco company. now, i ask you if that makes sense. do you think that in the 1960s that the mccabes -- mr. and ms. mccabe were talking about smoking? she saw her own husband quit in the mid-'60s. do you think they could have had a conversation where it was like, "honey, why do not you quit? why are you smoking that cigarette? who is responsible for you smoking?" do you think she would ever say, "i do not know. maybe i am a little, maybe r.j. reynolds is, maybe you are." and the person who had to look herself in the mirror and the person that had to make that decision was jane mccabe. and the decisions of the tobacco companies -- so the plaintiffs will say, oh, the tobacco companies have to be responsible too. the decisions of the tobacco companies were not telling her or were not forcing her to smoke, they were not stopping her to smoke, because the man that she was living with and ad been married to for 20 years, he had no problem making his own mind up. she made a different choice. 4283 her own children -- now, we heard all her children say, yes, she is addicted. but her own children still regarded -- their belief is that even though they called their mother addicted, that it was her business and her decision. and it was. she was the only one who could decide. so i put no one else could decide for her. is there someone at r.j. reynolds or the surgeon general's office who could have made the decision, today, jane mccabe will quit? did jane mccabe make only ten percent -- that is what plaintiff's lawyer says. she is only ten percent responsible. a lifelong nurse, an addiction professional. with all the evidence we have of the personal warnings she saw and received in her life, their argument is she is only ten percent responsible. did she make only ten percent of the decision? of course not. she was the only person who could decide for herself. 60 million people made a different decision. they quit smoking. her husband, her father, her three children, her four daughters all quit smoking. they made the decision. and each of them -- and i submit all of us are a hundred percent responsible when we make decisions about health behaviors that can 4284 affect us. now, when it came time to quit, did she make ten percent of the decision in '93 to quit? of course not. she made the entire decision. she made one hundred percent of the decision. and if she had stopped smoking back in 1980 or in '85 or the '70s or the '60s, she would have avoided her lung cancer, without any effect from r.j. reynolds. and under those circumstances, it is her choice that determined. now, they can show you as many bad documents as they want, and they have got a half hour to do it when i get up. and they can make you as mad as possible about some stupid document that some guy wrote sitting in a room. but he was not with jane mccabe, her family members were. and they say she never tried to quit. and each of them said it was her business and it was her decision. she did not take ten percent of the responsibility in life, she did not make ten percent of the decisions, she made all of the decisions, and she quit, one hundred percent never going back, when she made that decision. nothing stopped her once she decided to quit. and for that reason, she is personally responsible for her decision to smoke. 4285 there are other things that r.j. reynolds did, and we know the choices they made. but the things that r.j. reynolds did and the choices they made did not cause jane mccabe to smoke for 50 years. they did not prevent her from quitting, because when she wanted to, she quit, and she quit for a hundred percent. now, they have a fraud claim in this case. i'm going to take this down. here we go. they have a fraud claim in this case, and it is whether r.j. reynolds concealed or omitted material information. and then look, it is the same requirement. was concealment or omission of information about health effects or addiction, was that a legal cause of her lung cancer? did she really get lung cancer because she did not have enough information? did she get lung cancer because r.j. reynolds, in 1979, did not publish a paper saying we agree it probably causes cancer, the statistics are enough? there is no evidence of that. so here's their expert, dr. cummings. and one of the things he said is nobody really takes seriously the industry's position. and he says so they got other people to write it, like the guy 4286 who wrote true magazine -- a magazine that no one thinks ms. mccabe read. this is their expert. so in a fraud case, the people who are suing for fraud, and the children who want either two-and-a-half million or three-and-a-half million dollars each, they want that for what they themselves have said is their mom's own decision. this is who they call. and the first thing they say about the industry's position is that nobody really takes seriously the industry's position. and remember, i confirmed him with that -- i confirmed that with him. i showed him three surveys in a row, roper polls. roper's the second-most-famous pollster. and each of them said that out of all the americans, only 3 to 5 percent even considered -- even consider the tobacco companies to be credible or reliable. it did not even say 3 to 5 percent believed them, just 3 to 5 percent even gave them a shot. and we know from everyone that was asked -- you heard from each of the daughters and mr. mccabe. we know from the family members that there was no evidence that she ever saw some false statement or something from the tobacco industry 4287 research committee or anything after this 1953 conspiracy. there is no evidence. and romayne mccabe was asked those same questions and she confirmed -- we just played the video. she never suggested that she saw any of that stuff. those were the surveys. three percent for the tobacco industry research council. now, dr. cummings -- when i asked him about her being an addiction professional, one of the things she said is she would understand addiction. and you think about it, for 20 years she worked in substance abuse studying addiction. for her, it was mostly alcoholism, but we know she was the director of substance abuse services, not just alcohol. the techniques they used to help these people to stop substance abuse, we know that she never used any of those techniques. no one -- there is no evidence she ever used any of those techniques herself to stop her own smoking. and, again, it is a fraud case on addiction. and the expert they bring in says no one really believes the defendants, and the plaintiff would understand addiction. they have the wrong -- you have got the wrong plaintiff here. there may be 4288 people who could say "i was tricked" or there may be people who say "i heard something that that guy in 1954 on a tv show said, and that is the only reason i smoked." but that is not jane mccabe, and that is not the evidence in this case, and that is not what her own children admitted. i wanted to point out this. you are going to have an instruction -- and again, you will be able to read these. it is the plaintiff's burden to prove what they call reliance. and i wanted to say that, because the word "reliance" is not here. this instruction explains what they have to prove. they have to show by direct or circumstantial evidence that jane mccabe reasonably relied -- reasonably relied to her detriment -- that means to her harm -- on this concealment or omission of material information. and look what it says. it has to be material information that was not otherwise known or available. and you have seen all the evidence that shows that the risks of cancer were known and available, the warnings on the pack, her own family members in the '60s dying of cancer and emphysema. they have to prove this next sentence, that 4289 she would not have acted as she did but for -- meaning unless -- the concealment or omission. there is no evidence in this case if you had said something different or given a -- or given a different statement in the papers, that jane mccabe would have quit smoking. the very last question -- the very last question that i asked plaintiff james mccabe was, "is there anything you could have said to your mom that would have caused her to stop smoking?" and he said no. the only reason she stopped is because she wanted to see jenna. she never stopped for a health warning, and she got health warnings in droves. and, again, on the issue of concealment. they have to prove that but for the concealment -- if there had not been concealment, the lung cancer and death would not have occurred. there is just no evidence of that. defendants -- the plaintiffs say that in december '53 this concealment started. she would have already been smoking for ten years. no one claims that the conspiracy or that concealment caused her to start. and there is no evidence that in the '50s or '60s, if you would have given her 4290 some extra info -- if r.j. reynolds had an article on page 83 of the new york times, like dr. cummings is always looking at, that that would have changed her mind. even when she was told or given the direct examples of her relatives, she did not make any effort. even when she saw her husband and her father quit, she did not make an effort. so that is how she reacted to warnings. we know. we do not have to guess. she did not respond to warnings about health. she never made any effort to quit. they say, well, one of the fraud -- part of the fraud, apparently, is filters. and they say filters are fake. well, first of all, there is no evidence in this case as to when ms. mccabe switched to filters. none. they did not even attempt to provide it. romayne mccabe does not know anything about brands. there is no evidence in this case that ms. mccabe thought filters were safe. but look what the surgeon general was saying. look what the surgeon general was saying. the surgeon general concludes that filtered cigarettes and -- not just filters, but smoking cigarettes with lower amounts of tar and nicotine 4291 decrease lung cancer mortality rates among smokers. that was the official position of the surgeon general. that is a good thing. you would think you would want to decrease lung cancer. that is what the surgeon general was saying. at that point she was 50 years old, and she had been smoking for a long time. there is no evidence that there was some sort of filter fraud that somehow tricked her. and remember, they have to show that if something was not concealed, she would have acted differently. and ask yourself, is there any evidence that she was thinking in 1979, you know, i'm going to quit today, unless a new brand comes out, or i'm going to quit today unless there is a low tar brand. no. the only evidence that she ever smoked a low tar brand was malibu -- i'll just keep this up -- was malibu from 1990 to 1993. that was the last three years of her life. that is the brand she quit. we know one thing for sure. the only time she switched to a low tar brand, she quit it in a couple of years. there is no evidence that she got lung cancer because of something that anyone said about malibu. they did not even attempt to prove 4292 that. and under the jury instruction, that is what they have to prove. so here, a couple years later, the surgeon general says basically the same thing, that modern cigarette, today's filter-tipped lower tar and nicotine cigarettes produce lower rates of lung cancer, not higher. that is the surgeon general. he had researched this issue. their experts had researched the issue. they actually looked at the cancer rates -- not mice, not in the lab, they actually looked at the mortality tables of real people. people that smoked filters got less lung cancer. and that is a good thing. eight years later, '89, studies have shown that smoking filtered lower tar cigarettes reduces the risk of lung cancer. the surgeon general is saying it is a good thing to have these filtered cigarettes. in 1990, a lower risk of lung cancer for filtered cigarettes. when they show these documents from 1953 and they show the dizzying array of companies and witness -- companies and employees, i ask that you ask yourself: what does that have to do with jane mccabe? 4293 because we know that when jane mccabe got the most personalized warning right on the pack, she did not respond. we know when her uncles were passing away in front of her, literally, when she is taking care of uncle george with emphysema, we know she does not respond. so ask yourselves: what are all these documents? the documents that they say are horrible, the bad documents, as they called them, what do they have to do with her, with the actual real smoker in this case? and they do not. there is not any evidence that the tobacco companies said anything she relied upon. in fact, i want to talk about what melinda norman said -- her daughter melinda. she said, "mom said that she switched to malibu" -- that was around 1990, she was 61 years old -- "because of," and then she was not certain, but she said, "i think it was an ad -- because of an ad or something that somebody said that said malibu was healthier" -- those were her words, healthier. well, first of all, that story is impossible because we know there were not any television ads in the '90s. those ads went off january 1st, 1971, the rose bowl, the bowl games, that is what 4294 dr. cummings said. there had not been a television ad for 20 years. so if her mom really saw something about a low-tar cigarette on tv, it would not be from a tobacco company, and it would not be an ad. now, she only smoked malibu for three years. and, again, those are the ones she quit. there is certainly no evidence that it was something that somebody said about malibu that caused her cancer. there is no evidence that if she never switched to malibu and just stuck with her brand that she would have avoided her lung cancer. the plaintiffs did not even try to prove that, and yet the judge's instructions will tell you that is what they had to prove. now, one thing we know for sure, the 1990s ads, they would never say malibu was healthier. first of all, where is this malibu ad? if there really was a malibu ad -- i do not think we had any shortage of ads in this case. they have composite exhibits, meaning these combined exhibits, with hundreds of advertisements. dr. cummings alone probably showed you several hundred exhibits -- or several hundred advertisements. where is the malibu ad? 4295 no other member of her family confirms this malibu story. and when melinda norman was confronted, hey, that is -- you know, about this story, she also had some testimony, well, maybe it was in the '70s or '80s. and that does not make sense, because she switched to malibu in 1990. are they really saying there was an unknown ad 20 years earlier, that there was some sort of delayed reaction? let us get back to this. those ads did not say healthy because, according to dr. cummings, back since the '70s, every advertisement since the '70s was a print ad, it had to have the exact same warnings, the pack warnings. and in the '90s, these are the warnings that would have been on the packs and, according to dr. cummings, these are the warnings in the ads. and so if you saw a malibu ad, a quarter of the ad, one fourth -- because they called these rotating warnings -- would have said right in the advertisement "smoking causes lung cancer." the same disease she would get. a quarter of them would have said "quitting smoking now greatly reduces serious risk." a quarter would have had the pregnant woman ad or warning, and a quarter 4296 would have had that. so you have got unsubstantiated testimony that is impossible on its face, if it is a television ad, where there is no evidence that it had any effect on her lung cancer, and it just does not make sense. and, of course, neither melinda norman or any of the daughters ever claimed that their mom was choosing between quitting and smoking a malibu. nobody claims that. so nobody claims that something that somebody said about malibu is what caused her death. and that is what. they had to do. the judge's instruction is they have to show that if there had not been a statement or some omission of a fact, that she would have acted differently. and they have not proven that. and this is just a run through of everything that the fact witnesses said. whenever we asked them, was it the frank statement, ctr, tirc, the tobacco institute? no. there is no evidence that she ever saw, let alone rely -- and there is a big difference. people can see things. it does not mean they rely on them. there is no evidence of either for this case. so they have the wrong claimant. she did not 4297 meet her burden of proof. no one seriously says that some sort of omission is what caused jane mccabe to smoke, because she continued to smoke even though she got the most direct and immediate warnings. finally, i want to talk to you about -- let me, before we go to this next section -- for those reasons, because they have not met their burden of proof and they certainly have not proved that some unidentified concealment was a legal cause, you should vote no. and the same thing for the conspiracy. remember, dr. cummings says the conspiracy was in '53. she smoked years before that. we know off the bat, then, that the conspiracy could not make her smoke. and there is no evidence that -- whether it was r.j. reynolds who concealed or another tobacco company that concealed, there is no evidence that is what caused her to smoke. because when she got the information that smoking caused cancer, we know how she acted. it did not matter to her. she kept smoking until she could not see jenna. health issues were not a reason for her to quit. so you should vote no on that. 4298 the next one is damages. and i'm just going to talk briefly about this because i do not think you should get there. i do not think that a woman who makes her own choices, that an addiction professional, a trained nurse, and a woman who is been warned in as many ways as her, under this evidence, is entitled to money. and when her own children come in and say it was her business and her decision, then i submit they should not get money for their mother's choices. there is a difference between someone who is hurt in a way they cannot avoid and did not know and someone who had every opportunity to make her own decision, someone who society gives the right to decide whether to smoke. i submit they should not get any damages. but the plaintiffs gave you a number. there is five -- five children on this verdict form. and mr. trentalange says two and a half million to three and a half million. how do you come up with that number? is there any evidence? any explanation how they came up with that number? is there any basis, any metric, any measurement that would suggest that? and why such a big gap? why a million dollar difference? i mean, it is a 4299 number that is just tossed out into the air. and i would submit that you should remember, if you are thinking about giving any damages, these were not children who saw their mother pass away when they were young or when they were in school or when they were living with her or when they were being raised by her. and mr. mccabe's 40 years old when his mom passed away. and the daughters were between 35 and 40. and i certainly do not mean to belittle that. we are all going to face the loss of our loved ones, or we have, and we know that is bad. but under these circumstances, a woman who made a lifetime of decisions and got a lifetime of warnings and made what they call -- not me, but what they call her business and her decision, then that should be her decision. and they should not be rewarded financially even with the grief of their mother for the decisions she made. now, at three and a half million each, the plaintiffs would be asking for a total of 17 and a half million. at two and a half million, mr. trentalange would be asking for 12 and a half million. but then he said they want even more money in the form of punitive damages. and i want 4300 to talk to you about that. punitive damages. first of all, punitive damages, make no mistake about it, does not go to the american cancer society or anything. that would be a check that goes to the plaintiff. that means more money for the plaintiff. so you have to decide whether you think anything is warranted. but here's the difference. mr. trentalange: excuse me. objection, your honor. may we approach? the court: approach the bench, please. (at sidebar.) mr. trentalange: that is an absolutely improper consideration. they do not decide whether they think the money should go to the plaintiff -- that is not the instruction. the court: i'll sustain the objection. let us move on, please. thank you. mr. trentalange: can i have a curative instruction? the court: denied. (sidebar concluded.) mr. belasic: mr. trentalange talked about this. it is a completely different standard for punitive damages. it is no longer 4301 preponderance of the evidence. they still have the burden of proof, but their burden of proof is massively more. this is what is required. and you will have this. to get punitive damages, to answer yes on this last question, they have to have clear and convincing evidence. what does clear and convincing mean? it has to be of such weight that it produces a firm belief or conviction without hesitation -- without hesitation. that is not merely a doubt. all of us can have doubts about whether something -- it says, if there is any hesitation -- any hesitation by any of you, that they should get not just whatever they ask for and whatever you would award in compensatory damages; if there is any hesitation about giving him more money -- and i have no idea what they would ask for in punitive damages. but if there is any hesitation for you, then they have not met their burden of proof. it is a very, very strict standard. and you should know, if you vote yes here, there will be another phase of the trial. there will be additional evidence for you to consider. 4302 there is going to be more witness testimony. if you vote no, we are done. i want to talk about something that i skipped over that is very important; these fraud questions, fraudulent concealment and a conspiracy to fraudulently conceal. you should know you are going to -- you -- if you get to question 3, you are going to assign percentages. i do not think you should get there. addiction is not the legal cause of her injury. but you should know that no matter what you would assign on question 3, if you vote yes on 4, fraudulent concealment, if you vote yes on 5, those percentages will not be applied. it will be as if ms. mccabe was zero percent responsible. that is going to be the instruction that -- mr. trentalange: excuse me, your honor. mr. belasic: -- if you find -- the court: yes, sir? mr. trentalange: i have an objection. may we approach? the court: approach the bench, please. (at sidebar.) the court: yes, sir? mr. trentalange: i want to object to telling 4303 the jury about the effect, the legal effect of any reduction. there is an instruction that the court's going to give that they are not supposed to make any reduction. the court: well, the jury will rely on the instructions i give them. and i'll instruct the jury as to that now. (sidebar concluded.) the court: ladies and gentlemen, you are going to rely on the instructions that i give you. thank you. let us move on, please. mr. belasic: so if there is any hesitation, no punitive damages should be awarded. it is not my opinion. that is the law. that is the instruction that the judge is going to give you. now, we know punitive damages are damages in addition to damages that fully compensate the plaintiff. if you do -- if you do decide damages, you will decide what compensates them fully. this is extra money, the additional money. and it can only be awarded for conduct that was a legal cause of the harm suffered by the plaintiff. so it cannot be awarded for damage or for conduct that did not cause mrs. mccabe damage. 4304 now, think about this. in the instructions, you are told that punitive damages are to punish or deter. i'm going to give you some evidence. there was a lot of evidence that shows the context of what the companies did and why they did it. and let us go through some of that. ctr, the plaintiffs attack it. the council for tobacco research. but it funded research that was -- had substantial influence on the public health community to the point that the surgeon general, who has to decide whether the research is sufficiently good enough to go into his reports, found 600 of their research projects to be that scientifically credible they were used in the surgeon general reports. ten of those researchers were nobel prize winners. six thousand of their articles were published in peer-reviewed -- not some junk science that a tobacco company writes, but peer-reviewed journals like cancer, the journal of national cancer institute. it is not the type of phony research that you think of when you think of a company that should be punished. we know this, whatever you think of the tobacco institute, the council for tobacco research, the tobacco industry research committee, 4305 they are gone. they were disbanded in 1998. there is not any need to deter their actions, because they do not exist. they have been gone for 20 years -- almost 20 years. those employees, whether it is claude teague or alan rodgman, even the -- those employees are long gone. those are documents from the '50s and '60s. they are either dead or retired. every document, the documents they use, are publicly available. there is no need to punish or deter. you cannot deter the companies into producing the documents. they have already produced them. they are publicly available. they are on the website. that is what dr. cummings told you. and they have been publicly available since the 1990s. so there is no need to force that action. it is already taken place. reynolds admits that smoking is addictive. reynolds admits that smoking causes cancer. they say it right on their website. and they have said that since at least 2000. they want punitive damages for what they call concealment, and they have to show that that concealment caused harm. that instruction that i read to you, that the judge is going to give you, 4306 says you have to see if it was already known or readily available. we know what was known, and you saw it. as far back as the '20s, reader's digest was saying smoking causes cancer. dr. ochsner. this was known. it was not secret. this was not something like there is a chemical in your food that you have never heard of and it will cause you to get cancer. instead, the disease that she got was being discussed back in the '20s and back in the '40s. here's the newspaper that ran when she was at the hospital with dr. ochsner. we know newsweek, all of the reader's digests in the '50s. remember they talked about john kennedy and he did not know anything about lung cancer and everything? look what he said in '58. the clerk: warning, counsel. mr. belasic: okay. john kennedy writes an article in reader's digest and said, "the digest stories figured heavily in the committee hearings such as those on the cigarette-cancer relationship." so kennedy was not ignorant. and anyone -- anyone that read reader's digest would know. american cancer society said just this one 4307 magazine had a profound influence in creating public awareness about the risks of smoking. you have seen all of these. i'll just flip through them. she read life magazine. look at this. the gallup poll, 40 years, ladies and gentlemen, before she got lung cancer, ninety percent of america had heard that cigarette smoking may be a cause of cancer of the lung. this kind of smoking was not inevitable. at that time in the '50s, two out of every three women were not smoking at all. people made their own choices. ninety percent had heard -- that is 60 years ago, 40 years before she got cancer. another magazine that she read about cancer and death rates. all of the coverage of the surgeon general's report. the florida health department saying basically all floridians have heard about the surgeon general's report on lung cancer. the warnings. here's the surgeon general saying that even as far back as 50 years ago, you had anywhere from seventy percent to ninety percent who agree that cigarette smoking is harmful to health. and, of course, the mid '60s is when jane mccabe was being warned on the pack by the surgeon general and saw, unfortunately, her own two uncles 4308 pass away. she knew. no evidence in this case that r.j. reynolds thought filters were fraudulent. they read you some document that said -- i cannot remember if it was philip morris on the illusion of filtration. here's what r.j. reynolds said. this is a document they used. this is r.j. reynolds in '73. and look what they are saying about filters. they are saying, "the old cigarettes in the '50s had more tar, had more enjoyment or kicks, nicotine, and had more puffs." so this is 1973. so 20 years later, they are saying, hey, the old cigarettes gave more. twenty years later, the filter, it said it was reducing tar and nicotine. they were not saying that it was a fraud. they were saying that the '50s cigarettes were a lot stronger and the modern filtered cigarettes did reduce tar. that is why i showed you the four surgeon general's reports from the '70s, '80s, and 1990s. and the surgeon general said that the data show that people that smoked filters got lower rates of lung cancer. now, that is not something that should be punished. that is not something that 4309 plaintiff's should ask for 17 and a half million and then tell you we are going to come back and ask for more. i read this to dr. cummings. when they formed the ctr in '53, they said, "the industry is strongly convinced there is no sound scientific basis." they point out the national cancer institute at that time had officially refuted the tie-up. they did not say, let us start this and let us lie. the very document that dr. cummings told you said that they were convinced at the time that they were right. in '63, dr. cummings agreed with me that every carcinogen -- every carcinogen, every chemical compound that had been found to cause cancer -- and at that time, it was in -- in mice. no human studies. every cancer compound that the surgeon general listed in 1964 was provided by the industry. they did not leave anything out. they provided that list. did they have a dispute at the time? of course. you-all heard it. they were saying, hey, statistics cannot prove that something causes disease in a particular person. we even had testimony about that from dr. villa. fifty years 4310 later, dr. villa is still talking about statistics. so, yes, they did contest it. and, obviously, they said that painting something on the back of a mouse does not prove lung cancer. and maybe they stuck too long and clung to those ideas for too long. but in this case, jane mccabe being warned for 30, 40 years, there is no reason -- no reason to give them even more money. the surgeon general said in '64 the statistics could not prove cause. here's a document that is in evidence that you did not see before. murray senkus -- remember, he is the head of r&d -- from his boss galloway, september 1968. look at what reynolds' executives are saying secretly to each other. "in cooperation with others, push the work concerning tobacco and health. prepare a plan to foster a relationship with government personnel. if there is a safer cigarette, let us continue and increase our efforts." the top executives of company were saying work with the government, cooperate with the government, make a safer cigarette. and they did. they made the premier cigarette that significantly 4311 reduced cancer. this is the government's secret meeting that i talked about with dr. cummings. they made a cigarette that significantly reduced the risk of cancer. and dr. cummings said premier was a good idea. and what happened? you saw in that document, the fda tried to ban it. they had to pull it off the market. that is cooperation with the government, making a cigarette that the government says reduces cancer, and then having to watch the government, the fda, try to ban it. there is a lot of talk about design. and i'll tell you a couple of things. first, did dr. cummings ever say that the design of the cigarettes that ms. mccabe smoked made them more dangerous or harmed her in any way? no. here's what i asked him. you have got roll-your-owns. you know, you can go to the store, you buy some tobacco, and you roll it up in paper. you got a roll-your-own cigarette; right? well, he says, oh, the modern cigarette design, it is evil; it has all these ingredients and additives. all right? so, presumably, the modern cigarette must be more dangerous and that roll-your-own you make 4312 yourself is safer. no. this is what dr. cummings testified. the commercial cigarettes, like the salems, the belairs, they are not more addictive than roll-your-owns. they are not more addictive. in fact, he said, remember, the people that smoke roll-your-owns are more addicted than the people who smoke the factory cigarettes. there is no evidence that any design of a cigarette made it any more dangerous for her to smoke. and she smoked the same brand as her husband. her husband quit smoking salems. there is no design that hooked him. he changed his mind. she did not change hers until 30 days [sic] later. and dr. cummings admits that rolling your own cigarette with the tobacco you get from the store is not safer than a commercial cigarette. those commercial cigarettes are not more dangerous. the surgeon general said, when it came to ph, not a big deal. it says here cigarettes in the u.s. are mainly below 6.5 for ph and, therefore, they essentially contain only protonated nicotine. and what that means is, they do not have free nicotine. that is the surgeon general. you did not hear that from dr. cummings. 4313 an internal document, the correlations between ph and sales were simply coincidental in nature. there is no evidence from the historical data that the ph of rjr brands was purposely increased to enhance sales. and, of course, there was no evidence about any rjr brand that had a ph. he talked about reconstituted tobacco. that is actually tobacco. he called it manmade because they shape it into a sheet. it is the scraps, the parts of the plant that they form into a sheet of tobacco and they chop it up. and i never quite got what dr. cummings was saying when he said one floated and the other did not. but if any of you thought that meant it was more dangerous to take small pieces of tobacco and make it into a sheet, that is not what the surgeon general said. here's the surgeon general. "recon or reconstituted tobacco reduces the risk of tumors, generally resulted in condensates that were less tumorigenic," meaning less likely to produce tumors. that is a good thing. it is a good thing if you have reconstituted tobacco. they show you some -- maybe a scary thing 4314 of -- that said philip morris was doing some genetic research on modifying the tobacco leaf. look what the surgeon general says. it says, the main objective of this kind of research is to acquire the desired characteristics which will meet with the acceptance of smokers -- and then look -- and at the same time produce a less harmful tobacco. so that little video he showed where they were trying to adjust or trying do some sort of genetic research, the surgeon general has said that that is to make a safer, less harmful tobacco. here's a chart. surgeon general says that when it comes to reconstituted tobacco and reconstituted tobacco sheets, look what it says. it gives a grade of plus or double plus for tar and nicotine. now, what on earth does that mean? go down here. a plus means it is a significant reduction. double plus means more than a fifty percent reduction. here's the big column. carcinogenicity, meaning the propensity to cause cancer. reconstituted tobacco sheets, they rate it 4315 positive. why? because positive means that it is a significant reduction. the surgeon general said that reconstituted tobacco sheets have a positive effect by reducing the risk of cancer. that is the surgeon general's report, and that is the surgeon general's report card on the very design -- the very design that dr. cummings was talking about. that is why even when people smoke roll-your-owns, they are no safer than the commercial cigarettes. the clerk: five-minute warning, counsel. mr. belasic: they talk about the purpose of punitives being to deter. well, you know, it is not 1956 anymore. there is a warning on every pack. it is been there for 50 years. the documents are out, they are not concealed. the companies do not -- the companies that made those statements, ctr, ti, they do not exist. those executives, those guys that wrote that, they are long gone. and now, there is a new show. there is a new authority. the federal drug administration, since 2009, has regulatory authority to control cigarettes. the fda can regulate cigarettes just like it was a prescription drug. dr. cummings agreed they have 4316 the authority to control the design, the fda controls the additives in cigarettes, the fda controls the ingredients, the fda controls the nicotine levels. so from this point from 2009 on, the fda can take an additive out of cigarettes, as dr. cummings agreed. they can set a nicotine level, a nicotine cap, if they want. they can take any ingredient out that they want out and force the manufacturers to do it. that is what dr. cummings agreed. there is no need to give money, writing a check to james mccabe. he is not going to regulate the industry. they are already regulated like they were a public utility. and the fda controls what goes in the cigarettes, how they make the cigarettes, and how much nicotine is in the tobacco. that is done. dr. koop wrote that report in 1988. and the video they showed you was an old video from 1988. he went on to have a website, drkoop.com. this was his website in 2002, 14 years after his report and, of course, years after ms. mccabe quit. "the choice to light up is always yours. you are the one that has control over your 4317 behavior. it will not light itself and jump into your mouth." i'd like to close by showing the testimony of the children. it was her decision, and it was her business. can we play that? it is about one minute, your honor. the court: you may. (the following videotaped trial testimony clip of various witnesses was played before the jury.) "q. you do not recall ever -- you or your siblings ever having a conversation with your mother telling her she should quit, right? a. no, i do not. q. you just figured when she would quit, she would quit; right? a. yes. q. and it was her decision? a. yes." "q. and it was the same with her smoking, right? it was her decision whether she wanted to smoke or not; right? a. yes." "q. and you believe that it was your 4318 mother's decision to quit smoking in 1993; right? a. yes." "q. is it fair to say the topic of smoking did not come up because smoking was something that you and jane considered to be your own business? a. yes." "q. you told us one of the reasons you did not have conversations with your mother about smoking during her life is because you thought it was her business; right? a. that is correct. q. as far as you were concerned, smoking was her business; right? a. yes, sir. q. and we know that you had a few conversations with your mother about smoking, correct? a. not really about smoking. she was -- i never really had any types of conversations about her smoking. that was what i -- that was her business." (videotaped trial testimony clips concluded.) mr. belasic: her business, her decision. just like it was her decision and the decisions of the five family members who quit. the father, her 4319 husband, all four of her daughters made a different decision. and that is why we are not here today with a plaintiff called peter mccabe, because he chose to quit. his wife made a different decision. we are not here with someone called leon hudson mccabe. her father chose to quit. she did not decide to quit until 1993. and there is not anyone in her family that wishes she had made a different -- there is no one in her family that thinks she should not have made a different decision, but that does not mean that they get millions of dollars because she made that decision. thank you for your time. and again, this is the last chance i'll have to speak to you unless we go to a second phase, and i do not think that the evidence warrants that. i really appreciate all of your concentration and attention. thank you.