5 mr. schlesinger: may it please the court, counsel, john, the mccoy clan. good morning. ladies and gentlemen of the jury, good morning. jurors: good morning. mr. schlesinger: thank you for sitting through this trial. one of the things we tell jurors oftentimes is that many are chosen, but few are called. but, in this case, it is interesting. when we looked over your information, every one of you volunteered. and, so, unlike some cases in which the jurors begrudgingly submit, and they have got other more important things to do, my recollection was everybody here said, i'm willing to serve, and we -- we thank you for that. we think that is important, and we appreciate it. i've got a clicker here. so, at this juncture, i call this judgment day, a day of reckoning, a day of reckoning, in part, for what we will prove to you and remind you are reprehensible acts of the tobacco industry, historically, going way back, way back, a company that is an enterprise of death, a company that manufactured -- industrially manufactured terrible diseases that killed millions of americans over many, many decades, even after things like the 1964 surgeon general came out. and i'm going to go back and remind you about those things, and we will go through it and you will see what your job is to do. and your job is going to be filling out the questions and answers on a verdict form that is about three or four pages long, which his honor has not read, he will read at the -- read at the close, and i am going to try now to stitch together for you some of the evidence in the way we hope you see it, will you see it our way, and then help you come to the conclusions that you need to -- to make in your deliberative capacity as a juror in the jury room when we turn it over to you. and, you know, the whole idea, what is neat about this american system of justice, is that you all have no dog in the fight. you have no stake in the outcome. and, so, trial by jury is one of the best ways to protect the rights and liberties that we hold dear in this country. and while the attorneys are charged with zealously representing the position and the claim of their clients -- that is our role as advocates -- you all get to decide, okay, is this the search for the truth that the miami-dade courthouse has on a plaque emblazoned on every courtroom, "we who labor here seek only truth." that is going to be your job. and we are going to try to help you work through it based on assembling this data in -- realistically, what does it mean. so let me start by saying this: let me -- let me sum it up in a nutshell. the simple truth in this case is this is an industry, all right? and i said it has been in existence now and conducting a conspiracy, which was determined by the engle findings, which you will learn more about -- and i've got an enlargement up there you can read -- that youth targeted as replacement smokers, the dirty little secret of the business, that hides in plain sight, and the fact that, in real terms, in reality, this is nothing but drugs. that is all this is. smoking cigarettes is drug -- drug addiction, drug dependence. for a long time, it was a secret epidemic of drug dependence, because people did not know, because the tobacco industry played down the role of nicotine. and we will get into very great detail there, but this is just a nicotine-delivery device. it is nothing but drugs. it is hard to wrap your mind around it because it looks like a completely normal consumer product. and i'll show you some similar-looking packages that you can ask, do these look bad? if a child -- if a youngster is holding up a pack of camel -- camel cigarettes, with a nice little camel on it, if a child holds this package up and asks his dad -- a five-year-old, a six-year-old, a seven-year-old -- asks his dad, dad, what is this, and a dutiful parent, discharging his responsibility to guide his son towards the -- down the path of the true and narrow, says, oh, son, that is bad, that is bad, well, the son may respond, but, dad, it does not look bad. i mean, i have toy camels in my collection. kids collect toy camels. is a toy camel bad when you buy safari animals? is that bad? why is this camel bad? it is got pretty blue colors. why is that bad? so we will talk about that. the idea is that these look like normal consumer products. you cannot tell the difference. it is like that old game we used to play, one of these things is not like the other, one of these things just does not belong. a pack of pall malls, a color scheme like a hot wheels toy car, a color scheme like a -- like a pack of cards, jolly ranchers. in other words, it looks like a normal consumer product. it does not look like heroin, it does not look like cocaine, is not illegal, but it is an epidemic of drug addiction that exists in our country because -- and when folks say, well, why is this epidemic so difficult to eradicate? it is because there is a powerful industry that depends upon its perpetuation. and this is historical news going back to the '50s, no doubt, but it bears examination today. it is not old news. it is new news. if it was not new news, we would not have things like the surgeon general's report, which comes out every two years, and as recently as 2014 -- and this is in evidence -- as recently as 2014 -- oh, and by the way, dr. prochaska is referenced in this book. it comes out as recently as 2014, and it teaches us quite a bit and it explains the tobacco industry's extensive campaign to counteract the forces through marketing and public relations, political influence, and the creation of doubt about the scientific evidence on tobacco is know -- is now well documented through the industry's internal documents. the industry, itself, used its influence to thwart public health action at all levels and fraudulently misled the public on many issues, including whether low-yield cigarettes conveyed less risk to health and whether exposure to secondhand smoke harmed nonsmokers. undoubtedly, these actions slowed progress in tobacco control. so -- and there is more in here. that is page 34. i want you to be thinking about that, because these are in evidence. these stand -- right now, this is current, cutting-edge treatment and current cutting-edge analysis. and the focus now, in 2014, 50 years later, is the scientists, the public health researchers, the -- the folks that are protecting us through the federal government public health agencies, they are diving into this amazing archive of prior secret records of the tobacco industry to come to important conclusions about what they did to the citizenry that led to the 20 million deaths even since 1964. now, that is a big number, it is hard to wrap your mind around, but we will talk about it in no small detail. so the simple truth is, these are the two things that are so important to understand: all smoking is based on youth, and it is nothing but drug addiction. that is what smoking is. and we will go into the detail of it. now, you know, one of the things we did -- and i must tell you this -- is we went through this trial and we presented a lot of evidence. and part of the reason is because we do not know how much you need. you know, we say, when you come into this courtroom, i thought i knew. i knew something about the tobacco companies. i thought i knew. but i say, now that you have learned some of this and heard the lessons that dr. proctor and dr. prochaska offered about what the tobacco industry's motives were, and what they were all about, i say, now you know. and it reminds me of an elton john song -- some of you may know elton john, or not -- but the honky chateau album had a song called mona lisas and mad hatters. and there is a line in there where he says, "i thought i knew, but now i know." and i think, for you jurors, hopefully, if you see this our way, if we have stitched this together correctly for you, maybe you will see this our way and you will -- you will think, now i know. hopefully, we did not give you too much evidence. we do not know how much evidence you need, but, hopefully, we did not give you too much. now, why? why? this is why: because back as early as the '60s, and even after the surgeon general was trying to get the message out, the surgeon general they belittled and smeared and attacked, they knew cigarette smoke is a drug, but there were dangerous implications to the fda finding out about that, should that secret get out. we have got the goods on them now. we have their internal secret industry documents that were never meant to see the light of day. and we are going to talk about that. the fact is, is that this report here, on page 105, in no uncertain terms establishes that nicotine addiction is the fundamental reason that tobacco -- that -- that smokers persist in using tobacco products. page 105. and this persistent use contributes to many diseases described in this report. that is the concept that addiction causes disease. dependence -- it is an interchangeable word. dependence causes disease. and one of the things -- and i'm going to go aside real quick, because i've got a great outline here, but i never stay on it because i'm just going to ramble, but i'll get the points across -- is dr. agharkar, i heard him the other day, was talking about never having heard of the fagerstrom. page 106, okay -- the fagerstrom report is in page 106 of the nicotine section, and it is regarded as one of the most prominent instruments that the physicians have and use to determine the degree or severity of dependence to smoking, is the nicotine tolerance questionnaire. and that whole questionnaire is laid out here, just like the dsm has got a structured questionnaire that you use to make sure you get the answers right on the dsm, that dr. prochaska explained to you we used, and dr. agharkar said he knew nothing about it. so we are going to discuss the relative weights, values and merits of the experts in this case. there is even a section here that says: an indice of smoking reinforcement or persistence are related to a high level of addiction. these indicate a longer duration of smoking, young age of smoking initiation, no previous attempt to stop smoking, and a shorter duration of abstinence during previous attempts to stop smoking. 119. the definitive statement. this is not -- this is not one guy. there are hundreds of researchers, scientists, biologists, doctors of every ilk, professors from all over the country. you are going to look at this document and you will see hundreds of physicians nationwide contribute to this highly peer-reviewed, highly vetted, very cautiously stated scientific conclusion, without exaggeration. they are very cautious. but on page 119, they say: sometimes one big indice of addiction is that you did not stop or you had short periods of time to stop. smoking a long time without stopping is an important sign of addiction, just like smoking in the face of harmful consequences. so we heard a lot of statements from the defense, and the defense would say, somebody said it was bad, to her; someone told her it was bad; the family members excoriated her. mom, come on, we have got to do something about this. but the addict is in denial, and if you are hearing countervailing messages from a tobacco industry, saying, smoke filters, it is not bad, we still need more study, you were demotivating an addict. it is "operation stumbling block," and it worked. and we will go through that. it worked. but what is the -- what is the -- this is addiction causation. there is several other places where the science says, of course addiction causes disease. here's one. and are you going to run that? (the video clip was played and taken down to the best of the reporter's ability as follows:) voice: we should also give priority to the one addiction, tobacco addiction, that is killing more than 300,000 americans each year. (video clip concluded.) mr. schlesinger: tobacco addiction killing more than 300,000 americans a year in 1988. now, with our understanding of science and all of the broad panoply of medical diseases that are caused by smoking, it is 540,000 american deaths per year. two-thirds, one in -- two out of every three persons who smoke for an excessive period of time will die of a tobacco-related disease. this is a current epidemic that needs to continue to be examined because it is the number one killer in the united states. one in every five deaths. if you eliminated tobacco, it would be the equivalent of coming up with a vaccine that cured all of -- all of -- one-third of all cancers -- mr. furr: objection. mr. schlesinger: -- in this united states. the court: what is the objection, counsel? mr. furr: to -- the court: overruled. this is argument. mr. schlesinger: and this is on page 652 of the surgeon general's report, 2010, a revolutionary current exhibit, talking about if the population ceased smoking, this single behavior would be tantamount to a vaccine against one-third of cancer deaths. can you imagine? we are spending all of this time to cure cancer, and you know what? we can get one -- rid of one-third of it right now, because of cigarettes. and what did dr. proctor's book say? what did dr. proctor's book say? the title of it says: the golden holocaust -- a holocaust made of profitable goals -- origins of the cigarette catastrophe and the case for abolition. "abolition" means freedom from enslavement. mr. furr: objection. the court: sustained. mr. schlesinger: in any event -- mr. furr: move to strike the last comment, your honor. the court: disregard the last comments, ladies and gentlemen. mr. schlesinger: you can use your common understanding of what the word "abolition" means, but the point is -- mr. furr: objection, your honor. the objection was sustained. the court: as to a different word, not to "abolition." let us go. mr. schlesinger: okay. so, in any event, the -- this is an 800-page book. had there been anything in there worth contradicting, a skillful attorney would have, from the defense, from the -- lorillard, and mr. furr would have challenged him with something that helped his case. but not one word in this 800-page book was ever referred to on cross-examination. they are the words of dr. proctor. this book is a revelation. it is a great contribution to public health and it is very helpful. so the -- we played the video, right? let us go to the next one. anyway, it says there: nicotine addiction goes -- leads to lung cancer. that is in the 2000 surgeon general's report. it is in evidence. you can see it, okay? did i put the page number up there? i do not see the page number, but it is in evidence. now, let us play that. (the video clip was played and taken down to the best of the reporter's ability as follows:) voice: we want to be the detectives just as much as the surgeon general and the ama, and we will cooperate in every way. voice: well, obviously, a filter takes out certain tar and nicotine. i do not think the industry admits there are any bad elements. if there are bad elements, through our laboratories, through the surgeon generals, through the ama, through acts of god and luck, we hope we may find them. and if they are found, they will be removed. voice: we -- we do talk to the question of whether or not cigarettes are hazardous. we do not believe that cigarettes are hazardous. we do not accept that, because when, as and if any ingredient in cigarette smoke is identified as being injurious to human health, we are confident that we can eliminate that ingredient. voice: do you believe that cigarettes are safe? have they been proven to be safe, mr. cullman? voice: i believe they have not been proven to be unsafe. (video clip concluded.) mr. schlesinger: these are the chief executive officers going, as dr. proctor said, thousands and thousands of times to deny that cigarettes caused harm so that they could keep smokers smoking. and you will see as we go through this, you get a guy like cullman, and i see that cheshire cat grin and that smarmy demeanor, and he says: if there is any bad elements, they will be removed. and the fact of the matter is, is the worst element is nicotine. so dr. prochaska testified about the fact that you cannot just look at the smoker. the problem is, you have to look at the cigarettes flowing down the river from the manufacturers. if there was not that flow, it would be -- that would be -- there would not be the problem of nicotine. and he talked about whether ms. mccoy quitting is a success story, and it is not. but, you know, his concern is, is that there are, even to this day, researchers who are putting evidence into the society for research on nicotine and tobacco, and confusing whether or not there are permanent -- this is the wrong one. mr. gdanski: the next slide. mr. schlesinger: wait, hang on. let me stay on this one. i'm sorry. in any event, her point here is, this is a cycle. there are smokers that come out and die, there are replacement smokers that come in, and she says it is a big business, one of the biggest businesses in the nation. in a case like today -- because they have said this industry's powerful for more nations. in the jury system we have in this country, you hold great power. you have the ability to speak truth to power. you have heard evidence that it is a powerful industry, and you get to make a determination, on a level playing field -- my client, mr. mccoy, his family is here, they get to stand toe to toe with the tobacco companies -- and you get to make the decisions as to whether you can speak truth to power; but you hold power that -- you may hold more power in this case than you have ever held in your life. so it is an important and significant opportunity for you to do that. and one of the arrogance of power is that actions can be reprehensible. remember the waxman hearings and the ceos getting up in '94, when it was no longer really a debate in the public that cigarettes caused cancer and that they were deeply addictive? it was six years after koop had said, yeah, this is as addictive as heroin and cocaine. they got up and lied before congress. that is an arrogance of power to be able to do that. it was not received well by the -- by the public, but it was important to see. so, also, dr. prochaska talked about that the changes in the brain are believed to be permanent; and while there is some debate in the field, she perceives that the tobacco industry is hard at work creating ambiguity, because there were tobacco industry people at her conference, trying to submit information, and did not disclose the fact that they were funded by tobacco. and do not you remember that dr. proctor said that was true back even in the '50s and '60s, with the ama, who they paid $20 million not to appoint and support the 1964 surgeon general's report? so this was a very strong campaign to counteract the effects of the public health authority. now, what about our client? because you heard -- the last you heard was agharkar. we will talk about him. i mean, he has courtroom experience. he is not on any staff of any hospital to treat patients. and, believe me, there are such things as psychiatric emergencies. a real active, practicing psychiatrist, with a boatload of patients who are suffering from such terrible things as depression, they can have suicidal ideation. if they end up needing a hospital admission, a doctor who is really practicing full-service psychiatry needs a hospital setting to admit patients or go see them. he admitted he did not even see them. he admitted the bulk of his work was getting money, testifying in court; and his credential was, i'm a forensic credential [sic], i'm a courtroom expert. but in terms of his actual credentials, telling you what is the -- what it is on tobacco addiction, he had to contradict every single thing out there, including the surgeon general's report, including dr. prochaska, who teaches the addiction psychiatrists how to determine addiction. and, quite frankly, dr. prochaska, as you well know, if those were the answers she heard from one of her students, they probably would not get -- mr. furr: objection. mr. schlesinger: -- a very good grade in that class. the court: sustained. mr. schlesinger: so, you know, this is the tamol document. this shows, in no uncertain times -- in no uncertain terms, as early as the '60s, that the research at philip morris was to make sure that when those light cigarettes were coming in, that they would not remove so much nicotine or lower the light cigarettes to the point where they would lose smokers, they would wean them off nicotine, and they said, in no uncertain terms, we need to make sure we keep the normal smoker hooked. keep that nicotine so the smoker gets hooked. and prochaska said the same thing, that hook is pulling you along. it pulls you along towards addiction, it maintains addiction. they said she was -- they said the family said, mom, what is wrong with you? are you blind? well, i say that is good testimony for us. yes, that is the nature of the blindness caused by addiction. the definition of "addiction" is smoking despite the knowledge of harmful consequences. so when you are smoking even though -- even when you know -- and she knew more in the '80s -- that it is bad for you, and you continue to smoke, that shows the power of addiction. and dr. prochaska explained that to you when she testified that to you. so she is blinded by her innocence, you know? she was blinded by addiction. but, to the contrary, the tobacco industries eye's were wide open, and what they were pursuing was greed. they were about making money and making profit, and they did not care about the health of their customers. they did not care what happened to them. they chose profits over causing addiction, causing harm. that was a profit center. and so it begs the question, if a friend of a friend came to a person on the street and said, hey, i got this great business idea and we are going to make tons of money, people are going to eat this stuff up, some kind of special product, no one is going to be able to get enough of it and we are going to make tons of money, they are going to eat it -- they are not going to be able to stop taking it, but it is going to kill half or two-thirds of the users, would a moral person go into that business -- mr. tepikian: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. mr. schlesinger: would somebody go into that business with a -- with -- as a good-faith basis, would they take that business? well, this industry did. so prochaska talked about hooked, and the fact of the matter is, i want to just -- i want to share this with you. you know, the tobacco -- tobacco companies in this case want to pretend that glodine mccoy was not addicted, all right? but if you do not -- if you do not buy that, they want a fallback position that if she was addicted, it was her choice to continue to smoke long enough to get sick; therefore, it was her choice and not her addiction that caused pvd, heart disease, copd, lung cancer, and death. but not one piece of evidence was presented by either side that glodine's addiction was her choice. you know why? because nobody chooses addiction. it is often a terrible side effect of the choice to smoke. just like some -- just like addiction some people get from prescription pain relievers. no one chooses that addiction, but it frequently happens as an unintended -- unintended consequence of the use of the drug. the point is that lawful but dangerous drugs can have awful side effects like addiction. that is why ordinary people often say, about tobacco or prescription pain relievers, be careful, do not get hooked. why do people say that? because addiction is like a fish getting hooked. the fish chooses to strike the bait and then he gets caught by the hidden hook. the hook starts pulling the fish along. the fish starts fighting the hook and tries to get off. fish that are only hooked through the side of the lip may get away, but those that are hooked deep through the side of the mouth are goners. fishermen know this. that is why they use baits and hooks in the first place. but no fisherman would ever tell you that the fish was caught because the fish chose to get hooked. the fish died because he did not see the hook in the first place. the teenage glodine mccoy in 1913 -- in 1940, at 13 or 14 years of age, did not see the hook. she died in 1997. the tobacco companies did not tell their customers that they thought cigarettes were addictive until several years after she died. instead -- and they repeated it to everybody that could read. and we know that glo read a lot, that there was a substantial scientific controversy about whether cigarettes were addictive and harmful, and whether cigarettes could get you hooked. there were no cautionary labels of any kind on a pack of cigarettes until 1966. and, at that time, it was a caution. it may be harmful, or, in keeping with the doubt campaign and the campaign of confusion, it may not. she had been smoking for decades. she was hooked, hooked badly. she tried to get away, but she could not. and being hooked eventually killed her. now, the tobacco companies want to tell you, being hooked had nothing to do with the death of glodine mccoy. and that is a real fish story for you, and they know it. mr. furr: objection. the court: sustained. mr. schlesinger: glo -- mr. furr: your honor, can we approach? mr. schlesinger: oh, come on. the court: counsel, i sustained the objection. it is -- mr. furr: i need to approach. at sidebar:) the court: yes, sir? mr. furr: my objection was sustained to the argument that our defense was a real fish story. that is an attack upon the defense. i need to move for mistrial. the court: thank you. you wish to be heard? there is no manifest necessity for a mistrial. the motion is denied. (sidebar discussion was concluded, and the following was held in open court:) mr. schlesinger: in any event, glo chose to smoke at a time when no one knew the real dangers of addiction and the disease inherent in cigarettes. she started as a young teen in 1940. the advertising and movies that attracted young glo never mentioned addiction, they never mentioned cancer. she had been smoking for 25 years before the cigarette packs even said cigarettes might be dangerous to your health. twenty-five years. in that amount of time, this -- the hook can set deep. glodine mccoy was pulled along by that hook for about 50 years until she finally got off it, after having a heart attack, standing on the precipice of the abyss of death. she tried to fight it, she could not get off. maybe some of you will think she should have tried harder. and that is fair, but that is fault. that is not class membership, that is not addiction. and we have to -- we have to make sure we do not conflate the concepts of fault with the threshold determination as to whether or not she is one of the all floridians who suffered from these diseases before 1996. so, the cigarette will preempt food in times of scarcity. i told you about this in opening, i proved it to you during the trial. you heard the testimony of scott mccoy. and the internal marketing documents knew this and anticipated it back in the '60s. so the fact is, is that is a sign of addiction. when i say "sine qua non," that is because claude teague, senior research scientist, brilliant man, enjoyed a career of over 30 years at the -- at the rjr company, made brilliant statements, you are going to read three of his key documents: the 1950 survey of cancer research, nicotine, and its crucial role in cigarette smoking, and the important thoughts of the youth market and capturing the youth market. those documents right there tell you everything you need to know about what the tobacco industry was about. and in one of his documents, he said that nicotine was the "sine qua non," latin for without which there is nothing. and that is the truth about the tobacco industry. that is what they said in that document, who ain't for more money? do we want to tout cigarettes as a drug? they are. but they all say here: if we lose that tobacco -- if we lose the nicotine in tobacco, we could be out of business almost overnight. we would all lose our jobs and our consulting fees. philip morris and the cigarette market would collapse. if we reduce and eliminate the cigarette [sic] from our products, we shall eventually liquidate our business. and here is their -- here is their confession: the lawyers remind us, i'm told -- mr. tepikian: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. mr. schlesinger: the lawyers remind us, i'm told, that the entire matter of addiction is the most potent weapon a prosecuting attorney can have in a lung cancer/cigarette case. we cannot defend smoking as free choice if the person was addicted. this is in the '80s, before koop came out in '88 and said, this is as addictive as heroin and cocaine; but they anticipated it and they knew what impact that would have in their ability to defend these cases. so this is an important document for you to consider, and it is in evidence. here's my question: we are in florida. i do not know if the florida lobster mini-season is already over -- i think it is -- but lobster traps -- we talked about hooks, but let us talk about lobster traps. cigarette companies engineer their -- their cigarettes to make it as easy as possible to start, as easy as possible for children to start. that is the basis of the business, the dirty little secret that hides in plain sight. they make it as hard as possible to quit. they do not want their customers to quit. my client, glodine mccoy, may she rest in peace, she was the perfect customer. she fit their plan to a tee. she smoked their cigarettes, she smoked their filters, she smoked their lights. whatever they did to reassure her that she was doing something safer and to undermine her quitting, they did it, and she followed along like so many others like her. she fit the business plan to a tee. she was a beloved customer, one of millions, except when we got in the courtroom, except when her -- her husband, john mccoy, decided to pursue this legal action -- and he is an old man, and we are proud of him for bringing this case -- mr. furr: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. mr. schlesinger: in any event, the lobster trap is this: it is really hard to get -- really easy to get in. there is bait inside, in crawls the lobster. it is really hard to get out. the question is, why should cigarette smoking be so hard? in the defense of the case, the defendants would have you believe that she smoked enough to cause her peripheral vascular disease, her heart disease, her copd, her lung cancer and death, but not enough to addict her. that -- that does not make any sense. look at her. she smoked all the time. she smoked for nicotine all the time. these are just natural family photos, right? none of these are staged. this is just taking pictures of family, okay? all the pictures of the family, so many of them, in every one of them, you see what she is got in her hand? she is got a cigarette. she was a cigarette smoker. smoking 20 cigarettes a day, 200 hits of nicotine to the brain a day is because of nicotine addiction. the preponderance of the evidence stands. this is not a criminal case. you will make a decision by the greater weight of the evidence. on balance, who wins by the preponderance of the evidence. they -- they are going to say this is some evidence, they are going to say this is some evidence, we will show it, we are going to say we have got some evidence that maybe is more persuasive, more powerful, more reliable, and we are going to say and prove to you that if we tip the scales in our favor, not a criminal case -- raising a doubt does not get them to escape their responsibility. but when you are asking all the questions, what is more likely, what makes common sense, what is the preponderance, the greater weight of the evidence, better than a coin toss, what is more likely than not probable -- it is not absolute, so you cannot get stuck on the, well, maybe something else could have happened. there is going to be lots of maybes. what probably explains this story, that is what is important. here's what the national institutes of drug -- on drug abuse, a federal agency -- dr. agharkar would not recognize it. i wonder why. he said that this -- this says that addiction is a chronic, relapsing brain disease that is characterized by compulsive drug-seeking and use, despite harmful consequences. all of the times they said that the family said she said "shut up," she said, you -- i think filters are better for me. but, mom, this could kill you. are you blind? all of those things, that is the classic response of the addict in denial, the person looking for a place to live within themselves. they want to believe the message put out by the tobacco companies, it might not be harmful. they want to believe it because that is -- if you -- if you give an uncertain message, confusing picture to an addict, you knock the pins under them. you undermine their ability to forcefully get after quitting. and when she was addicted as a teenage girl, going all the way back to the '40s and the '50s and the '60s, there was nothing about addiction out there that was meaningfully told. to this day, there is nothing that says tobacco smoking is addictive. that is not going on. anyway, nicotine is the center of their universe. and all these documents that are all in evidence talk about, we are in the business of selling nicotine -- this is from the early '60s, that is called the battelle hippo -- nicotine is addictive, the dominant specifications for our product is nicotine delivery, nicotine is potent, the industry is designed upon the sale of nicotine, even to the point where if you put a hungry rat in a cage and give him a drug, he is going to press that lever and press that lever. and they say, smoking is the lever push, using skinnerian techniques of operant conditioning, showing how rats get addicted and comparing those rats to the human smoker. without nicotine, the argument goes, there would be no smoking. nobody's ever become a cigarette smoker by smoking cigarettes without nicotine. we got the goods on them. these were never supposed to see the light of day. you are seeing them now and you are seeing what they wrote, what they said. and that is why we are still studying them. in the 2014, it says it is a treasure trove, we are studying and writing research articles all the time. this -- and this is super important: the cigarette should be conceived not as a product, but as the package. the product is nicotine. the cigarette is but one of the many layers. think of the cigarette as a pack of a storage container for a day's supply of nicotine. and it goes on to say, it is a nicotine-delivery device. you remember what dr. prochaska said? this will shoot the nicotine to your brain -- this perfectly engineered, down to two decimal places, nicotine-delivery device, precise nicotine -- will shoot the nicotine to your brain faster than an intravenous and hit that brain 200 times a day. so smokers often smoke for the avoidance of withdrawal. when that cigarette starts wearing off, they get jittery, they get nervous, and it gets to the point where they cannot think of nothing else and they have got to have that cigarette. so some of their free will has been compromised, okay? and very few consumers are aware of the effects of nicotine, its addictive nature, and that it is a poison. it was always promoted as something that had to do with health. and, again, the surgeon general's reports that are in, talk about that when you understand tobacco addiction, it helps you understand why the tobacco user continues to use tobacco despite the known health risks. every one of the defendants' statements -- and there were many, many, many of them -- about what she heard and what she knew, particularly in the '80s when it became more clear and she was more responsive to her children -- plays along with this line: knowing it is bad for you and smoking anyway is a sign of addiction. now, addiction in the class membership does not matter for class membership. addiction may matter for fault, and we will get to that, but it also says that smoking is not a free choice, because most smokers begin as teenagers and then become addicted. and then the surgeon general '15, page 105, it talks about how difficult it is to quit and how, in the united states, the number one drug addiction, out of all drug addictions, far and away is cigarettes. you know, we see things happening with cars and airbags and people being hurt, and you think alcohol deaths or heroin deaths. they pale in significance to the numbers. they are a fraction to the numbers of cigarette diseases in this country. it is an important, ongoing epidemic. here's legal cause: in order for addiction to be a legal cause, it does not have to be the only cause. it can be in combination and contribution of other acts. so if she is smoking because she is dependent, if some of the smoking -- if some of that compulsive smoking is being driven by nicotine, which we know it is, but also she is enjoying it or she is not trying hard enough to quit, that means that she is entitled to get the contributing cause instruction to say that smoking is a legal cause. here, does it contribute substantially? meaning, did the addiction play an important role? if she was not addicted to nicotine, would she have smoked one or more packs per day every day for 50 years? hundreds and hundreds of thousands of cigarettes, millions of hits of this nicotine drug, this short-acting nicotine drug to the brain? what is missing from here? in the class membership definition, you will not see anything that says choice has something to do with -- with class membership. it is a threshold term. all floridians. maintain her in the class where she obviously belongs. she is got the requisite predicate evidence to be there. you can make these things as hard as you want or as easy as you want. the records we showed you and the tobacco addiction in the chart, in two minutes, somebody can easily come to the conclusion, yep, she was obviously addicted, it drove the compulsive smoking, led to disease, she is a class member under engle. they want to escape their responsibility by keeping her out of -- mr. furr: objection. mr. schlesinger: -- the class. the court: sustained. mr. schlesinger: or if the -- if they kept her out of the class, they would not face responsibility for the -- mr. furr: objection. mr. schlesinger: -- the engle lawsuit findings. the court: sustained. counsel -- mr. schlesinger: okay. all right. the court: -- i sustained the objection. mr. furr: your honor, same motion as before. the court: thank you. same ruling as before. it is denied. mr. schlesinger: again, so this is addiction as a concurring cause. it only has to be a legal cause of disease, it can act in combination with other things. it is not the all or none. but she was dependent on nicotine in cigarettes, she was addicted, and you will see that whatever the combinations were, taste, flavor, whatever, it still contributes. what did they say? did they choose profits over public health? did they want smokers to quit? here are the documents in evidence where they talked about a guy who was coming up with a way to get a chemical that would block the nicotine. and what were they afraid of and why would not they fund his program? because it was having some great success. and this is back in the '70s. remember, nicotine patches, nicotine gum did not come out until the '80s. they slowed the introduction of help to patients. they did not care. they were not setting up smoking-cessation clinics. they were not fielding customers who were 30 years old, that had started at 14, who said, you know, i want to start a family now, i've been using your products for the last 15 years, i need some help to get off, can you help me? they did not demonstrate that. they worked just like they did when they boycotted merrell dow, who was introducing a smoking-cessation product, the gum. they did not want people to quit, and they proved it by their actions as documented in their secret records. and, remember, there is an old chinese proverb: the palest ink is much more vivid than the brightest memory. so what we have got nails down internally the lies they were telling the public publicly. and he said, if we let this guy come up with a way to block the nicotine, we are in the process of digging our own grave. and the question you have got to ask yourself is, whose graves were they willing to dig but their own? mr. furr: objection, your honor. mr. schlesinger: now, the program has the potential to do great damage to the industry. it undermines the public posture. we have taken outsiders, they admit they are lying, they are telling a different story inside than they did outside, and that antagonist could put the tobacco manufacturers out of business. the believability of witnesses. we will get into this a little bit real quick. you need to know that you have the power to decide who to believe. you have the power to judge the demeanor of the live witnesses. so the folks that testified before you, you get to look them in the eye, you get to take some notes, you get the feel and measure of what they had to say. and who did we bring into the courtroom? dr. prochaska. what a -- what a -- what a well-credentialed, true scientist, working deeply in the program. she demonstrated the gravitas. we tried to honor this process by bringing to you the world's leaders who are contributing to the cutting-edge research reports, who are dedicating their life to figuring out how can we help people with tobacco addiction. and she is explaining, we have got to look at what the tobacco manufacturers are doing, because the tobacco epidemic is so recalcitrant to elimination, because a powerful industry depends upon its perpetuation. there is a driving force. she called it a vector. you know what a vector is. a vector is that which spreads disease. a virus, a germ. she described them to a vector. that is in evidence in this case. so when you consider believability of witnesses, take prochaska. never been in a courtroom before, never came to court to testify, came to do a benefit for the clients and public health. dr. mannino, he talked -- he wrote the chapter on chronic obstructive pulmonary disease in the very current surgeon general's report, a giant in his field, a well-respected authority, not only nationwide, but worldwide, and came before you and was willing to describe and explain and took of his time and came back another weekend to be here with us, and i think that dignifies the proceedings and honors -- mr. furr: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. mr. schlesinger: similarly, dr. proctor came and testified. the man has got tremendous credentials. he is the world's leading researcher on what he says is the origins of the cigarette catastrophe, explaining what happened. because those of us who forget history are doomed to repeat it. and he is laid it out. and it will be studied for decades, because 80 million documents takes a long time to study. but those witnesses are believable. now, when it comes to someone who is an expert, how did you get to be an expert? you get to be an expert because you do something that distinguishes you. you dedicate your life, you -- you study -- you are scholarly, you contribute to the literature, you write, you teach, you want people to know, you commit yourself on paper to what you have accomplished. you have your colleagues read it for -- for -- for veracity and accuracy, so that when it gets into the journals to teach other people, it is accurate. our experts did that in abundance. their experts did it not at all. and i will submit to you, as we get into more detail in this, that the power you hold is the expert witness instruction which says experts are special and why you may consider their testimony and give it the weights it deserves. if it does not meet with the bounds of common sense, if you find that it contradicts everything you saw in this courtroom, you may reject it. you have that power. so you may say, how could dr. -- how could judge murphy let them say these things -- mr. furr: objection. mr. schlesinger: -- in this courtroom? but he let them -- the court: sustained. counsel... mr. schlesinger: the evidence is permitted because you were empowered through the jury instruction to reject it. and i suggest that you do reject it. oh, so the strawman. i'll go back to that. so why -- there is a false equivalency here, and i must touch on it very quickly. the false equivalency is that dr. proctor charged a lot of money. he is been drafted into this series of engle class individual cases that are being tried all up and down this -- this -- this state, and he is pulled all over coming to court. and he went to miami. remember he went to miami right after our case? and i'm pretty sure he is back in miami. if we go -- when we go to punitive damages with you all, if the timing is right, we will bring him back in here -- mr. tepikian: objection, your honor. mr. schlesinger: -- to talk to you again. the court: sustained. mr. schlesinger: in any event, dr. -- dr. proctor, here's what he did. here's how he became an expert. he built a better mousetrap and the world beat a path to his door. remember that saying? if you invent something, if you do something, if you distinguish yourself among the world's experts, and do something no one else has ever done, and that information, that scholarship becomes necessary in a court of law where many cases are going on, you will be sought out, as opposed to going to someone who you call an expert, who has experience coming into courtrooms but does not have any specialty in nicotine, nicotine addiction, anything like that. that is not the kind of expert that can match up with an expert who has built the better mousetrap. so it is a -- it is a shifting justification, it is a false equivalency to try to compare proctor merely because he charged money over time because of all these cases that are -- they are seeking to defy and to -- mr. tepikian: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. counsel -- mr. schlesinger: i misspoke. to try -- mr. tepikian: your honor -- mr. furr: your honor, may we approach? mr. schlesinger: i misspoke, judge. i meant to say "try." mr. furr: i would like to approach. the court: sure. at sidebar:) the court: yes, sir? mr. furr: i move for mistrial. once again, he is basically -- he is attacking the defense of this lawsuit. and also on the cumulative effect of all the attacks that have been made during the course of his closing. the court: wish to be heard? mr. schlesinger: no. the court: counsel, just -- you go into the evidence. mr. schlesinger: okay. the court: do not -- do not go after the defense, all right? mr. schlesinger: okay. the court: thank you. mr. schlesinger: i'm going back to the defense's witness. the court: the objection's sustained. mr. schlesinger: okay. i will. i'll watch it, judge. the court: thank you. but there is no manifest necessity for a mistrial. i sustain the objection. (sidebar discussion was concluded, and the following was held in open court:) mr. schlesinger: may i proceed? the court: hold on, hold on. let everybody get set. all right, counsel, you may proceed. mr. schlesinger: in any -- in any event, this is why i use this imagery. i say, proctor deserves to be here. he built a better mousetrap. here's what is undisputed, because this will be on the verdict form, and i want to show you -- i want to show you that. not -- not yet. this is going to be on the verdict -- this is not on the verdict form. it is undisputed, it is an acknowledgment and admission that reynolds -- mr. furr: objection, your honor. mr. schlesinger: -- and philip morris admit that cigarettes -- mr. furr: objection. excuse me, sir. mr. tepikian: objection. the court: it is not an admission. sustained. mr. schlesinger: it is undisputed that r.j. reynolds and philip morris have admitted, through their expert, dr. klein, that cigarettes caused glodine mccoy to get lung cancer and die. there is no evidence to the contrary. that question is going to be on the verdict form. there is no evidence to the contrary. the death certificate says it, mannino said it, altschuler said it, all the doctors said it. even dr. klein admitted it. now, here's what is interesting: the very first time you heard in this courtroom from anybody from the defense that there was an acknowledgment and admission -- mr. furr: objection. mr. schlesinger: -- that cigarette smoking -- the court: excuse me. sustained. mr. schlesinger: in any event, you will see that dr. klein acknowledged that glodine mccoy died from cigarette smoking and lung cancer caused by cigarette smoking. and, so, when you get to that question on the verdict form, did glodine mccoy's lung cancer cause her death, the only question -- the only answer you can check off is "yes." some of these things, there is competing evidence and you have to hash it out. there is no competing evidence here. none. not one reference anywhere to anything. no witness, no expert, no medical testimony. that is important to remember. so here's the verdict form: was glodine mccoy addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine? and, if so, was such addiction a legal cause of her chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, coronary artery disease, peripheral vascular disease, and lung cancer? and the answer to every one of those questions is "yes." every one of them. now, there is something you did not hear that i must touch on real quick here. there is something you did not hear. you are not going to be making any decisions in this case, you are not going to be making any determinations as to some of the issues you heard tried in this case. one of those important issues is, did she have a heart attack -- mr. furr: objection. mr. schlesinger: -- before 1990. that -- that is not an issue in this case. that is not for your determination, you will not hear it. you heard it from counsel in opening statement. this will be something you are to decide. mr. furr: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. mr. schlesinger: the issues in the case, you will see from the instructions and the verdict form, do not ask you to make the determination as to when glodine mccoy, who had her heart attack, when it was. we -- the -- you are not asked that question. similarly, you will not be asked the question, you will not have to decide, you will not have to debate, you will not have to weigh evidence, you will not be confronted with the issue of was glodine mccoy knowledgeably suffering from copd back before may 5th of 1990. those are not in this case for your determination. you must remember that. do not be confused by it. do not be looking for it and writing questions and sending it out saying, where is that question? it is been handled, it is been resolved -- mr. tepikian: objection, your honor. mr. schlesinger: -- it is been -- the court: sustained. counsel, move on. mr. schlesinger: okay. it is not an issue for your determination. that is why you see these questions. and the only questions talk about did she have an addiction which in some way -- a dependence -- contributed to cause -- was it a contributing cause of her lung cancer -- i'm sorry, of her four different diseases; and, ultimately, down here, did it cause her lung cancer. and we -- and it obviously did. and, then, dr. altschuler's testimony verifies it. you heard it, you took notes, i will not spend time on it, but he said the vascular disease was a consequence of her peripheral -- of her nicotine addiction. mr. furr said there would be no proof that cigarettes cause peripheral vascular disease. there is no proof that cigarettes did not cause peripheral vascular disease. all the proof is that cigarettes caused peripheral vascular disease. both mannino, an expert we brought in, and dr. altschuler, who came here not for money, who came here to help a client, a former patient -- mr. furr: objection, your honor. mr. tepikian: objection. mr. schlesinger: -- for many years later -- the court: sustained. counsel... mr. schlesinger: in any event, this is the testimony they gave. same thing with altschuler saying he was treating her for a heart consequence as a consequence of historical nicotine addiction. so this question says -- can i get this? can i have the elmo, please? this question says: was glodine mccoy addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine; and, if so, was addiction a legal cause of these conditions? that is the question: did the nicotine addiction contribute? and you will see -- i need it back, the clicker now, please. so, the wild goose chase. everything having to do with pre-may 5th, 1990 -- mr. furr: objection. mr. schlesinger: -- is no longer part of the case. the court: sustained. mr. schlesinger: the question you do have to talk about is lung cancer. and because you will be asked to determine if lung cancer caused -- if her lung cancer manifested before november 21, 1996. it clearly did, because the medical records say, in no uncertain terms, that, on december 6th, '96, which is where the diagnosis was made -- which, yes, december 6th, '96, is after 11/21/96. yes, it is. but remember what mr. furr said in his opening statement? statute of lim -- deadlines count; and even if it is one day over or one day before, it counts? well, one day over, one day before counts. if she got the symptoms of lung cancer that led to the diagnosis before december 6th, '96, and before november 21, '96, she is also a class member, just by virtue of the lung cancer. you must remember that. and the evidence and the overwhelming weight of the evidence is, very simply, that the medical record says the symptoms have worsened over the past week, but they have been present for the last month. so december 6th, '96, goes back to at least november 6th, '96, and that precedes 11/21/96, and, therefore, that is class -- that is a -- that is a disease that appeared in the class period. now, this is important to remember. and there is a lot more evidence on it, and we will talk about it some more. this is an important thing to remember when you are making this decision, okay? and that is that the condition manifests by showing signs and symptoms of what ultimately led to the diagnosis. so when you go back -- when you have a record from afterwards and you go back to what the condition was that led to the diagnosis, that is manifestation under -- under the terms of the law. so this is an easy determination. she gets that question answered. dr. altschuler confirmed it, dr. mannino confirmed it. and dr. mannino went on as far as to say that he was going to explain how he had some x-rays in the chiropractic -- in the chiropractic office. so that is -- that is important. let me tell you about that real quick. let me tell you about that. let us put this in perspective. this was a woman who had a heart attack, quit smoking, right, was able to finally quit smoking after she had a devastating illness that -- that made her think she was going to die. then, years go by, and in the fall of 1996, she starts feeling poorly. and while she is feeling poorly, her family is concerned and they treat her at the chiropractic's office for musculoskeletal, because she is got some shoulder pain. her son talks about around the time of getting the halloween costumes in the quiet of the car, he noticed she was starting to get hoarse -- hoarse. she was getting -- she was wasting, she was losing weight and getting skinny, and she was looking frail, and the family was concerned. and, at some point, there was a chest x-ray done in that chiropractic office, and somebody saw something -- chiropractors, not radiologists -- and they were worried, ma, you got to see a doctor. and she went to see dr. berman, who had replaced dr. sherman who had retired, and she went to see dr. berman on the initial office visit on november 22nd, '96 -- which is what dr. mannino said, from the review of the record -- x-rays in hand, x-rays from the chiropractor's office for days later, x-rays from before november 21. and what did dr. berman say when he saw it? he said, there is a spot on the lung. now, think about that. what does it mean in the common parlance of laypeople's understanding when the terminology of a beloved family member is expressed, saying, i see a spot on a lung? here's what it is: it is a punch in the gut. it is the time when time stands still, because everybody knows what it means. it is terror, it causes panic, it causes the desire in a woman who is already had a cigarette-related disease to want to run away, to escape, to -- mr. furr: objection, your honor. mr. schlesinger: -- flee. it is completely nat -- the court: what is the objection? excuse me. mr. furr: there is no such evidence in this case. the court: overruled. mr. schlesinger: to deny -- the court: ladies and gentlemen, you are to rely on your own recollection of the evidence. this is argument. proceed. mr. schlesinger: is it natural from the sequence of events to imagine the heartache, the fear, the pain of hearing that term, a "spot" on the lung? what does it mean? mom, this is something, we have to do something about this. we cannot -- we cannot -- we cannot ignore this. and they go and they see dr. berman. he says, yeah, you got to see a pulmonology doctor, an expert, there is -- this is worrisome. and then what did the family do? what did all their testimony do? you do not want to hear the other shoe drop. if this is going to be my last thanksgiving, let us spend it with the family, if this is what it is going to be. does not that show she knew what was going to happen or could happen? maybe you could -- oh, i hope it is not that is what it is, i hope it is not that is what it is. and you get the family together and you gather them in that small apartment. it is a big family, and you gather them in that small apartment and you have the celebration of life, because it is -- they are afraid it is going to be the last thanksgiving. and then they go -- after november 22nd, with dr. berman -- november 28th is thanksgiving -- december 6th, they see the lung specialist. and what does his note say? we will show it to you. it says you have endobronchial lung cancer, metastatic lung cancer, lung cancer that is spread so much, when i reach into your collarbone, i can feel it, and you are hoarse. that is an invasion into the laryngeal nerve, paralyzing the laryngeal nerve. this is a death sentence. our experts testified to it. it is a prognostically grave sign. this is the sequence of events that occurred going back into the august, september, october time frame. and that is why dr. labi documented that these symptoms, although they worsened, had been in existence for -- for a month. and what did their doctor say? you know, we brought you heavyweight witnesses, and they tried to counter -- counterbalance it with a lightweight. they brought in -- mr. tepikian: objection, your honor. mr. schlesinger: -- dr. klein. the court: sustained. counsel -- mr. tepikian: move to strike. the court: the jury is to disregard the last comment. mr. schlesinger: we tried to bring in excellent witnesses. they counterbalance with a witness who has made no contributions to the literature, has not distinguished himself with books or records or anything that we could read and challenge him on. he does not exist in the research, he does not exist as a professor in a university. you could not find him researching for a great professor anywhere. and -- and what did he say? oh, i think the symptoms were there for a week or so. now, you think about what really happened in human terms during that period of time, in that november time frame, and whether or not that meets with the ring of truth, because i say that -- i submit that i stitched this together to you, and it does. so here's the engle class period. what was the defense in the case? remember back in the olden days, in hollywood, we had those trampolines in the ground on hollywood beach, and you could bounce really high on them. i mean, woom, on hollywood beach, right on the boardwalk, as kids, there were trampolines. if a defense is -- is -- has an agenda, a preexisting agenda, not to analyze the medicine as to what really happened -- mr. furr: objection. the court: sustained. why do not you come sidebar. mr. furr: take it down, please. at sidebar:) mr. schlesinger: i gave over all these exhibits, judge. they were all approved. the court: wait until mr. furr gets here. mr. schlesinger: i did everything i could not to have any surprise. the court: i just do not want you to -- you are basically -- it sounds like you are denigrating defense. mr. schlesinger: not at all. the court: okay. well, that is what it sounds like to me. mr. schlesinger: not at all. i'm talking about the concept -- the court: thank you. that is why i brought you sidebar, okay? mr. schlesinger: okay. the court: so i do not want -- mr. schlesinger: i'll try -- mr. tepikian: your honor, we will move for another mistrial based on this. mr. schlesinger: this is so tame. the court: excuse me. mr. schlesinger: this is so tame. mr. tepikian: are you done? this is absolutely denigrating to the defense of this case in front of this jury and we move for a mistrial. mr. furr: and on the cumulative effect of all the denigrations of the defense. the court: thank you. the motion is noted. it is denied. there is no manifest necessity for a mistrial. just take it easy. mr. schlesinger: yes, sir. (sidebar discussion was concluded, and the following was held in open court:) mr. schlesinger: tell me when you are all ready. mr. furr: i'm ready. mr. schlesinger: now, what i think was interesting about this was this: remember the exhibit that dr. klein put up, and it had a calendar, and in red -- in really big red, it said "end of engle class period"? remember that? so that his testimony was -- he demarcated the end of an engle class period. he said, i think it was, you know, december 6th, it was probably there for a week or so. what does "or so" mean? he did not define that. so he did not change the medical record evidence. and what i talked about, organic records, these are records that existed at the time. nobody created them to try to make a litigation. these are just the records of a poor woman with a fatal disease, being treated, family trying to dutifully gather those records up -- thank goodness they had them -- and it proves very clearly that she is within the class period. it just so happens to prove it. that is just the -- that is just the math. that is just the math of it. so these are the class members. you know, as a class member, all these -- all these apply, all these diseases apply. she got the big four. she got hit with four of them, all from smoking, okay? there is nicotine is addictive, the defendants put cigarettes on the market that are defective and unreasonably dangerous, and smoking causes all these diseases. what is more, there was concealment, an omission of material information that the defendants knew were false, and they disclosed it. and then they got together, they all agreed to get together to -- to put out this fraud -- because that is what it is, it is a fraudulent concealment -- and they all got together in a conspiracy to hide the health effects from smoking, with the intention that people would rely, and they knew that these material facts were not otherwise known. so when they talk about what glodine knew, the bigger question is: what did not glodine know? and all the things they concealed from her are what she was relying on, believing in filters, to keep smoking. and, like i said, the palest ink is more vivid than the brightest memory. they knew and they said, we are going to be charged with -- with making false and misleading statements that promote the sale of cigarettes. and you know what? it worked. it worked great. if you look at those charts of smoking, every time they put out their health reassurance message, up went the cigarette sales. john mccoy talked extensively about the fact that glo believed that filters would help her and that they were safer. you heard that testimony from him. and that was exactly what the tobacco companies were shooting for. they counted on it. she fit their plan to a tee. she was the perfect customer. they knew that doubt was their product. they said, doubt is our product. they said, the most important story is the one that casts doubt. they said, look for some other factor to explain why the people are getting sick. the key word is "confusion." and what did they give glodine mccoy? a psychological crutch and self-rationale to continue smoking. they put those fake filters on the market. they were a marketing ploy, a marketing gimmick, they were never meant to work. they knew what they said was an independent research organization was nothing more than a -- than a holding pattern, a defensive front. and then there is lots of stuff here from the surgeon general, you will see, talking about how filters were actually worse, they caused adenocarcinoma. page 163 through page 168. there is major conclusions that explain that clearly. the surgeon general 2010 said, hey, we figured out they were faking us out -- faking us out. the designs were used, these filters and lights were used as a tool by the tobacco industry to undermine prevention and cessation efforts. they said, with regard to kent, a nice jolt of nicotine, and we are going to tell them, here's our triple, quadruple filter, and it is going to remove whatever harmful elements of smoke are there. this is what glodine mccoy heard, this is what glodine mccoy counted -- counted on. these kent cigarettes, the parliament cigarettes, that is what she was smoking. they were the health brands. they got the reader's digest -- remember, who did anti-smoking ads -- they were an unwitting third party. tobacco used them as a catspaw. they were able to see that they were playing up on the fact that reader's digest got duped and mistakenly started saying, use these filters. if you are going to keep smoking, use filters. and look what -- sales went from four billion to 38 billion, because they had marketed kent as a safer cigarette to still instinctive fears. and john mccoy corroborated it. she started using the filters. she used the parliaments, the kents. she tried the filter. she thought they were better for her health. that is her relying on these messages. those lies contribute. health protections, scientists smoke, low tar, recessed parliaments, low-tar kents, these are the ads she was inundated with. the monograph, i'll let you read it, but pages 205, 207, and 233, say, in no uncertain terms, kent was for health, parliament was for health. folks were smoking them because they were concerned about their health, they were perceived as being more healthy, and the national cancer institute's monograph from 2001, number 13, that is in evidence for you to look at in this case, the final conclusions, page 233, say, in no uncertain terms, that the filters were used to reassure smokers and that they were deceitful. now, here's my -- here's my -- there is a -- the judge read a jury instruction about circuitous. it does not have to be a direct statement to glodine. it does not have to -- i do not have to put in glodine's hand, her sitting in front of a television set watching the traveling truth squad, or bill dwyer, or somebody. it can reach her by circuitous means. and one of the things that mr. furr said -- and he is a very -- very bright, formidable, well-spoken attorney, and he does a good job defending his client, and he is -- he is supposed to do that, but he made statements to you in opening statement and in cross-examination with dr. proctor, saying, well, you know the government was supporting filters, you know the government was promoting filters. the government was promoting filters as an unwilling dupe. so if the tobacco companies duped the third parties, the surgeon general, and whatnot, and those third parties unwillingly passed lies to glodine mccoy and she relied on what they said, and they had been, in turn, relying on the tobacco companies, tobacco companies do not escape liability by misleading the government. it just does not happen that way. that is the circle of deceit. so that is a circuitous way. she did not rely on us, she relied on the government, but you guys faked the government out. and it is in no uncertain terms that the reliance does not have to be on a direct statement. this is in -- you can read this, i will not read it, but a circuitous channel reaching her; meaning, if i use those -- if i have an unwitting third party -- unwitting innocent third party like reader's digest or the surgeon general and it gets to glodine and that helps her undermine her cessation efforts because she is getting false reassurances -- and you cannot -- if you give an addict some place where they can live in themselves, to believe maybe this is not bad, you are -- you are demotivating him. it is "operation stumbling block." they are never going to be able to quit. and then what happened ultimately? in 19 -- it took until 2008, almost over 40 years. the industry -- the public health authority was fooled by what the tobacco companies did, conned by them. finally, in 2008, they said, we are not going to say you should smoke -- filters are better, we are not going to put these numbers on the pack anymore, because the -- the tobacco companies cannot wrap their misleading tar and nicotine ratings in a cloak of government sponsorship. simply put, the ftc will not be a smoke -- smoke screen for tobacco companies' shameful marketing practices. and that is exactly what john mccoy said. that news coverage, she would reassure him by saying, i'm being told by the tobacco companies they got their own scientists, they are looking into it, they say, smoke filters, that is what i'm doing. those will be better for me. those statements were legion and they were exactly what tobacco expected. the engle findings say they made those misleading statements so smokers could rely, and she was one of millions of smokers who did rely. she is a typical -- play it, please -- typical generic smoker. (the video clip was played and taken down to the best of the reporter's ability as follows:) voice: ...take the controversy about cigarettes. in the 91st congress, a house committee heard testimony from leading experts on smoking and health. the record shows that many of the country's most respected doctors openly challenged anti-cigarette claims. voice: and i have to disagree with you in that we do not know what causes the ailments that have been attributed to cigarette smoking. voice: insofar as the correlation between lung cancer and cigarette smoking are concerned, no one knows. it may, it may not. voice: cigarette smoking does not cause cancer, yes or no? voice: it is not known whether cigarettes cause cancer. voice: all right, sir. voice: it has not been causally established. voice: cigarette smoking -- no causal relationship between cigarette smoking and emphysema? voice: despite all of the research to date, there has been no causal link established. voice: the case is still open. the jury has not come in. voice: it may not be harmful, you are not convinced? voice: it may be or it may not be. we do not know. voice: do cigarettes cause cancer? voice: i do not know if they do or not. voice: i'm not in a position to give you a "does" or "does not" answer. voice: we -- we have looked at the data and the data that we have been able to see has all been statistical data that has not convinced me that smoking causes death. voice: we do not know what causes cancer in general right now, so i -- i think that we may find out what causes cancer and we may find out some relationship which -- which has yet to be proven. (video clip concluded.) mr. schlesinger: thousands and thousands, untold thousands of these messages, along with a quarter billion dollars in advertising promoting the message of health reassurance, glamor, youth, all these things were being promoted, all this time, and they want to say, in this courtroom, glodine knew? if she knew or she was supposed to know, why did not any of them know? why did not the tobacco executives know? if everybody knew, why did not they know? remember, in the ftc reports, they talk about some beautiful ads, and they say they are spending 365 to one, and they are saying the surgeon general has no chance against this. the message of this health authority, out to protect the public health, is completely overwhelmed, overwhelmed by the messages of doubt being promoted by tobacco and the pervasive ads and the beauty of the ads. class membership is not about fault. we will get to that. class membership is not about fault. it is a simple threshold determination of addiction causing disease. you are going to get to -- a chance to discuss fault. but when we talk about the reliance on the lies, and the fact that she fell into their trap and she was one of the ones that acted in accordance with their business plan that would continually shoot the sales of cigarettes through the roof -- cigarette -- every time they would introduce a filter, cigarette would go up. every time they would issue a statement that it is not going to be bad for you, we are getting to the truth of it, cigarettes would go up. the fact of the matter is, is how do you know it matters to -- to glodine mccoy? lies costs lives. what did not glodine mccoy know? what did not she know? did she know that there was a -- a conspiracy formed by these companies, along with these inde -- these -- these research groups, supposedly independent research groups, the ti -- the ctr, the ti, all these different groups that formed a conspiracy to fraudulently conceal the legal effects and addictive nature of smoking? no. did she know they were hiring scientists and doctors to mislead the public about the health effects and addictive nature? no. did she know they were misleading the surgeon general, on whom she may have been relying to some extent, and other public health authorities about, go ahead, smoke the filters? did she know that they were taking -- they were embarking upon a plan to smear and belittle the public health authority? they were studying nicotine, manipulating, knowing it was an addictive drug, targeting children, with ninety percent of all smokers start as teenagers. knowing that cigarettes were killing hundreds of thousands a year, and saying, i'll never agree that smoking cigarettes even kills one person, manipulating the levels of nicotine with great precision and control to maintain the buying -- public buying -- buying cigarettes? did she know that there were 70 causing-cancer agents in every puff of smoke she inhaled, chemicals like arsenic, cyanide, radioactive polonium, that filtered cigarettes were no safer and actually more dangerous, and that they -- the conspirators were purposefully misleading the public about the safety of filters and lar -- low-tar cigarettes? and what did they say about it? we are going to keep them smoking with a psychological crutch. they studied the psychology, how do we keep that addict addicted. an illusion of filtration, a marketing gimmick. and now, here, wrap your minds around this. wrap your minds around this. ninety-nine percent of all cigarettes, to this day, have filters on them. filters make smoking worse. they make you have deeper inhalation in the lungs, deeper tumors, adenocarcinoma, and yet we live in the culture they created. it is all -- it is super hard to imagine that filtered cigarettes are actually worse, but the 2014 surgeon general says they are. what is smoking? this is the surface area of the mouth, right? that is how much surface area is in the mouth. if you puff a cigar or a pipe, you get some stuff in your mouth. i guess if you smoke the heck out of it, it could be bad for you, but there is nothing compared to a tennis court, which is the surface area of the lung, which allows for that unbelievably rapid bolus of complete crack -- they called it crack -- mr. tepikian: objection, your honor. mr. schlesinger: they called it -- the court: overruled. mr. schlesinger: they called it crack nicotine, freebased nicotine, ammoniated nicotine, molecularly advanced nicotine, to shoot to the brain so fast, no other way to give it to you. and that surface area of the lung has no taste buds. what about these -- what about these descriptions: taste, pleasure, satisfaction, enjoyment? that is not what cigarette smoking is about. it is about, do you inhale, deeply inhale. and they invented inhalation, they perfected inhalation. get those cigarettes deep in the lungs, shoot that nicotine to the brain, change that brain, a chronic, relapsing compulsive brain disease. this -- i'm not going to go through this again, but you saw the -- you saw the factory, how they add the urea and the ammonia and everything else. tobacco -- the tobacco industry guys, the philip morris guys, they can bring whatever they want here. they can show you their processing techniques. they have the right to bring whatever evidence they want to bring. i did not see a demonstration in this courtroom of what the current manufacturing -- mr. furr: objection -- the court: sustained. mr. furr: -- your honor. mr. schlesinger: the -- the -- this is very important: they can regul -- we can -- this is 1963: we can regulate, fairly precisely, the nicotine and sugar levels to almost any desired level that management may want. 1961, my smoker's a smoker for a long time. is there something wrong with smoking when -- when, arguably, one of the most beautiful women in the world is sitting at a table, with her oscar and her cigarette in her holder? i mean, what could be more beautiful than that? what could be more glamorous than that? is that conveying a message of -- of -- of danger, talking about truth in advertising? let me keep going. more manipulation for inhalability. recon tobacco, vent holes, additives, menthol, licorice, bronchodilators, flue-curing and sugars, any one of which could be changed to make this defective product -- which it is defective by the engle standards -- safer. change the inhalation, change the -- the addictiveness of it. make an arrangement that nobody under 21 ever gets the cigarettes, because all cigarette smoking -- most cigarette smoking starts before 18. if you do not get them by the time they are 18, they do not start. you would lose ninety percent of your business, but it would still be a business. it would still be a profitable business. but they do not do that. they want to maximize profits. play this, please. (the video clip was played and taken down to the best of the reporter's ability as follows:) voice: what cigarette do you smoke? you will be interested to know how the doctors of america answered that question. doctors in every branch of medicine were asked: what cigarette do you smoke? voice: something wonderful happens when you change to philip morris. you will feel -- voice: do not miss the fun of smoking, do not miss the fun of smoking, mildness is a pleasure... voice: do you inhale? then you are better off smoking philip morris. and here's how you can prove it. voice: let us take a winston break. voice: that is it. winston is the one filter cigarette that delivers flavor 20 times a pack. winston's got that filter blend. voice: yeah, fred. voice: i tell you, pearl, winstons is good smoking. sure wish you could taste it. voice: i am tasting it, granny. voice: the dickens, you say. (video clip concluded.) mr. schlesinger: so talk about -- they are making cigarette smoking look safe and normal, and they are saying, something wonderful happens. they are never using the truth in advertising that -- to show chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. they do not advertise that. they do not advertise a man in a wheelchair with -- with an oxygen tank on his nose. they do not advertise, like, glodine mccoy laying in a hospital bed, having fluid -- bloody fluid full of cancer drawn off her lungs and a chest tube in place in the throes of dying from lung cancer. they do not advertise the truth about tobacco. they advertise an illusion, a mass illusion that has a powerful effect on influencing folks and behavior and children to take up the act. they do not do truth in advertising. they could, but they never show ads where somebody is reaching into a dirty ashtray to pull out a cigarette butt. they do not show those, okay? now, you know, john mccoy talked about she smoked the -- she smoked her favorite brands, the camels, the philip morris, the ads were everywhere, and he thought those ads definitely had an effect. play this. (thereupon, a video clip was played) mr. schlesinger: remember, this is just a clip of a clip. a lot of these videos are in evidence, you may need a player to play them if you want to watch the videos of the tobacco people or the home movies. i know watching other folks' home movies is not so interesting, but here's a clip from the thing. now, look what we did. we stopped and we went up close. and i want to show you something. can i get behind you guys for one second? i want to show you something. let me go back in time. i'm going to reach back to 1975 and i'm going to pull that magazine out of that -- out of that film, and i'm going to bring it to you live and i'm going to show you something she did see. this is mccall's magazine, 1975. this is that issue, and this was chockful -- mr. tepikian: your honor, object. i do not believe this is in evidence. mr. schlesinger: this is in evidence. the court: counsel -- you are to rely on your own recollection of what the evidence is. mr. schlesinger: it is in evidence. this is chockful of ads, and we -- we took -- we took that extra little bit of study, we checked the ad, and just as an example of something that is actually in her hand, not the 1941 school book that mr. furr could not put in his hands and that mr. furr did not quote all the language of, but mccall's. and what was in mccall's? one, meek but not mild; raleigh extra mild. two, with all the talk about smoking, i decided i'd either quit or smoke true. and i smoke true. now, what does that mean? people are hearing about bad things, tobacco is marketing to you and they are saying, keep on smoking because you can smoke true. true is a cigarette like a parliament, a kent. it is blue and white, it has the special filter. these are the ads in the magazines. she was reading them. this is in evidence. find one word in this magazine that says smoking is bad. except for the box warnings, find any independent article in this magazine that is saying that it is bad. l&m, the proud smoke. in every -- there is a little eve in every woman. to the 56 million people who smoke cigarettes -- you have got to read this. i will not read it now, but it is a whole thing about we have heard some things and what are you going to do about it and you are going to keep smoking, you are going to keep smoking vantage. the health reassurance message. she was inundated with it, even in 1975. the magazine is in evidence. you will see it. newport, this is an ad they use to this day. some of the more recent ads we put in, you will see the same ad, all young people, young, fun, healthy, vibrant, they are doing good, alive with pleasure. now, truth in advertising. suffocated to death with emphysema, died a horrible death from lung cancer, died from heart disease, pulmonary vascular disease, bladder cancer. they never advertise the truth of what these products do. they advertise something that is an illusion, that is not an accurate representation. saratoga 120s for women. the longer smoking, longer enjoyment, more smoke, more cigarette, more nicotine. they are -- look at this. they are happy, they are sailing, beautiful young woman, good looking young man. and the joke of the benson & hedges used to be, it is so long, the tip would break off. if you had a child and the child is climbing on a ladder to go in a swimming pool and he is going to jump in a pool, and you know the pool is empty, and the pool has a no-diving sign, but the kid is not paying attention to it or -- and he is going right by it. do you stand there and say, go ahead, go ahead, you have been warned; or do you do everything you can in your power to say, stop, do not do this, this is dangerous, something bad's going to come of this? i say that we had all these warnings, but you must keep this in context. the first warning is a caution. it may be hazardous to your health, it may not be. and you are going to hear, glodine should have quit. and you know what? we agree. glodine should have quit. but you know what? the tobacco industry should have quit, too. they should have quit lying. so glodine should have quit. she has human weaknesses, human foibles. she could have tried harder, she should have tried harder, that will be for your consideration; but when she should have done something, so should they, too. but here's what is important: in 1966, glo was smoking for 25 years, without any caution, without anything on a pack. by 1970, she was a 29-year smoker. by 1985, she had been smoking for 44 years. remember the hook story? she was deeply addicted. look at all the things she did to try to quit smoking. everything she could. she listened to her family, she rebutted them, shut up, shut up, shut up, shut up, shut up, shut up. i counted it. eight times. eight times she said "shut up." now, there is going to be an instruction, sympathy does not guide your verdicts, sympathy or passion or prejudice for our against any party. and i'm showing you things which are reprehensible acts, they are in the nature of atrocities that -- mr. tepikian: objection, your honor. mr. schlesinger: -- deserve condemnation. the court: excuse me. why do not you come sidebar for a second. at sidebar:) the court: yes, sir? mr. tepikian: your honor, he is using the word "atrocities," and i move for a mistrial and -- i move for a mistrial based upon the cumulative nature of all of this. the court: thank you. the objection's noted. it is overruled. this is -- this is argument. i do not have any issue with it. if he uses the word "atrocities," do not worry about it. listen, i called you sidebar for one thing. i do not know where you are going and how long you anticipate -- you have got roughly five or so minutes left on your -- mr. schlesinger: i'm just trying to get through this, judge. the court: -- on your direct -- mr. schlesinger: if i got to take from the back end, i will, but i'm -- you know, these sidebars take away from my time. i do not think that is -- mr. tepikian: can i ask this? is there anything displayed on the front of your notebook that is showing to the jury? mr. schlesinger: no, not at all. it is blank. the court: it is a blank page. thank you. mr. schlesinger: i just -- i would ask the judge to consider giving me an extra five minutes. the court: i'm sorry? mr. schlesinger: i would ask that you give me... (sidebar discussion was concluded, and the following was held in open court:) mr. schlesinger: so when you consider the reprehensibility, deserving of censure, we ask you to consider this, to condemn it. these actions by these companies are in the nature of atrocities. that is why it is reprehensible. it is things that do not meet with the bounds of human decency. i remember robert fulghum wrote a book, everything i needed to learn in -- i knew in kindergarten. be decent to people, you know? so these are some things she did to try to cut down. they knew that, fortunately for them, it is a habit they could not break. this is glo -- this is glo and john. and i want to just -- you know, i want to just talk real quick. you know, look, we -- we were talking about "shut up," "shut up," "shut up." they used that term a lot. there is an instruction saying, do not make your decision based on sympathy, do not make your decision based on -- made on prejudice. and i want you to recognize that while what we are showing you by the tobacco companies is -- is bad acts, it is bad and we are saying this is reprehensible, deserving of censure, deserving of your condemnation and merits punishment -- that is ultimately what we are here for, for an expression of punishment from the jury, to say in the strongest possible terms, we do not want a company to act this way -- that the -- the other side of the coin is, no prejudice. you do not act from a position of anger; you act from a position of cool, calm, dispassionate, deliberate jury. this is what i've seen, i analyze it, i know it is wrongful conduct by human and humanity terms. by the same token, you do not apply prejudice. and all in all, the -- the family is a nice family, the testimony was nice. they are decent folks. the worst thing i heard was, in the throes of -- mr. furr: objection to counsel's -- the court: sustained. mr. schlesinger: in the throes -- we heard the word "shut up." what i'm trying to say to you is this: you are also not supposed to be affected by prejudice for or against a party. and we do not want you to be -- have a prejudice against the tobacco companies, make a decision based on the facts. we do not want you to have a prejudice against our client. and if you do not believe that, because the word "shut up" was used, that someone's trying to hurt the character of a client or say she was some sort of person that said "shut up" a lot, that could be prejudicial. so try to set that aside and put it in context with what it really means of an addicted smoker in denial, in pain, trying to find a place to exist and be comfortable, to -- to live with themselves. this is -- this is the family. we heard that this was a romance story. she was his beauty, right? he was mesmerized and smitten by her. the durability of this marriage is from a bygone era. it is so hard to duplicate that in this modern age, but he tried to impart that lesson to his children. you know, it was a more innocent time. even the advertisements, what they knew back then, you have to put yourself back in that time. folks trusted companies. if a company said, we are going to do right by you, folks believed them. and, so, even john said, take me back to that time. they had a nice life. this is his favorite picture. remember he said, take me back to the time. you know, ultimately, we are going to ask you for compensatory damages. they -- if you could take him back to that time, he would not want compensatory damages. mr. furr: objection. the court: sustained. mr. schlesinger: so -- mr. furr: move to strike. the court: five minutes, counsel. the jury is to disregard the last comment. mr. schlesinger: so here's some photos of the mccoy family. they are in evidence. it is a nice family. you can see this. you know, scott testified on how hard it is on his dad, and how he was just -- she just fade -- john said how he just faded away. scott said how his father aged like ten years, okay? she died in his arms, okay? he said it was his beautiful wife. it was devastating, okay? it was disastrous to her. and when they heard that diagnosis, they -- they did not know what to do. so it was just a horrible thing. and he was stoic. he said, you are bringing it all back now, and he fought back tears. i thought that was courageous. he was stoic up there. mr. furr: objection, your honor. mr. schlesinger: and he -- and he held on. you know, i thought of the movie -- and i'm going to do this quick -- i thought of the movie "on golden pond." and i've seen it. i do not know if you ever saw it, but it is -- it is henry fonda and kate hepburn, and they are an elderly married couple in love, and there is a scene where he gets lost going to the end of the -- of the path where he lives, and he comes back and he is angry because he got disoriented, and he said to her -- he said to her -- he throws down the thing, he says, i got lost, i got a little confused, i did not know where i was and i came running back here because i wanted to see your pretty face. and kate hepburn, who was a great actress -- i mean, and this -- i'm going back to his time. you may not have known her, but she was a great -- a great actress. she took his face in his [sic] hands, and she looked at him and -- and she reassured him, you know, that she loved him, they had grown old together, and it did not matter that he was confused and getting a little -- a little befuddled and a little -- she said to him, she goes, you are my knight in shining armor. and that was the climax of the movie. and it was a powerful moment if you have ever seen the film. and that is how i think about him. he was her knight in shining armor. they showed -- all the evidence in the case was of a great relationship the whole time. so when you decide on the damages in this case, you should -- and can we get that up? -- you should -- you should award an amount of money based on measuring the harm that has occurred to john because the premature loss of his wife over the last 18 years and going into whatever foreseeable future they might have had together. he is 87. obviously, the future would not have been that long if she had been here today with him, but he is lost her for 18 years. and i would suggest to you that if you measure the harm, and you tell the family and john, through your verdict, that we place great value on your loss, that you could award as much as $9 million for what he lost in the past, which is a lot of money, 500,000 a year, give or take; you could award three million, you could determine that restorative compensatory damages for the anguish, the loss, are worth three million. that would total to 12 million. let me say, i am not giving evidence, i am giving a suggestion. you may say, that is too much, i want to award less. it is completely up to you. these are intangible elements of damages, of love a man had for a wife. they might not have been rich in money, but they were rich in family. and they continue to be. and as supportive as he -- as this family is to their patriarch, they said, we are not mom, and you need to be together not only for the good times but for the bad times. and when you lose a child to lung cancer from smoking, and he was stumbling around all along and -- it hurt their children to see him not to have mom there to commiserate. it is the idea of a marriage and being together through thick and thin, through the hard times, and it means something. and our -- and one of the defenses in the case was, ancestors of john and gloria [sic] died of tobacco-related illnesses and that should have served as a warning to them. and now children -- he is lost two children from tobacco-related illnesses, and that should serve as a warning to him. mr. tepikian: objection, your honor. mr. schlesinger: that was the -- the court: the objection's noted. it is overruled. counsel, comment on the evidence. mr. schlesinger: the evidence in the case from -- from mr. furr's questioning was, this -- this should serve as a warning. and my context is, perhaps they should not get credit for that. if tobacco has caused these deaths, there is an instruction, punitive damages, considering harm to others. you are going to consider harm to the 20 million that have been killed. harm to others, that is how you arrive at whether this kind of conduct deserves to be punished. and so i think that is important to consider. he is written down the numbers. we think that when you break up -- are you on comparative now? mr. hammer: no. mr. schlesinger: okay. so now, ultimately, you go to punitive damages, and i'm going to go through this -- oh, and what is it, the survival claim? there is not going -- in my opinion, based on the way this case went down -- there is a survival claim, meaning what did glor -- what did glo suffer, what did glodine suffer in the event that she did not die from smoking, but she just suffered for many years? it is in the case. it is -- it is not going to be -- it is not going to be a decision you make. this is a death case. this is a wrongful death case. there is all the evidence, all the testimony. even on both sides, wrongful death, you are not going to get to this question. if you do, mr. hammer has suggested five million for what she went through since the time she got sick in '91 with the heart attack, for the six years until she died in late '97, at the age of 70, that that should be five million. you are not going to get there, so please do not be confused by that. that will not be your consideration because there is no basis to say she did not die from lung cancer. they -- they cannot argue it to you, they do not have any evidence. but going on to this -- can i move on? mr. hammer: yes. mr. schlesinger: okay. you go to punitives and you have to decide should these companies be punished for what they did. and you may consider harms suffered by others not parties to the lawsuit in assessing the reprehensibility or wrongfulness of the defendants' acts. remember they said, this is about glodine mccoy? it is about glodine mccoy and so much more. it is not just about glodine mccoy. it is about the opening -- the major conclusion in the surgeon general's report that says that 20 million people have died from the tobacco epidemic. the century-long epidemic of cigarette smoking -- this is page 7 -- has caused an enormous public health tragedy since the first surgeon general's report in 1964. more than 20 million premature deaths can be attributed to cigarette smoking. and who do they lay it on the feet of for the first time ever in a surgeon general's report in 2014, fresh news? the tobacco epidemic was initiated and has been sustained by the aggressive strategies of the tobacco industry which has deliberately misled the public on the risks of smoking. so, as far as percentages are concerned -- is that ready to go? throw that up real quick. as far as percentages are concerned -- and i'm skipping a little bit, but when you get to comparative fault -- this is -- this is the part that is not addiction; it is comparative fault. mr. mccoy is not able to see that he thinks his wife did anything wrong, because he thinks she is a victim as an addict. however, he is willing and we are willing to accept the fair share of blame. if you choose to assign any for the human weaknesses, for the "she could have tried harder" elements that could be a part of this case, if glodine mccoy could have tried harder, but her human weaknesses were such that she did not, you can cut up the relative degrees of responsibility so that they add up to a hundred percent, any way you want. we recommend thirty percent for each of the three defendant companies, recognizing now that lorillard has been subsumed by -- by reynolds, but because it happened just before the beginning of the case, there is still three defendants, thirty percent, thirty percent, thirty percent against all three co-conspirators all working together to conceal, and ten percent for glodine. mr. tepikian: objection, your honor. mr. schlesinger: that is our recommendation. mr. tepikian: we have a motion we will need to make. we can make it later. i want to reserve that there is a motion to make. mr. schlesinger: that is -- that is our recommendation if you decide to find fault for her. i would be honored and i would be in -- i would believe the evidence supports a zero -- mr. furr: objection. the court: sustained. mr. schlesinger: i feel the evidence could support -- mr. furr: objection. the court: sustained. mr. schlesinger: the evidence -- the court: no personal beliefs. mr. schlesinger: you may decide that the evidence supports a finding of zero for glodine -- glodine mccoy, or you may decide the evidence supports a finding for glodine mccoy of 25 percent, or 35 percent, or 45 percent, or 55 percent. you can do whatever you want. all i did was make a recommendation. the defendants will say it should be a hundred percent. so you get the final decision. all we do is make this recommendation. now, can i go to the clicker -- go to the clicker, please? so here's what we have got. where is that? okay. in terms of harm to others -- i'm going to do this quick. it is hard to think about 20 million deaths. one death is a tragedy, it makes the evening news. every time we put on the evening news, we see terrible things happening, our heart goes out to folks, and we read about it, we learn about it, we understand it because it is something happening to a person, a few people, we see it. twenty million is so big, it is unimaginable. so i use this to say -- mr. furr: objection. mr. schlesinger: -- the numbers numb. the numbers numb. you see the numbers are huge, but they actually numb. mr. furr: objection. mr. schlesinger: this is the state -- the court: overruled. mr. schlesinger: this is the state of florida. there are 20 million people living in the state of florida. take a minute to put in context these large numbers. what if there was nobody in florida? that is how many people 20 million people are. mr. tepikian: objection, your honor. mr. schlesinger: that is how many people -- the court: overruled. mr. schlesinger: -- twenty million people are. i say that america has been used as this industry's ashtray. mr. furr: objection. the court: sustained. mr. schlesinger: they stub out -- this is about truth and consequences. and i will tell you what i mean by that. when you engineer your product to cause addiction, there will be consequences. this is about telling the truth and the consequences the tobacco industry needs to face. when you target children, there will be consequences. when you lie to the american public, there will be consequences. when you offer up false solutions such as filters and lights, which do nothing, there will be consequences. when you commit fraud, there will be consequences. this is about the truth and how they need to tell it, and this is about the consequences and how they need to face them. i talked to you about surgeon general 2014. that is right on the page, page 7. all the -- all the conclusions, we can skip that. you stand at a moment in history. i mean, you know, more people have climbed mount everest -- mr. tepikian: there is no evidence of this, your honor. the court: sustained. mr. schlesinger: dr. proctor testified on cross-examination with mr. furr about the website, where on the website it says that -- oh, yeah, on the website, it said that what people should do if they are concerned about smoking is quit; nobody under smoking -- nobody under 18 should pick up smoking; and children should never smoke; and if you are not a smoker, you should not start. so if they are -- my question is, what business are they in? if nobody that smoked should start, if children should never start, if this was really true and sincere and everyone who is smoking should quit, it begs the question, what kind of business are they in? forty million americans caught in a web of tobacco dependence. that is page 5, surgeon general's report, in evidence. glodine was one of them. here, how about this? all those brilliant guys -- claude teague -- all those scientists, all those researchers, how about if you were curing cancer instead of causing it, you know? and if you have a -- a corporation here that is described as the rights of an individual, i say, very simply, if you are going to be accorded the rights of an individual, you also are faced to meet the burdens of a responsibility of an individual. if you want to be treated like a person, you have to act like a person. you have to be human. and in what they did, this tobacco company, with the rights of a human, you can find have not acted as being humane. and that is reprehensible and it justifies punitive damages. clear and convincing evidence, you should have lacking in confusion, because punitives require more than the preponderance that i showed you. punitives require more. you should not be confused, you should be able to get it, you -- all -- and those internal documents, those are damning, those really show we have got the goods on them. so there should be no confusion about the confusion. there should be no confusion about the confusion. there is no doubt about the doubt. they had a confusion campaign, they have it even to this day, according to dr. prochaska. you should protect children. you should not addict them, okay? even in the '20s, they were getting after prep school kids. there is glodine mccoy. she was a replacement smoker for her parents that died preceding her. and will her children be replacement smokers for her? we knew from philip morris that teenagers were the rapid growing area in tomorrow's success and tomorrow's customers, the base of the business is the high school student, and these are 14 to 24, 12-year-olds. and this is one i must read to you. we have -- this is from claude teague, on the youth market, where he says: we must capture our share of the youth market. we have deliberately played down the role of nicotine, hence the nonsmoker has little or no knowledge of what satisfactions it may offer him, and no desire to try it. instead, we must somehow convince him, with wholly irrational reasons, that he should try smoking in the hope that he will for himself then discover the real satisfactions obtainable. that is cold-blooded. it is connecting to kids and targeting them and addicting them. and here's where they are talking about 12-year-olds and the younger smokers are the only source of replacement smokers. and you see how they throw that word "adult" in there? remember the saying, only the guilty flee when no man pursueth? remember the art -- the pittman article, it is in evidence from 1975, we are going to use -- we have used references to "young smokers" and the "youth market," from now on, put that word "young adult" in there. why was that? because this is so incendiary that, even though it is secret, the fear of it getting out, hopefully that would give some cover. character is how you act when you think nobody is looking. and if they want to be judged as humans, they should act with human decency, they should be afforded the rights of humans and the responsibilities, and this corporation did not. and when you decide on punishment, it is, in part, to deter other companies from doing this kind of thing. in here, it is very clear that if you do not get smokers before 18, you do not get smokers. the joe camel cartoon ads, you heard about that, as young as you could get, internal documents. the proof is in the pudding. these folks -- these folks created a business model, a strategy, it was brilliantly conceived, masterfully executed. my client was caught up in it, as millions of others were, and they -- and -- and she went down the -- the river of that business, a roaring river of cash and profits, until she died. they talked about a crop of prospects in 1964, saying the youth have not picked it up, but they are going to pick it up because the backlog will join with the crop of prospects to produce a healthy increase in the number of new smokers, referring to themselves as healthy. and so what do you do with a crop? you reap it. this is van gogh. so what do you do with a crop? you grow it, you reap it. just like they talked about rats in a cage, they also refer to their customers as a crop, like a commodity, like we are growing smokers, children. all tobacco use begins in childhood and adolescence. if you do not smoke by the time you are 18, most will never take up smoking. and how about this? this is from the '60s. and is this a popular business plan? we are thus devoting our business lives to the propagation of lung cancer. cigarettes have certain unattractive side effects: lung cancer, cardiovascular disorders, and emphysema. this is in the '60s. would not it be wonderful if we produced a cancer-free cigarette? they told the public, let the scientists do the worrying and you go on smoking. now, the frank statement, which we have here, but i'll just do it this way: let us look at the promises of this frank statement, 1953, promises by the defendant. they said: we accept an interest in people's health as a basic responsibility paramount to every other consideration in the business. and what does it say in their internal document? "who ain't for more money?" so, really, that was the motive. you could find that was the profit motive, over the lives of people, over children, over the health of the customers, over the health of -- of americans. we have always and will always cooperate closely with those whose task it is to safeguard the public health. this is the promise in every newspaper in the country in 1953, during the cancer scare, to still quiet fears. and what do they say they are going to do to wynder and others? they are going to smear them and belittle them. and we are going to try to smear them. and did not they do that? they said they would put out there all kinds of comments that the surgeon general -- they did not agree with him. and they even have -- i think they had an expert here today that said, i do not agree with the surgeon general. now, here, critics have held it responsible for all diseases, for years and years. one by one, these charges are abandoned for lack of evidence. and what do they say in a document in '53, claude teague: obviously, the amount of evidence accumulated to indict cigarette smoking as a health hazard is overwhelming. the evidence challenging such an indictment is scant. here's what they promised in this frank statement at the beginning of the conspiracy, when my client had been smoking for 13 years and was already in her 20s: we will put in charge of this research activity -- this supposed independent research activity -- a man of unimpeachable integrity and national repute. and the guy was on the payroll because it was set up as an industry shield and a front. and what do they say? let us face it, we are interested in evidence which we believe denies the allegation that cigarette smoking causes disease. and a promise is a promise. could glodine mccoy rely on this? if our product is proven to be harmful, we will stop making it. and that was 11 examples of that from major executives from the cooperation telling the public, we would never make a bad product, we will stop making it. in this case, when you come to the clear and convincing evidence standard that these folks do -- do richly deserve your censure, richly deserve for you to exact a penalty and punish them and say in the strongest possible terms, we do not want you to do this, you will see there is no doubt about the doubt campaign, okay? they said it themselves, a brilliantly conceived holding -- holding strategy, creating doubt. and they employed it on a single -- a single strategy to defend itself on major fronts: litigation, politics, and public opinion. and what dr. proctor says, that was the whole point. they were making a product that could cause harm, and they were worried that this could bite them in court, and that that was one of the essential pillars of the conspiracy, the man who knows the most, who dedicated years, decades to studying hundreds of thousands of those internal documents. and what do they say they would do when they got information that could show nicotine was addictive? they bury it. they did not disclose the information. i'm not going to play this. i'm not going to play this. you saw this. the chief executive officers of the major tobacco companies standing up in front of congress -- you have seen it twice -- and lying, in 1980 -- 1994. and that is not corporate conduct that is acceptable, it does not meet the bounds of human decency, and it costs lives. lies cost lives. they control the future. that is the lung cancer and the -- and the product usage line. the yellow one is cigarette smoking going up to 600 billion a year. the red one is the -- the amount of lung cancer, because there was a 20-year lag time. they controlled the future. how different would it have been if they had come clean? what would have happened? how would the future have been different? how would those lines have changed? how would there have been a plummeting of lung cancer and diseases and death if they had said, we are not going to make it inhalable, we are going to lower the nicotine, we are going to take out the sugars, we are not going to lie to the public, we are going to give truth in advertising, we are going to tell you it kills you? we live in the culture they created. and this -- it is relevant today, it bears continuing examination and scrutiny. and the last slide. and that is why we are here. the epitaph on the -- on the gravestone that he visits every single week and makes sure that the flowers are fresh, and to keep her memory alive. she is gone and not forgotten, and that is why we are here and that is who we want you to think about in this case. where is the check mark for punies? did i get everything? mr. hammer: just go through -- mr. schlesinger: this? mr. hammer: show them that. mr. schlesinger: so after we talked about the money, which is -- it is your decision. i make a recommendation. i could have recommended an amount that does not meet with what you want. it is up to you. but, ultimately -- because you remember mr. furr said, this is only about glodine mccoy, not others, but it is about harm to others. he said it is about glodine mccoy. and every question is about glodine mccoy. this is the question about them. this is why you saw this evidence. it is about them, and does this industry -- has it done indecent things to the american public and glo mccoy. and it says here: please state for each defendant below, who you answered question -- "yes" on questions 6 and 7 that -- that reliance, the false statements, were a contributing cause to her not being able to get off those cigarettes, to fool her and reassure her, whether you find by clear and convincing evidence that punitive damages are warranted against any of the defendants listed below. and there is a check mark, "yes" or "no," for each of the three defendants in here; and we propose and submit that the right verdict and the verdict that will be the most important part of this case is to work your way through this path to the punishment damages, and check off "yes" for each of these -- each of these defendants. and when you do -- because you can take as long as you want to, to deliberate this case. it could be a day, tomorrow. we are going to be on your time. it is very interesting, you guys wait for us; we are going to turn this over and then we are on your time. but if you say "yes" and we have a punitive damages phase, there is a short phase, a brief phase, it could take as little as a day, and then we submit to you -- mr. tepikian: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. mr. schlesinger: -- a single question -- we submit to you a question as to what is the amount of the penalty that you will exact against the defendants who you found deserve that penalty. on behalf of my clients, on behalf of the family, i thank you. mr. schlesinger: can i have the easel, judge? can you put the engle finding up on the board, danny, and we will get started? cannot do it? mr. tepikian: there is lower ones, danny. mr. schlesinger: there you go. that is why i did not do it because i would fall over it like chevy chase, okay, in saturday night. all right. may i start, judge? the court: please. mr. schlesinger: all right. thanks, folks. all right. so my time is short, and this is rebuttal, last word. so you know, first thing i want to touch base with you on is this -- is the thing -- put that on too, okay? video technician: it is on. mr. schlesinger: is it on? where is it? nothing. video technician: nothing? mr. schlesinger: right here: reynolds and philip morris concealed or omitted material information not otherwise known or available. you cannot say that my client knows something when the fraud count -- remember, they have been found guilty of fraud and conspiracy in the engle case. they cannot talk about those internal documents. they cannot talk about what they did. mr. tepikian: objection, your honor. it is a misstatement. the court: sustained. mr. schlesinger: they did not talk about the documents, and they are prohibited from denying what is in the documents. mr. tepikian: objection, your honor. it is a misstatement. the court: overruled. mr. schlesinger: they are prohibited from taking exception. what is not otherwise known or available means my client could not possibly know. neither could john. neither could harry reasoner nor hammond because in the '60s they internally knew -- mr. furr: objection. mr. schlesinger: -- moreover nicotine is addictive. mr. furr: i'm sorry. it is improper argument. the court: overruled. mr. schlesinger: moreover, nicotine is addictive. remember that is that internal battelle hippo document you will see? they did not know it was addictive. they did not know all the things that tobacco was concealing. so so many unwitting, duped public health officials, newscasters were saying things, but that secret of addiction they knew so well, that they developed so well, that it was the sine qua non, without which there is nothing, was unknown to all those people. so here is what you heard: personal responsibility, personal responsibility, personal responsibility, and choice. you will not see that word on the verdict form. you will not see that word in the engle findings. you will not see that word anywhere in any of the jury instructions, but we say: yes, obviously personal responsibility plays a role. you have to decide whether a human being and their personal weaknesses or their lack of diligence, that could have been greater. she tried so many times; she could have tried more. you can consider that, but do you know who else has responsibility? and i do not mean to yell. corporations. they have corporate responsibility. so if you have personal responsibility for a person, a corporation has personal responsibility to talk about what they did. does the clicker work, danny? video technician: yes. mr. schlesinger: so now let me show you something else. this is something i saved real quick because i want you to know -- you have got to blow it up, bro. thanks. okay. remember we talked about lung cancer? there is a question on here you have to touch on about: did the lung cancer cause her death, and did it manifest before november 21, '96? that is the only manifestation question you have, and, remember, they started saying: we did not prove that pvd and heart disease was caused by smoking. they argued in the entire case that heart disease and pvd were caused by smoking. now they are saying that we did not prove it. altschuler said, in no uncertain terms, it was caused. here's what really interesting. add this to my pile of evidence. this is dr. sridhar, the world's big -- the hot shot pulmonary pathologist who was at the university of miami. mr. furr: objection. the court: sustained. mr. schlesinger: there is evidence that sridhar was a well-known pulmonary pathologist. there is testimony to that effect. a pulmonary doctor -- sorry, a pulmonary oncologist, testimony to that effect. look right there. this is his record, march 25th, 1997. diagnosis: microscopic squamous cell cancer. history -- history of present illness. remember we asked in other records: how do you do define that acronym, history of present illness? the month, day, year. symptom onset: october of 1996. pain in the left shoulder. saw the chiropractor. saw an x-ray. it is abnormal. went to dr. labi. okay. that is an additional evidence. i saved it. i wanted to see if anybody else would bring it up or anything. i showed you the scales, and the fact of the matter is that is a huge piece of evidence that shows before 1996. that does not even say a month before. that says october '96, history of present illness, symptom of onset: october '96. that is manifestation before november 21, '96, of the symptoms, of the lung cancer, absolutely. pvd, one hundred percent caused by cigarette smoking. all the testimony swore to it. mannino swore to it. altschuler swore to it. during dr. prochaska's -- mr. furr: excuse me. objection. may we approach, your honor? the court: yes. mr. furr: take it down, please. sidebar:) the court: yes, sir. mr. furr: they did not show us any of these things. the court: they did not show you the slide? mr. schlesinger: all it is is testimony, that you said i could show the other person the testimony. the court: excuse me. keep it down. mr. schlesinger: first of all, the medical record is a record in evidence. it is not a special board. second of all, this next slide is sridhar's testimony when they misquoted that she was not hooked. this is the full quote from the page, and all it is is direct out of the record. i pulled it just now because you said i could show it. the court: and i said show it to them. so if you have it, give it to them. (the sidebar discussion was concluded and the following was held in open court:) the court: mr. schlesinger, counsel, you may proceed. give them a copy of the slide, please. thank you. go ahead, sir. mr. schlesinger: put it up. put it up. okay. what did she say about, was the -- she said in other testimony: by the time you smoke a pack a day, you are hooked. the surgeon general's report chapter on nicotine addiction, page 105, it is all about nicotine addiction. that is all this is about. and she said: is not it true the earliest you can state that mrs. mccoy was, in your opinion, addicted to the nicotine in the early '60s? when i say "hooked," i mean you are caught on that hook, on that fisher, on that line, and you are being reeled in by the tobacco industry over time. can i say she was addicted by that time? no, i cannot say for certainty, but she is got -- they have got that hook into her, and she is pulled toward and she is tried -- she is doing different brands and she is trying different things, and she continues to maintain that use of nicotine in cigarettes, parliament, philip morris brand, kent, reynolds' brand, camel. kent was lorillard, now reynolds. camel. we gave you tobacco addiction. they did not address that, did they? an independent doctor who testified to -- who put a medical record back in the late '80s that said tobacco addiction. dr. agharkar, here's an interesting question, he was asked straight-up by mr. furr: what do you work on, dr. agharkar? and he says: alcohol, marijuana, cocaine, heroin, methamphetamine. those are broad classes, but i think that covers them. and then mr. furr had to remind him: and nicotine, because on his own, he did not know he had anything to do with the nicotine because he does not have anything to do with because he does not have any qualifications in nicotine. and they are quoting to prochaska for you? we brought you a world-class expert. she testified that our poor gal was terribly addicted, and she emphasized that repeatedly. same thing with dr. klein who -- mr. tepikian: objection, your honor. we do not have this. we do not it -- i do not believe we have any of these slides. mr. schlesinger: these are just -- this is testimony from the record that you have that we are just responding to. all this is is testimony. can i just rip through it real quick, judge? the court: yes, sir. go ahead. mr. schlesinger: thank you. anyway, so dr. klein agreed she died of lung cancer, smoking cigarettes caused the lung cancer, and smoking cigarettes caused the death and but for the -- but for the lung cancer, she would not have died. lung cancer does not develop overnight. dr. sridhar, a world class guy, he is the one that said october '96 was the onset of the symptoms. that is in the record. there is a lengthy record when she was on death's door, and they confirmed that her onset of cancer symptoms began in october in the class period. our lung cancer evidence is filled up now with that excerpt of march 25th, '97, history of onset. you never saw that before. now this is the website where they asked about: if you do not smoke, you should not start. kids should not smoke, and everyone who smokes should quit. and it begs the question, what business are they in? if they are sincere, what kind of business is that to be in? this is the ads from glamour magazine today. remember dr. prochaska said they are still not disclosing their funding interest when they come to the nicotine conferences on nicotine? these are the ads today. american spirit, one hundred percent additive-free. i mean look how glamorous these ads are. is not that a health reassurance message? it is one hundred percent tobacco, organic tobacco. that is in recent magazines with young people on the cover. inspiration, where a moment becomes a memory. discover the unexpected. this is in evidence. taste it all. moments, imagination, discovery. yeah, there is a warning down there, but look what the major -- the major demonstration is. what did not glo know? these are the things that she did not know. she did not know any of these things. that is the concealment. was it a cause? did the filter fraud contribute? did the lights fraud contribute? was it something that was operation stumbling block and undermines the smoker? of course it was. of course it was. so you can consider all of those things. similarly, on page 871, these are not inherently dangerous products. cigarettes are not natural growing from trees. they are defective by design. it has been stated that a cigarette is also a defective product, meaning not just dangerous but unreasonably dangerous, killing over half of its long-time users and addictive by design, page 871. and that is one of the findings of the engle findings that had to be proved, and they say that cigarettes cannot be made safe. sure, they can. take out the sugar. take out the inhalability. lower the ph. go back to mouth puffing. no one is supposed to be sucking smoke deep into their lungs. that is unnatural. if ancient man around the campfire leans over and sucks in smoke from a campfire, what is he going to do? he is going to choke and cough. the body is going to respond to it. you are not supposed to engineer cigarettes to inhale them in the lungs to deliver a drug. and what does it say on little page 3 on sg '10 in evidence? it says: the way tobacco is grown, mixed, processed today has made cigarettes more addictive than ever before. and i read to you from surgeon general '14: more addictive than ever before, more dangerous than ever before because of the relative risk, and -- mr. tepikian: your honor, is there -- is this the time? the court: thank you, counsel. mr. schlesinger, you have got two minutes. mr. schlesinger: okay. thank you. i'll tell you something else. they showed you these warnings, and we have got packs of cigarettes, and our pack of cigarettes -- i need a pack. the warnings are not quite this big. okay. and they are the warnings they want to show you every single time. now think about the logic of this. if that defense is correct, if that defense is correct, every single smoker who would ever claim to be an engle class member would always have to contend with: but there were warnings on the pack. every single smoker who got sick or who was in a family would have to contend with the arguments that family members have said: stop smoking. it is the -- it is the definition of addiction that drives this. it is smoking despite knowing it is bad for you that contributes to this. i'll tell you what, if every time somebody went and bought a pack of cigarettes, when you bought the cigarettes, if it came with this warning this big and this is what you had to leave the 7-eleven with, that might start making a different impression if this is the kind of thing -- mr. tepikian: objection, your honor. mr. schlesinger: -- they handed out every single time. mr. tepikian: preemption. the court: overruled. mr. schlesinger: but instead, you get a pack of cigarettes that, in camel, they so cleverly advertise it with the cellophane on it, and the very light gray, depending on the -- mr. furr: objection, your honor. mr. schlesinger: -- on the -- on the light reflection -- the court: excuse me, counsel. 1 mr. furr: preemption. the court: sustained. let us go, counsel. you need to wrap it up. mr. schlesinger: all right. yes, sir. okay. and that is what i'll do. this is the last two things i want to show you. these are internal documents in evidence where it said: our medical and scientific witnesses will say whatever we want them to say, clearly implying, if not stating, that they lacked credibility and integrity. this is from their secret files from 1982: our medical and scientific witnesses will say whatever we want them to say clearly implying, if not stating, that they lacked credibility and integrity. and here's another one: lest some lawyer be looking over our shoulder, i do not concede that even one person dies of a chronic disease that is caused by cigarette smoking. you know what they all said. i'm not going to play it again, but those men as late as 1994 were still lying to congress and denying the harms and denying nicotine was addictive. and dr. -- mr. furr: objection, your honor. time. the court: counsel, you need to wrap it up. mr. schlesinger: i'm out of time, folks. you all have been super attentive. i appreciate it. i hope that we stitched this the way -- stitched this together in a way that you can understand it. the last thing, i hope we have stitched it together for you in a way that you can understand it, that you can see things as they are. i said that to you in opening, is wide-eyed and seeing things as they are, understanding the world we are in. we did ask for an amount of money. i said it is up to you to make that discretion, but here's one thing you did not hear: how much money for compensation for the loss of a beautiful wife and a 50-year marriage, how much money did any of the defendants recommend to you would be fair? did they suggest an amount? did they say what they think would be fair? mr. tepikian: objection, your honor. 1 the court: sustained. mr. schlesinger: they did not. the court: counsel, you need to wrap it up. mr. schlesinger: i'm done. thank you. mr. tepikian: your honor, can we approach briefly? sidebar:) the court: thank you. yes. mr. tepikian: your honor, we would ask that this instruction, we would ask it be read based upon the closing, the rebuttal mr. schlesinger just gave. he talked about how large -- the court: we need to excuse one juror though. okay? you want to be heard? mr. schlesinger: i absolutely do. judge, i cut out about 15 slides that were in evidence from dr. proctor, testimony in evidence because they said be careful. i asked for clarification. i did not say a word about warnings on the front end, but mr. furr went into it extensively, and i did not say there was anything wrong with the language. all i talked about was the noticeability, the size and the noticeability. ftc says people do not notice them. he said they ignore them. i did not say the language was not good enough. i did not tread on any of that. i said virtually nothing -- the court: what you said was about the size of it, and i thought the warnings are regulated as to the size. mr. schlesinger: i'm sorry, judge. regardless of the size, the size of the board they used -- the court: let us go. thank you. (the sidebar discussion was concluded and the following was held in open court:)