25 mr. furr: thank you. may it please the court, counsel, mr. mccoy. welcome back from lunch, ladies and gentlemen. the jury panel: thank you. mr. furr: well, we have kept you here for almost three weeks, but this is really a pretty simple case because this is a case about something you learned about in kindergarten, and that is personal responsibility. it a case about taking responsibility for the choices that we make in life. the evidence is overwhelming that mrs. mccoy knew that smoking could cause lung cancer, emphysema, and premature death by the late 1950s. so the question for you is going to be, who is responsible for the informed choices that she made, to knowingly take the risk of smoking, despite an awareness of the dangers, and to do so because she loved smoking. that is not my word. that is mr. mccoy's word. and i'm going to show you that in just a moment. as you will see as i go forward, by the 1950s, it was recognized in this country that the choices we make about smoking were really a matter of personal responsibility. and i'm going to start by taking you right back to something dr. proctor told us to set the stage for how our society made decisions about cigarette smoking, because dr. proctor told you early on in this case that: cigarettes are inherently dangerous and addictive products that cannot be made safe. you might remember that on cross-examination, i asked dr. proctor: would not it be true that if you took a leaf off a plant, dried it, burned that leaf, that you would create a smoke that has carcinogens and nicotine in it, and which would be dangerous and addictive and cause lung cancer and heart disease and emphysema and premature death if you smoked enough of it? and he said: absolutely correct. i also asked dr. proctor: is not it true that cigarettes cannot be made safe? and he told you: the only safe cigarette is a cigarette that is not smoked. so it is an inherently dangerous and addictive product that cannot be made safe. now a couple issues were suggested to you this morning. i want to sort of clear the air on a couple things. this issue of inhalability, you were told this morning that the tobacco companies made cigarettes inhalable, but dr. proctor told you that cigarettes have always been inhalable. it is the nature of the product, that native americans were smoking inhalable cigarettes in this country before lorillard, philip morris, or rj reynolds ever made their first cigarette, and that inhalable cigarettes were being smoked halfway around the world in the middle east because people would cure their tobacco on the roofs of their house in an environment that caused the sugars to stay in the tobacco, and thus it was inhalable. you were also -- this morning there was some argument made to you about additives, which you might remember what dr. proctor told you, that additives make no difference, that an additive-free cigarette is no safer or less addictive than a cigarette with additives. because dr. proctor used that expression to you, he said: the rubicon, crossing the rubicon with respect to the dangers of tobacco is the combustion. when you burn the tobacco, that is the smoke that you create. it is nothing that is done during the manufacturing process. it is the inherent property of the product. well, in the 1950s, dr. proctor as explained to you, there was a great deal of new scientific information released about the dangers of smoking. there were human epidemiologic studies showing that smokers were developing more lung cancer and dying sooner than nonsmokers. there were animal skin painting studies that you saw on multiple occasions showing that when you paint a tar on the backs of laboratory mice, they would grow papillomas, which were cancerous. and there were early chemistry studies that came out showing that there were toxins and carcinogens being found in cigarette smoke. all of that was made public, widely circulated in both the scientific and lay media, common knowledge in the early 1950s. at that point, our society had a choice to make. society could have banned cigarettes. that is something that could have been done, but that is not what was done. our society decided that adults would be free to make choices about how they lived their lives, including whether to smoke cigarettes or not. we live in america, the land of the free, and we just celebrated the 4th of july, which of course is independence day. it is a celebration of our rights as american citizens to make choices about how we want to live our lives. but, of course, freedom of choice comes at a cost, and that cost is personal responsibility. because freedom of choice only works if individuals also take responsibility for their actions, because freedom of choice without responsibility would just be chaos. it would just be chaos. this was recognized a long time ago in this society, and i'm going to take you back and show you some examples that you saw during trial. and i'm going to start with the 1955 video that the plaintiffs actually showed you during dr. proctor's direct examination. it was the edward r. murrow show in which that famous scientist who had done some of the groundbreaking work named dr. hammond was interviewed on television, and he said it better than i could ever say it. so let us look at what he said. (video clip played as follows:) voice: good evening. this is see it now, produced by the partnership of friendly and murrow. tonight, the first of two reports on cigarettes and lung cancer. voice: in 1952, drs. hammond and horn of the american cancer society began an extended study of the smoking habits of american men. here is dr. hammond reporting on the results of the first two years. voice: it is now established, in my opinion, beyond a reasonable doubt, that cigarette smoking greatly increases the probability of developing lung cancer. in my opinion, people can be warned of the dangers, and they are being warned. what they then want to do, whether they wish to smoke or not, is their own business. (video clip concluded.) 1 mr. furr: 1955, people were being warned, but it was their own business as to whether or not to take the risk that accompany cigarette smoking. the only person that might say it better than dr. hammond was harry reasoner, who was also played to you by plaintiffs during the direct examination of dr. proctor where harry reasoner was the anchor on one of those television shows in which the results of the 1964 surgeon general's report were being presented to the country on the night that that report was released. so let us take a look at what harry reasoner said. (video clip played as follows:) voice: this is a cbs news extra on smoking and health, the findings of the surgeon general committee. voice: almost from the moment that cigarettes were introduced, they were attacked. but the attacks took a new turn ten years ago and culminated in today's report by the surgeon general's committee. this, in summary, is what the committee says: cigarette smoking is a major cause of lung cancer in men, and data on women smokers points the same way. cigarette smoking is a significant cause of cancer of the larynx and probably the most important cause of chronic bronchitis. cigarette smoking may be related to other lung diseases. male smokers have a much higher death rate from heart disease, although it is not proven that smoking is the cause. on the question of filters, the committee says there is no evidence that they do any good, but it did not exclude the possibility that an effective filter might be developed. in short, the committee says: if you smoke cigarettes, you increase your chances of dying early. the sooner you start, the more you smoke, the more you inhale, the worse your chances are. in this kind of a country, it comes down to you, whether you like it or not. no one is going to forbid an adult to smoke. and it is now quite clear that no one is going to tell him it is good for him, either. the decision is his. the decision and the health that may depend on it. this is harry reasoner. good night. (video clip concluded.) mr. furr: in this type of country where we get to make free choices, it really comes down to the individual, whether they like it or not, to make their choices and take responsibility for those choices. from the 1950s on, mrs. mccoy was bombarded with clear, unambiguous, powerful and oftentimes very personalized warnings about the dangers of smoking. i've got a board here i want to put up so we can just remind ourselves what some of those warnings were and the time frame in which they came. the evidence is overwhelming that -- there is a copy of this in your stack, also. the evidence is overwhelming that mrs. mccoy knew about the health effects and addictive nature of smoking throughout her life because we are going to look -- we are going to look at this. but dr. proctor explained to you that there was an abundance of information in society, being taught in schools, reported in the popular media and other sources of information, even at the time that mrs. mccoy was making her initial decisions about becoming a smoker. but she chose to smoke nonetheless. she could have chosen not to start and to have chosen health, but she chose to smoke. mr. mccoy told you that almost immediately, dating back to the 1940s, that she had what he called "a smoker's cough." what is a smoker's cough? it is a warning from your own body that your body is reacting to the smoke that you are inhaling. she could have listened to that warning and stopped, but she chose to continue smoking. and then in 1957, as mr. mccoy told you, his father, alexander, died from lung cancer. and both he and mr. mccoy's mother, hazel, told mrs. mccoy that his father had died from lung cancer and that that cancer was caused by cigarette smoking, as powerful and personalized warning as you can get. i'll show you in a little while, both dr. proctor and dr. prochaska agreed with respect to how powerful that type of warning is for an individual. she could have stopped. she could have chosen health, but she chose to continue smoking. then in the 1960s, both her mother and her father died from lung cancer. and mr. mccoy told you from that witness stand that he told her that both of those deaths had been caused by cigarette smoking. again, she was faced with a choice of whether to quit and choose health or whether to continue smoking and take the risk. and mr. schlesinger suggested to you this morning that somehow this is an inappropriate argument for me to make and i'm trying to take credit for it, i believe was the phrase that he used. these are just the facts. because the most important issue in this case for you is what mrs. mccoy knew, when she knew it, and what she did with that information. mr. mccoy told you about when he worked in the hospital in the 1960s, how he would see patients that had emphysema and other serious diseases and that the doctors and nurses in the hospital would tell him that those diseases were smoking related. and he would come home and tell mrs. mccoy about the patients he was caring for, and he would tell her when they died. he would tell her that he had lost another patient to a disease caused by smoking. and he was doing all this, coupled with urging her to stop smoking because from the 1950s on, as you have heard, mr. mccoy was constantly urging her to stop smoking. mrs. mccoy chose to continue smoking, could have chosen health, but the value that she was receiving from cigarettes and the enjoyment that she got from it, in her mind, outweighed the risk that she was taking. warnings from the surgeon general, from the popular media, news, magazines, tv. you have seen in the 1950s that information started coming out. it was everywhere in society. you saw some of that during the cross-examination of dr. proctor. in each of those opportunities -- each of those instances would have been yet another opportunity for mrs. mccoy to re-evaluate her decision, to make a different decision, but she always chose to continue smoking when she could have chosen health over and over. by the 1960s, of course, pack warnings began appearing on the packs of cigarettes in 1966. again, a golden opportunity to quit, because mr. mccoy told you from that stand that in the 1960s when those warnings went on the packs, and they had had three parents die from smoking, that mrs. mccoy knew that there were risks associated with smoking, but she chose to continue smoking, not to quit. now the argument made to you this morning was that all of these choices were made under the influence of being addicted. and that, therefore, somehow her addiction is an excuse for her to continue smoking despite knowing that cigarettes are dangerous. i'm going to show you what the evidence is with respect to whether she was addicted or not, but even if you believe the case that was put on by the plaintiff here, his own experts, which i'm going to remind you of. dr. prochaska told you, the doctor they brought from california to talk about addiction, told you that based upon her review of the whole record, after reading all the depositions, that the earliest she could say that mrs. mccoy was addicted was the 1960s some time. so some time in this time frame here is the earliest dr. prochaska, their expert, can say that mrs. mccoy was addicted. that is critically important because, as is obvious from this board, she had been receiving warnings about the deadly nature of cigarettes and how they could result in serious disease and premature death for a long time when she was hearing those warnings with even -- under circumstances where even their own experts say: she was not addicted yet. she was not addicted yet. i cannot say she was addicted. so all of these decisions were being made prior to a time when she was addicted, according to dr. prochaska. it did not end there. her sons, whom you met a couple of during the trial, as dr. prochaska also told you, began very aggressively warning her in the 1970s about the dangers of smoking. she was fortunate to have daughters-in-law who were health professionals. you remember anita was a nurse who worked in broward general in the cardiology unit, i believe. stacy was an optometrist. they both warned her over and over about emphysema, lung cancer, heart disease and that her smoking might kill her. each of those were opportunities. but she had a choice to make, could have chosen to quit and health, but she chose to continue smoking. that was here. and finally, as you have heard, as the '80s went on, she began -- her symptoms began increasing. her shortness of breath got worse. her cough got worse. but until she had her heart attack, she chose to continue taking her chances with cigarettes because she valued the benefit that she perceived from cigarettes. and ultimately, she quit after she had a heart attack. and then, unfortunately, of course, and we are all sympathetic for mr. mccoy's loss, there is no question about that. they had a wonderful marriage. nobody would ever challenge that in any way. unfortunately, she died in 1997. ten years later, this lawsuit was filed. and that is what we are here to discuss, who was responsible for the choices that mrs. mccoy made throughout her life, the informed choices that she made to take the risk of the dangers of smoking despite knowing how dangerous it was, including the years before even her experts say that she was addicted. why did mrs. mccoy smoke? the argument you heard today over and over was she smoked because she was addicted. i want to remind you what mr. mccoy told you from the witness stand. (video clip played as follows:) q. mr. mccoy, mrs. mccoy would enjoy having a cigarette before and after her coffee, for example? a. yeah, right. q. and ms. mccoy loved to smoke after she ate, right? a. yeah. mrs. mccoy loved to smoke, period. (video clip concluded.) mr. furr: mrs. mccoy loved to smoke, period, that is what mr. mccoy told us. he was not pressured. he was not harassed. he volunteered that she simply loved to smoke, period. that is why she smoked. okay. let us turn to the issues in this case. plaintiffs have the burden of proof in this case to prove mrs. mccoy's case because we are in a case that is about mrs. mccoy. we are only here to decide the issues -- you are only here to decide the issues relating to one smoker. the class action is over. it is not about smokers in general. you will see your verdict form relates to mrs. mccoy, and the plaintiffs have failed to prove their case about mrs. mccoy. they failed on several fronts, including these: they did not prove that she was a member of the engle class, as i'm going to address in just a moment. they did not prove that she died because of the dangers of smoking were unknown to her. and as we walk through the verdict form today and the instructions -- mr. schlesinger: excuse me, i'm sorry. excuse me, judge. misstates the instructions on the law and the issues in the case. i object. the court: ladies and gentlemen, you are to rely on the instructions that i gave you. that contains the law. this is counsel's argument, a chance to persuade you to reach a verdict in favor of his clients' position. counsel, proceed. mr. furr: thank you. we will look at the verdict form together and we will look at the relevant instructions. in fact, i've highlighted portions of the relevant instructions. and you will see that they can be reduced to the question of: did she die because the dangers of smoking were unknown to her or otherwise unavailable? mr. schlesinger: excuse me, judge. mr. furr: that is the language you are going to see. mr. schlesinger: i object, your honor. that is not a question on the verdict form, and i object. it misstates the law that your honor has instructed on. the court: thank you. i ruled on that, counsel. ladies and gentlemen, again, i have given you a set of the jury instructions. they have the law. this is client's argument. and proceed. 1 mr. furr: thank you, your honor. hold me to it. i'll show you with the instruction and the verdict form why this is the question. finally, you will see that the plaintiffs did not prove that mrs. mccoy's estate is entitled to money damages because she smoked knowing the risk that she was taking for decades. let us go to the verdict form. your verdict form question 1, which you saw in part, is going to be the class membership question. if the answers are no to these questions, then the case is over because if mrs. mccoy is not a class member, as the evidence demonstrates, then you write, no, sign this verdict form, and your deliberations are done. the question you will answer is this: was glodine mccoy addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, and, if so, was such addiction a legal cause of her chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, coronary artery disease, peripheral vascular disease, and lung cancer? so embedded in that top question in the bold are really two questions. we talked about this during opening statement. what the plaintiffs have to prove to you are two things. they have to prove to you that mrs. mccoy was addicted to nicotine. that is the first thing they have to prove. but then they also have to prove that that addiction was a legal cause of her death on the wrongful death claim. they have to prove both of them. one is not enough. if they prove that she was addicted but you conclude that her addiction was not the legal cause of her death, then the answer under the instruction you have should be no. and so we are going to look at both of those questions separately. we will start with the issue of: did the plaintiffs prove to you that mrs. mccoy was addicted to nicotine in cigarettes? and let us launch into the evidence on that. as dr. agharkar explained to you yesterday and the day before, fifty percent of smokers in the united states are not addicted. 50 percent are; fifty percent are not. you have to decide which fifty percent mrs. mccoy fit into. and dr. agharkar explained to you his analysis under the dsm with respect to where mrs. mccoy fit, and i'm going to look at that with you. but one of the things -- arguments that was made to you throughout this case was that being a long-term, daily smoker of a pack of cigarettes a day was really all that you needed to know to answer the question of whether she was addicted, because why else would someone smoke that much? but then mr. keehfus cross-examined dr. prochaska. and when he did so, here's what she told us, that daily smoking does not prove addiction. under cross-examination she said that: smoking one pack per day does not necessarily mean that the smoker is addicted and that a smoker can smoke a pack a day and not be addicted. mr. schlesinger: objection, your honor. that mischaracterizes the testimony. rule of completeness, i'd like him to read that whole answer, if it please the court. the court: counsel, you have a chance to redirect. ladies and gentlemen, you are to rely on your own recollection of the evidence. mr. furr: so why do people smoke if it is not addiction? we have already heard mr. mccoy tell you that mrs. mccoy loved to smoke, period. but we cross-examined -- or on direct examination, we asked the experts questions about: why do people smoke? and here's what you were told. i've combined dr. agharkar's and dr. prochaska's answers. and that is: people smoke for many reasons, enjoyment, pleasure, like mrs. mccoy, relaxation, taste, social interaction, to relieve anxiety, alleviate boredom, habit or hobby -- you might remember that at one point mr. mccoy told you that smoking was, in his judgment, ms. mccoy's hobby. -- after meals or with coffee, or simply to get a break from their routine. a few of the things mr. mccoy told us about mrs. mccoy's smoking. he told us that she smoked, that she got pleasure from smoking, that it relieved stress, that she liked the taste, that she liked it with her meals, that she smoked before and after she had her coffee, and he told you that smoking was her "hobby." that was his word that he volunteered. a couple things -- more things that mr. mccoy told us is that: glo always wanted to smoke, that glodine mccoy never asked mr. mccoy to help her quit smoking, that mrs. mccoy would say that she did not want to stop smoking. dr. agharkar told you that based on his clinical experience -- and we are going to talk about why dr. agharkar was brought to you and why he is the right witness to answer the questions that you have to answer here -- but that there are smokers who know that smoking is dangerous and do not want to quit, and mrs. mccoy was one of those smokers. and he told you that until she had her heart attack, she simply was not sincerely motivated to quit smoking. yesterday on redirect examination, he told you some more things that are important to understand because you are being told that she smoked because she was addicted and that she no longer had freedom of choice with respect to her smoking. here's what dr. agharkar told you: that ms. mccoy never lost control of her smoking, that she never smoked against her will, that she was never an involuntary smoker, and that she could quit at any time, and that she was not addicted. i want to talk about dr. agharkar for just a moment. you saw him on that witness stand. he was an intelligent, compassionate, dedicated doctor, committed to his patients whom he takes care of to deal with their severe and highly disruptive psychiatric illnesses. that is how he spends his time. he also has expertise in forensic psychiatry, and that is helping judges and juries and other legal decision-makers understand how issues of psychiatry might influence and inform the decisions they have to make. and for that, he was ridiculed and mocked and belittled mr. schlesinger: objection, your honor. move to strike. the court: sustained. jurors disregard the last comment. mr. furr: you saw the cross-examination of dr. agharkar. he was not asked a single question about his dsm analysis. instead the whole time was spent asking him questions about what he is not. he had already volunteered that he is a treater, in the trenches taking care of people with substance abuse problems and nicotine addiction. that is what he does, unlike any other witness in this case as i'll show you in just a moment. but instead of asking questions about that, he was asked about things that he is not. well, anybody could be cross-examined for a month about things they are not. it is not what he is not that matters. it is what he is that matters. dr. agharkar told you that mrs. mccoy did not meet the dsm-5 diagnostic criteria for nicotine addiction. and he spent some time explaining to you that psychiatrists do not run around placing labels of psychiatric illnesses, for which tobacco use disorder and nicotine addiction is one, on people for no good reason. that they place those labels on people when people have a problem, not just because they are using cigarettes or smoking cigarettes, but that you only diagnose somebody as having a tobacco use disorder or addicted if they have a severe tobacco use disorder, if it is a problem in their life, if it is causing them clinical impairment, if it is disrupting their life. and as was explained to you a couple times, if it rises to the level of it is all they can think about, it is all they can think about as they go through their daily lives, that is a problem, that is a problem if it is keeping them from doing other things they want to be doing. but if they are simply using a product and it is not causing them stress and it is not impairing their ability to go through life, then you do not place a psychiatric disease label on them. now why did we bring you dr. agharkar instead of a nicotine researcher? we brought you dr. agharkar because he is the only witness you heard of during this trial who has treated thousands of patients for substance abuse. the plaintiffs have the burden of proof in this case. they brought you a pulmonologist, and they brought you a ph.d. psychiatrist who does research on populations, in general. but they did not bring you anybody who is down in the trenches working with meth addicts and heroin addicts and cocaine addicts and alcohol addicts, and, for that matter, nicotine addicts. it is dr. agharkar who does that as part of his professional life. and you did get an opportunity to evaluate his demeanor, and you can reach your own conclusions about the reliability of dr. agharkar's testimony. who did plaintiff bring you? well, they brought you dr. mannino, a pulmonologist, highly-credentialed pulmonologist, but he is a lung doctor, not an addiction specialist. and at this stage of his career, he told you he really only sees patients two days a month. and in one of the most revealing parts of the cross-examination, he admitted that he had never seen the dsm before. the test that both dr. prochaska and dr. agharkar used to evaluate mrs. mccoy was something dr. mannino had never even seen. they also brought you dr. prochaska, prolific researcher, no question about it, but she is not a clinician. she does not have a clinical practice. she is not a medical doctor. she does not have medical privileges anywhere. instead, as she explained to you over and over, she works with participants, not patients. she works with study subjects. she is not down in the trenches helping people deal with psychiatric or psychological illnesses and break addictions. ladies and gentlemen, i submit to you that when you look closely at the testimony of plaintiff's experts, dr. mannino and dr. prochaska, they are really not going to be very helpful to you in answering the question of whether ms. mccoy was addicted. for among other reasons, their testimony was completely inconsistent and cannot be reconciled with each other. and here's how it all came to peak. dr. mannino insisted on cross-examination that anyone who smokes one cigarette per day is addicted. dr. prochaska conceded on cross-examination that you can smoke one pack per day and not be addicted. mr. schlesinger: judge, objection. it is -- it mischaracterizes testimony, and it is not even an answer from the deposition. it does not have page and line. it is not even the complete answer. it is an excerpt. mr. furr: your honor, i object. it is a speaking objection. the court: your objection is overruled. ladies and gentlemen, you are to rely on your own recollection of the evidence. mr. schlesinger: may i approach, judge. the court: sure. sidebar:) the court: yes, sir. mr. schlesinger: all my boards have page and line. if it please the court, all my exhibits have page and line so you can always go to the page and line. that quote does not appear in this record, except they might have taken out six words in the middle of a sentence. your honor said: okay. i have to fix it on redirect, and i will, but i have to have the page number. i say it is not fair to put an excerpt in there because it is misleading, but more importantly, i at least -- it has to at least indicate the page number. otherwise, i've got to go through 300 pages of transcript to try to find how they excised a piece of the transcript in the middle of a depo, and it is just not fair. 1 the court: i'm sure -- a couple things. number one is regarding the excerpts of his testimony, i thought all these exhibits were exchanged beforehand. mr. tepikian: they were. the court: there were not any objections about it. if you have the line and page number, i'm sure counsel's associates here, mr. leppert, can get you line and page number. so if you think there is a mischaracterization, you can correct it on redirect. counsel is making a good-faith representation, at least that is the way i take it, that this is testimony. when it comes up, you are suggesting it is not testimony. it is out of context. i tell the jury, as i do all the time, you are to rely on your own recollection of the evidence. and i do not have a photographic memory. i do not know exactly what the witnesses said. i know the gist of the testimony that was done. i keep notes. but, again, just like the juries do, it is their recollection of the evidence that counts, all right? your objection is noted. it is overruled. mr. leppert, mr. leppert, i'm sorry, sir, you can get him to quote the line and page numbers for this case? mr. leppert: yes. the court: thank you. (the sidebar discussion was concluded and the following was held in open court:) the court: mr. furr, are you ready to proceed? mr. furr: yes, sir. thank you. the court: ladies and gentlemen, as i indicated before, you are to rely on your own recollection of the evidence. this is counsel's chance at argument, to persuade you as to what his recollection of the evidence is and how it should be interpreted in this case. proceed, counsel. mr. furr: thank you. from that witness stand, right in front of you-all, dr. mannino said: one cigarette per day is enough. dr. prochaska said: you can even smoke a pack a day and not be addicted. she would have to know more information. they cannot prove their case with inconsistent expert testimony that cannot be reconciled. i suggest to you, ladies and gentlemen, that the evidence really demonstrates that mrs. mccoy smoked for reasons other than addiction. she loved to smoke, period, as mr. mccoy told us, that she did not have a problem with her smoking. it was not disrupting her life. she was not clinically impaired. she did not ideate over smoking all day so that she was unable to accomplish other things. as dr. agharkar explained to you, she does not meet the dsm criteria. she simply was not addicted to nicotine in cigarettes. so, ladies and gentlemen, for those reasons, that applies to all the disease states. it is the same issue for each of them. i suggest to you that when you get to verdict form question 1, the evidence demonstrates that she simply was not addicted to nicotine and that your answer should be no, sign and date your verdict form, and this case is over. but even if she was addicted, if you conclude that she was addicted, as i said, there are two parts to the class membership question. and the second is they have to prove that addiction was a legal cause of mrs. mccoy's death, a legal cause of her death. that is kind of an odd concept, probably never thought much about that before you got here, but there is sort of a simple, common sense way to think about that. and that is this: was mrs. mccoy so powerfully addicted that she was compelled to smoke and unable to quit and thus prevent any smoking-related disease, or, or, did mrs. mccoy want to keep smoking even though she had the ability to quit at any time and prevent any smoking-related disease? it is really an either/or question. both of those cannot be true at the same time for the same smoker. what do we know about addiction and quitting? we know that all the experts agreed that addiction does not mean that a smoker cannot quit and that addicted smokers quit every day in this country. and as dr. agharkar explained to you, any smoker can quit. any smoker can quit. all the evidence points in one direction. there is no evidence that addicted -- being addicted means that you simply cannot quit. a couple of very important concessions obtained on cross-examination from plaintiff's experts are these: dr. altschuler conceded that addiction does not stop a person from having the choice to quit. and dr. mannino went even farther. he said that being addicted to nicotine does not relieve a smoker of responsibility to quit smoking. now there was a lot said during the trial and during closing argument this morning about why smokers did not quit and about how the design of the cigarette had something to do with it, about how the advertising campaigns kept people from quitting, about how the statements made by the companies prevented people from quitting, that this, quote, campaign of confusion and doubt prevented people from quitting. but you know that is not true. we cross-examined plaintiff's experts, and they conceded, the campaign of doubt does not prevent quitting. this modern american cigarette, the design of it, did not prevent smokers from quitting. advertising does not prevent smokers from quitting, and even these brain changes that we spent some time on, although finally dr. agharkar explained to us that is simply how the human brain works, we think, through the release of neurotransmitters, that is how our brains work, but that does not prevent anybody from quitting. and how do you know that? we know that because dr. proctor conceded that millions and millions of heavy smokers quit while mrs. mccoy chose to continue smoking. dr. proctor, on cross-examination, told you that 9 million smokers quit between 1960 and 1965. that is one year after the surgeon general report. that the heaviest period of quitting in this country was right after the first warning label went on the pack. between 1966 and 1970, 13 million people quit. and you might recall dr. proctor told you, if you do the math, that is about 7,000 people a day. and that between '64 and '74, 30 million people quit. and you add it up over time, by 1974, 45 million people had quit. and the point is, that is when the tobacco companies were advertising cigarettes. that is when the tobacco companies were debating and disputing that smoking is dangerous and addictive. that is when the advertising campaigns were being run about the products that you saw. so all of that was going on, but it did not stop people from quitting. it did not stop people from quitting. and, of course, as you heard, all of those smokers who were long-term, heavy smokers would have had those type of brain changes that were discussed with respect to how nicotine affects the brain, but it does not stop people from quitting. it just does not do it. dr. prochaska suggested to you that smokers are caught in an addiction cycle. and you might remember she said that what begins as a choice, which even she concedes is a choice -- in this case, i guess the choice extended to the 1960s because she says that mrs. mccoy was not addicted, that is the earliest she can identify her as being addicted -- but that it begins as a choice, but then ultimately people get stuck in a cycle of daily use and physical dependence. then on cross-examination, mr. keehfus cross-examined her and said: is not there something missing from this chart? is not there something missing from this chart? because people do not stay in that cycle. they quit. they quit by the tens of millions. as you heard during the trial, 60 million americans have quit smoking since the 1950s. and they quit because, as dr. mannino said: addiction did not stop mrs. mccoy from having the ability to choose to quit smoking. dr. proctor told you the u.s. smokers started quitting by the millions in the 1950s because they were concerned about the dangers of smoking, and that it was the knowledge they had about the dangers that drove the quitting. dr. prochaska conceded that millions of addicted smokers have gotten out of the addiction cycle. and that starting with the 1964 surgeon general report, people quit at an exponentially faster rate. so this addiction cycle is a false construct. it is not a closed loop. there are off ramps. there are off ramps that people take to quit smoking. during these years, when 45 million americans were quitting prior to 1974, mrs. mccoy, as we looked at our first board, she chose to continue smoking. that is her right. she has every right to make that choice, but with that choice comes a personal responsibility that accompanies knowingly and in an informed manner making the choice to continue using a product that you knew and had been told in a very powerful and personalized way could cause lung cancer, emphysema, and premature death. here's what dr. prochaska actually told me, that the earliest that she could conclude that mrs. mccoy was addicted was in the 1960s, depending on if it is 1960 or 1969, mrs. mccoy would have been in the range of 33 to 43 years old. you know, one of the things that was argued to you is that addiction is a pediatric disease, that if people do not become addicted in their adolescent years, that they will never become smokers. but dr. prochaska told you that after reviewing everything, the earliest she could say ms. mccoy was addicted was 1960 when she was 33 years old. let us think about what that means, the chart we looked at earlier. the earliest she could conclude would have been somewhere in this range (indicating). so think about all of the information that mrs. mccoy received and all the choices she made, would even, under dr. prochaska's view of the facts of this case, she was making all of these choices to continue smoking prior to becoming addicted, or at least dr. prochaska being able to conclude that she was addicted. addiction is not an excuse for not quitting. we talked about 60 million people quit. 60 million people quit. why did not mrs. mccoy quit when 60 million other people quit? was she different than the millions and millions of addicted smokers who quit? were her cigarettes more addictive? no, there is no evidence of that. was her brain affected differently than the smokers who quit? there is no evidence of that. was she exposed to advertising different than smokers who quit? no evidence of that. was she exposed to tobacco company statements denying the dangers of smoking that were different than the statements that people who quit were exposed to? no evidence of that. did she smoke more or longer than smokers who quit? no. dr. proctor told you that somewhere between a third and a half of the people who were quitting throughout those decades were smoking a pack a day. there is only one reason why mrs. mccoy kept smoking when other people quit, and that is because she wanted to smoke. she loved to smoke. but then, of course, once she became motivated to quit because she developed a health problem, she quit easily. i skipped one. this is important. dr. prochaska told you that based upon all the depositions she read, she saw instances in which mrs. mccoy simply said she did not want to stop smoking when she was confronted with information by mr. mccoy about the dangers of smoking. mr. mccoy told you, i will not belabor this, that she simply loved to smoke, period. she liked to smoke, she did not want to quit, and she wanted to continue smoking. and then there was an exchange that i think is very revealing because actually it is a window into how mrs. mccoy was really thinking about her smoking decisions. and that is this, on cross-examination, mr. mccoy told you all this. mr. mccoy told you that there were instances in which he would approach mrs. mccoy and tell her: you have got to stop smoking. and her answer would be: i'm not old. i'm not sick. and he would tell her: you are going to get old, and you are going to get sick if you keep smoking. and her response would be to light a cigarette. you were told by the experts, by dr. agharkar especially yesterday, what people do when they want to quit, that it takes motivation and persistence, that there are a series of steps you can take. if you are serious about quitting, you can develop a plan to quit, set dates, ask people for help, throw away your ashtrays, your cigarettes, join a smoking cessation group. mr. mccoy even encouraged her to participate in the great american smokeout. mrs. mccoy did not do any of those things because she did not want to quit. she wanted to continue smoking until she got sick, and then she quit. in the late 1980s, she had her heart attack, or maybe it was early '90s, not an issue we have to worry about anymore, but after she had her heart attack, she quit and she quit cold turkey. she did not ask anybody for help. she did not even tell mr. mccoy she was going to do it. and what did he tell us about what her experience was like? did she go through severe withdrawal? did she have multiple relapses over and over? no, none of those things. he said that she was a little bit irritable about silly household things, like if he forgot to take the trash out. and he said there came a time afterwards when she actually became more pleasant after she quit smoking. and, importantly, she did not relapse. the undisputed testimony in this case is that after she quit when she had a heart attack, she never smoked again, never smoked again. dr. agharkar told you that her ability to quit smoking in 1989 was no different than her ability to quit smoking would have been in the '60s, '70s, or early in the '80s. she always had the ability to quit. but for her, the balance between her enjoyment and the danger she was taking swung this way in favor of continuing to smoke until she got sick, and then it swung back the other way and she became motivated, sincerely motivated to quit. and she did it, and she did it rather easily. mr. schlesinger previewed all this today, but as you know, when people are confronted with information, most of the time her response would be in the nature of: mind your own business. do not start. shut up. in other words, do not bug me about this. i've heard what you are going to say. i've made my choice. i'm going to continue smoking. so, ladies and gentlemen, for all of those reasons, that is a second reason why mrs. mccoy fails the class membership issue. and if you get passed addiction, with respect to whether she was addicted, she clearly fails the issue of whether or not addiction was the cause of her disease. because the only thing that was a cause of her disease was her decision to continue smoking because she valued what she was getting from smoking as opposed to quitting even though she had the ability to do so at any time. there is a third reason why, for at least two of the diseases, mrs. mccoy fails the class membership test. and that, as you were told -- this is -- you will see this instruction 8 on page 9. i will not read it all to you right now, but basically this is the instruction. it tells you what plaintiffs have to prove to prove to you whether smoking was a cause of a particular disease. and what i would highlight for you is you would see that: so that it can be reasonably said that but for the smoking of the defendants' cigarettes, that the injury would not have occurred. "but for," it is right there in the middle of the instruction. and so the important part of this test for this case, for the cvd and the -- and the -- and pvd -- the cad and the pvd is this "but for" causation test. and dr. altschuler told you what the answer is on this. dr. altschuler told you that mrs. mccoy had multiple significant risk factors other than smoking: her high cholesterol, her high blood pressure, her family history. and there was a moment when, on direct examination by plaintiff's counsel he was asked: was not smoking a higher risk factor, a more significant risk factor than these other things? and he refused to go there. he would not go there. he said they were all significant risk factors. more importantly, here's what he said on cross-examination: that not only -- not only are they all major risk factors, but that she would not have developed coronary artery disease if her risk factors were adequately controlled and if she were compliant. but we know that her risk factors were not adequately controlled, and we know that she was not a compliant patient. and you saw that on the one document where you saw how her blood pressures continued to be elevated. her cholesterol was also elevated. so addiction is irrelevant to what caused the cad and the pvd because plaintiffs have been able -- unable to carry their burden of proof to show you that but for her smoking, she would not have developed those diseases. because dr. altschuler told you that she would not have developed the cad if her risk factors were adequately controlled and she was compliant. thus, for those diseases, we go back for cad, coronary artery disease, and for pvd, peripheral vascular disease, there is yet another reason. there only has to be one reason for each disease, but for those diseases, there is actually three reasons why mrs. mccoy is not an engle class member. how's my time, jason? mr. keehfus: you are less than an hour. mr. furr: less than an hour. okay. all right. let us go to another very important part of the verdict form. i'm not going to cover each and every question. mr. tepikian is also going to present a closing argument at the end of the case on behalf of philip morris. in order to use our time appropriately, we split it up. i'm not going to cover everything, but the next question i'm going to cover is the two questions you will see on your verdict form. do you have a copy of the verdict form? what numbers are those? are they 6 and 7? mr. tepikian: yes. mr. furr: questions 6 and 7 will be the questions you get on your verdict form -- i hit the button inadvertently. question 6 deals with this issue of whether or not concealment of information was a cause of mrs. mccoy's death. question 7 deals with whether an agreement to conceal was a cause of ms. mccoy's death. and the answer to this is pretty simple. you cannot injure somebody by concealing information from them if they already know it. if they already know it, then no concealment or agreement to conceal could cause the injury because they already know the information. the plaintiffs have the burden to prove to you that it was a concealment or agreement to conceal or both that was the cause of her death, and they cannot prove either. you probably remember dr. proctor telling you that it had been known for centuries, people had been writing and talking about the dangers of smoking. you know what, i'm going to go back and look at this. this is the instruction i told you i would look at. you will see instructions 11 and 12 on pages 13 and 15 of your instructions that deal with the -- the first one is the fraudulent concealment claim and the second is the agreement to conceal claim. i'll use the first one to illustrate the important point for both instructions. the next claim you must consider is plaintiff's claim for fraudulent concealment. on this claim, the issue for your determination is whether glodine mccoy reasonably relied to her detriment on any statement of material fact by each defendant that concealed or omitted information not otherwise known or available to her -- in other words, the information was unknown by her -- concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes. and if so, whether such reliance was a legal cause of glodine mccoy's injuries. and you see the same operative language in the bottom instruction, number 12 on page 15. so it is, was it known or available to her? that is the issue you need to look at when you consider the concealment and agreement to conceal claims on number 6 and 7 on your verdict form. it talks about dr. proctor. he gave you the background of how the information has been available for a long, long time. for over a hundred years, people have been teaching children in school. the information has been in the public arena and available for a long, long time, but we do not even have to go there because we have information about much more personalized warnings that mrs. mccoy got. for one, we know that she and mr. mccoy lived until she was 50 years old in the news capital of the world. you saw evidence on dr. proctor's cross-examination that the dangers of smoking were extensively covered in new york newspapers. the public health organizations like the american cancer society were very active in new york, and that the new york health department itself, in addition to everything else that was going on, published bulletins that were distributed throughout the state encouraging local health authorities to provide that information to the public. and here's what we know. it is undisputed that mrs. mccoy was a voracious reader. she was a consumer of information, a consumer of news. she read multiple newspapers and magazines, including the new york times, the post, the daily news, the long island press. you remember her sons had paper routes, so they were bringing home lots of papers in the home. she read magazines, news day, newsweek, reader's digest. and dr. proctor told you about the type of information that was being provided to people who read those. and maybe the most important thing he told you was that it would take forever, his word, "forever" to read all of the information that was being provided to the public about the dangers of smoking. mr. keehfus: jeff. mr. furr: thank you. mr. furr: let us talk about the information being provided to mrs. mccoy. this also is in your packet. you saw this in opening statement. you have now seen the evidence proving each and every one of these sources of information that mrs. mccoy was receiving. you have heard that mr. mccoy constantly warned her about the dangers throughout their life. that when their parents died, mr. mccoy and his mother warned mrs. mccoy that their parents had died from smoking -- excuse me, from lung cancer and that that smoking -- excuse me, that lung cancer was being caused by smoking. we have talked about information mr. mccoy brought home from his workplace in the hospital. the warnings she was getting from her own body, the shortness of breath. how her daughters-in-law, both anita and stacy were providing her information about cardiovascular disease, emphysema, lung cancer, premature death. that her sons starting warning her aggressively in the 1970s. and that was sort of the inner circle of information she was getting, but, of course, she lived in the broader society like everybody else. and so she had access to information from public health groups, schools, mass media. you have heard about the family using slang. i'll go back to that. of course, the warning labels began appearing on every pack of cigarettes in 1966, in cigarette advertisements in 1971. she lived in new york, the media capital. you know they had house rules. she and mr. mccoy, and this illustrates a lot in this case, they did not allow the children to smoke because they knew it was not good for them. she had her smoker's cough. and, of course, in addition to the new york agencies, the federal and state regulatory and governmental agencies were bombarding people with information about the dangers. we will look at some of that. but the bottom line is, information about the dangers and addictiveness of smoking was not only always available to her, it was known by her. she was surrounded by information about the dangers and addictiveness of cigarettes, including very personalized, very powerful messages that she was getting from her own family, her in-laws, her son, her husband, her own parents' experiences, her daughters-in-law and her own body. surrounded with information about the dangers, but she chose to continue smoking because she loved to smoke. just a few more things on this subject. dr. proctor told you that an individual can get a very powerful message about the dangers of smoking if they have a family member that develops a disease that they are told is attributable to smoking. dr. prochaska said it in even a more powerful way. dr. prochaska said: once the warning is personalized, the perceived threat goes through the roof, goes through the roof. what could personalize a warning more than having your father-in-law die from lung cancer, that both your husband and your mother-in-law are telling you was caused by his cigarette smoking as they literally beg you to stop smoking, beg her to stop smoking? mr. mccoy, of course, from time to time, he got frustrated with her continued smoking in the face of the knowledge that she had. well, let us go to this first. mr. schlesinger referenced this earlier. mr. mccoy said to her: are you blind? all these people have died from lung cancer. you have got to stop smoking. she was not blind. she was not blinded by nicotine addiction. she got that information back in the '50s and early '60s. and mr. scott mccoy, who you know testified, told you, conceded on cross-examination that he told her: you are going to kill yourself, and you are not going to be around. you are going to kill yourself, and you are not going to be around. how more personalized can the message get than that? now what i started to talk about is mr. mccoy got frustrated with her from time to time. and he would say things like: i want you to quit those gd cancer sticks, glo. cancer sticks is, of course, a cigarette being a stick that can cause cancer. and her response would be: mind your own business, john. mind your own business, john. now i'm not criticizing ms. mccoy. and despite what i said to you this morning, i'm not in any way saying anything bad about mrs. mccoy. she seemed like a nice lady. they had a great family. they had a loving relationship. i'm sure she was in love with her husband and kids. and when we talk about these things, it is not to be critical of ms. mccoy or say that she is a bad person. it is because this illustrates for you what her attitude was about the dangers she was knowingly taking by continuing to smoke. of course she got also information from other sources. we talked about the surgeon general's report. when it came out, dr. proctor told you it was the biggest news story of the century, smoking causing lung cancer, emphysema, bronchitis, premature death, all over the news. more importantly, mr. mccoy told you that he specifically told mrs. mccoy about what he had learned about the report. and he told you that mrs. mccoy believed that the surgeon general was a reliable source of information about smoking, but that she paid no attention to it. that is okay. she gets to make her choices, but with that choice comes the responsibility for that choice. mr. mccoy also told you that in the mid-1960s when that first warning came out and they had had three parents that had passed away from lung cancer, that mrs. mccoy understood that there were health risks associated with smoking, understood at that point in time that there were health risks associated with smoking. and, of course, as dr. agharkar told you yesterday -- you know, they put that slide up in front of dr. agharkar to show you how much and how long she smoked, and it ended up being four years or something like that during the course of her life. and i had asked dr. agharkar: how much time did she spend making motivated efforts to quit prior to the time she quit after her heart attack? and his answer was: zero. this was not somebody who tried over, over, over again and experienced horrible withdrawal and relapsed over and over again. this is someone who exercised her right to choose to smoke because she enjoyed using the product. and, of course, it is important to quit. it is important to quit if you do not want to face the dangers of smoking. this was a public service announcement that you saw during the course of this trial. 1 (video clip played as follows:) voice: the moment you stop, in most cases the effects of smoking will begin to reverse themselves until your lungs are nice and clear again. (video clip concluded.) mr. furr: smokers were being told: stop. stop. and the damage you have done to your body will begin reversing itself. and over time, your danger of developing disease will turn to that -- will return to that of a never smoker or nonsmoker, and we will look at that. we will look at what the plaintiff's experts and our expert, dr. klein, told you about the benefits of quitting here in just a minute. i'll skip a couple of these. okay. one of the things dr. proctor told you, because, you know, there is this issue there about -- you will see in the instructions that we looked at a question of: was the information otherwise available to her? dr. proctor told you the warnings about the dangers of smoking were available to smokers and people making decisions about smoking in the 1950s, '60s, '70s, and '80s. dr. prochaska told you that mrs. mccoy's children constantly talked to her about smoking in the 1960s, '70s, and '80s. those warnings got more graphic. as time went on, they got more detailed. ms. mccoy raised some successful sons who became chiropractors, who had medical knowledge of their own. and, of course, they loved their mom. and just like mr. mccoy did out of his love for her, they would bring that knowledge home to her because they wanted to encourage her to stop because they did not want her to continue down the path that she had chosen to take. so she got that information constantly. you might remember that some of the sons would even -- as time went on, they would cut out articles about the dangers of smoking and bring them home and put them in front of mrs. mccoy's face in an undeniable way and say: you cannot deny what you are doing to yourself, mom. okay. the warning labels, sometimes we get away from the basics, but the warning labels are a highly important issue in this case. every pack of cigarettes that ms. mccoy would have smoked after 1966 would have had a warning label on it. every advertisement she saw after 1971 would have had a warning label on it. this mccall's magazine that you were shown this morning, i encourage you, that if you look through here, look through every single cigarette advertisement in here. it carries a warning on it. mr. schlesinger began his closing today by picking out a package of cigarettes and comparing it to how other consumer goods looked and how other consumer packages look and suggest to you, this could become confusing. how can this be bad? it looks just like these other consumer goods. but there is a difference. those package of cigarettes have a warning label on the side of them unlike all those other consumer goods. and they have one of the warning labels, depending on when the package was made, including warning labels that say: smoking causes lung cancer, heart disease, emphysema, and may complicate pregnancy. surgeon general's warning: quitting smoking now greatly reduces serious risk to your health. that is how cigarettes are different, and that is why they are not confused with other products. because unlike all of those other products, cigarette packages carry a warning on them telling the user that by choosing to use this product, you are exposing yourself to these dangers. mr. mccoy told us that ms. mccoy simply paid no attention to the warnings. you know, mr. schlesinger today talked to you about how many cigarettes she would have smoked, how many hits of nicotine she would have taken. but each time she smoked a cigarette from 1966 on, she would have picked up a package that carried a warning right on the side of the package. a warning that the united states congress has approved with respect to the location, the language, and even the size of the warning. and so every time she picked up a cigarette, she would have had that information in the same hand that she was holding those cigarettes in, but she simply paid no attention to it. dr. prochaska, again, i want to return to this because this is critically important. you know, we throw so much information at you, but you have got to keep your eye on the ball. you have got to keep your eye on the ball and sort through what information is really important and what information does not help me much. dr. prochaska said ms. mccoy was addicted around the '60s, the first time she could conclude. mr. mccoy, who was allowed to express his opinion to you about his wife being addicted, told you that he did not believe that she was addicted before they moved to florida in 1976, before they moved to florida in 1976. so his wife would have been in her late 40s before mr. mccoy concluded that his wife was addicted. as we have talked about on more than one occasion, it is important to keep this series of events in mind chronologically because the basic claim is that she was unable to act upon the information that she was receiving because she was addicted and could not process the information. well, now not only do you know that addicted smokers can quit and it does not prevent people from quitting, you also know that depending on whether you rely on dr. prochaska or on mr. mccoy's view of things, which would have put this line somewhere around here (indicating). regardless of which of them you rely upon, ms. mccoy received powerful, personalized warnings about the dangers of smoking that she was taking long before even mr. mccoy or dr. prochaska concluded that they could say she was addicted. i want to talk to you about this issue about filter fraud, filter fraud. i'm sure you know what a red herring is. a red herring is something that does not -- mr. schlesinger: i object. the court: sustained. mr. furr: can you take that off the slide, cliff? let us talk about filters and what the facts are behind filters. tell me when you are ready to pull it up, please. mr. tepikian: you are up. mr. furr: one of the things that was said to you this morning is that the tobacco companies deceived public health authorities and deceived the reader's digest and deceived other intermediaries into endorsing filters, and that is how the message got to smokers. but you know from the cross-examination of dr. proctor, that is not what happened. dr. proctor told you that there were 40 to 50 large epidemiology studies done in the '50s, '60s, '70s, and '80s by public health authorities that concluded that smokers of filtered cigarettes were developing less lung cancer that smokers of unfiltered cigarettes and that that information was available to those public health agencies and other governmental entities who had that information when they were making the recommendations about filtered cigarettes. he also told you that he had reviewed rj reynolds internal company documents and had seen statements in those documents that rj reynolds' scientists genuinely believed that filters worked and that low tar and filtered cigarettes were better for health. let us think about what is missing from this case and the claim being made that somehow the production and advertisement of filtered cigarettes was a cause of ms. mccoy's death. did anyone come here and testify that mrs. mccoy would have quit smoking if filtered cigarettes had never been produced? of course the answer is no, because the claim is she did not quit smoking because she was addicted, and you just cannot have it both ways. if she did not quit smoking because she was addicted, then it was not the production of filtered cigarettes that caused her to continue smoking and vice versa. is there any witness who came here and told you that if filtered cigarettes had never been produced and that mrs. mccoy had smoked only unfiltered cigarettes, that somehow she would have avoided the diseases that she developed and her death at age 70? no. nobody told you that. nobody told you that the manufacture and sale of filtered cigarettes was really what caused ms. mccoy's death or -- excuse me, disease or death or that that is what kept her smoking. of course, mr. mccoy told you that he actually encouraged her to switch, to stop smoking, and that filtered cigarettes were not going to help her. but here's what we know, and this is the important thing, because the question -- one of the questions you may consider is, was -- did she rely on the advertisements for filtered cigarettes and was that reliance a cause of her injuries and death? whatever mrs. mccoy believed about filtered cigarettes was not strong enough or important to her enough to drive her smoking habits. because what you heard is that she switched to filtered cigarettes initially, but then soon switched back to unfiltered cigarettes because she preferred them, that was her preference, and that she went back and forth to filtered cigarettes until the late 1980s when she finally switched to a filtered cigarette as her main brand. but for decades, she went back and forth between filtered cigarettes and unfiltered cigarettes. so whatever she believed about filtered cigarettes was not powerful enough, was not powerful enough to drive her smoking habits and was not a cause of her injuries. this is katie lehman who just handed me something. she works with me. she handed me something important. she handed me something really, really important. because, you know, the claim is that it was the concealment of information or the agreement to conceal information that was a cause of mrs. mccoy's disease and death, question 6 and 7 on your verdict form. but here's a question -- mr. hammer: judge, can we approach? the court: sure. sidebar:) the court: yes, sir. mr. hammer: i'm not sure what mr. furr is going to put on the boards. mr. furr: it is one of the slides. mr. hammer: it is a slide that was handed to him. mr. furr: there you go, number 68. mr. hammer: the slide that he put up with the red herring, that was not given to us. we never had a chance to address it at sidebar. it was put up and then as soon as we objected, mr. furr took it down. mr. furr: i think it was in the deck. i would be shocked if that is not in the deck. mr. hammer: but it said filter fraud is the way they fixed it. that is how it was handed to us. they never gave us a slide that said: red herring. we absolutely would have objected at sidebar beforehand and they threw it up there. we never saw that, and he knew that. mr. furr: that is not true. the court: i do not know what was done. i will check, but i sustain the objection because to me red herrings are just like fish stories. mr. tepikian: there you go. (the sidebar discussion was concluded and the following was held in open court:) mr. furr: was the concealment of information a cause of mrs. mccoy's disease and death or was an agreement to conceal information a cause of her disease and death? one question and answer from dr. prochaska illustrates that the answer to those questions has to be no. dr. prochaska was asked: do you recall mr. mccoy's testimony that he did not think there was anything anyone could have said that would have caused her to quit? and the answer was: yes. the answer was: yes. there was nothing that anyone could have said to her that would have caused her to quit, and that is straight from mr. mccoy. and dr. prochaska told you that is what she saw in his deposition. thank you. ladies and gentlemen, just like i said when i first stood up, the evidence is overwhelming that mrs. mccoy -- of all the issues in the case, this is the issue where all the evidence points in one direction, that ms. mccoy knew that smoking was dangerous and addictive beginning in the 1950s, knew it caused heart disease, emphysema, lung cancer, premature death, and there is nothing anybody else could have said that would have caused her to quit sooner. and the answer to -- what have i done now, cliff? oh, it is okay. it is up there. the answer to question 6, for all these companies, has to be no. this is a question about whether she relied to her detriment. this is a fraud and concealment question. you see it in number 6. this is a question that because she knew about the dangers, she cannot have relied upon it. the conspiracy question, the agreement to conceal question, question 7, it is really the same answer. she knew the health effects and addictive nature of tobacco, and you cannot conceal something from someone when they already know it. you certainly cannot hurt somebody from concealing something from them if they already know it. so just like the concealment claim, the agreement to conceal claim, which is number 7 on your verdict form, the answer has to be no. all -- respectfully, all of the evidence in this case points in one direction, and it was not a lack of knowledge on mrs. mccoy's part that kept her smoking and caused her injuries. it was the choices that she made notwithstanding that knowledge. i want to go to this comparative fault question. you heard today for the first time that the plaintiff's recognize that you may well find -- mr. schlesinger: objection, your honor. the court: overruled. mr. furr: -- that you may well find that mrs. mccoy was at fault for causing her own disease and death and that mrs. mccoy could have tried harder and could have tried more often and could have quit sooner. that is what was told to you today. but, anyway, the assignment of fault question is important because it is a very narrow question, actually. and what is important when you get to this assignment of fault question is this, the assignment of fault in this case relates only to actions that were a legal cause of mrs. mccoy's death. if there is some other action of one or more of the tobacco companies that you do not like or that you think is wrong but was not a legal cause of her death, it simply does not weigh in the calculus of this assignment of fault. the defendants can only be assigned faults for actions -- excuse me, cannot be assigned fault for actions that were not a cause of her death. you will see that when you read the instructions. they are very clear. fault must be based on acts that were a legal cause. you also have heard this morning, you heard the instructions, you know that the engle findings do not establish that defendants are at fault for causing ms. mccoy's death. and important to remember, when you think about those engle findings, if those findings establish the defendants were at fault, we would not be here. that issue would already be decided. those findings simply do not establish the defendants were a cause of mrs. mccoy's death. they are not about mrs. mccoy. they are about actions by the defendants, in general, and whether those actions affected mrs. mccoy is why you are here. as you begin your deliberations, it is important to recognize that the plaintiffs have to prove every percentage point of fault. like a lot of times, you know, in life, you start at 50/50. and you think about: how do i adjust the 50/50? but not here because the plaintiffs have the burden of proof. the defendants start down here at the bottom. and you were told this morning that you should assign thirty percent of fault to each defendant, a total of ninety percent. that is easy to say but hard to prove because you have to prove each percentage point. you have to prove -- mr. schlesinger: objection, your honor. it misstates -- the court: objection is overruled. this is argument, counsel. mr. furr: you have to prove why it is not 1 percent or 2 percent, or what is the additional evidence you have that takes it from 3 percent to 5 percent, to ten percent? that is what has to be proven to you. let us think about what some of this evidence was that you might want to consider if you get to this issue about assignment of fault. dr. mannino. question: and being addicted to nicotine does not relieve a smoker of responsibility to try to quit smoking; is not that right? answer: correct. of course, like i said, you heard this morning, mr. schlesinger tell you, she could have tried harder to quit, she could have tried more often to quit. dr. mannino, a very important concept because it is a fair question: would she have benefited from quitting and how late could she have quit and still gained a benefit? dr. mannino, fine pulmonologist, no question about it, said that it is likely that she would not have developed a heart condition if she stopped smoking in 1981. if she stopped smoking in 1981, she would have avoided her heart disease. dr. klein told you that the risk of developing lung cancer is nearly, not quite, but nearly the same as nonsmoker's risk five to eight years after stopping smoking. so not only is it important to stop smoking, but the sooner you stop, the greater the benefit. the sooner you stop, the greater the benefit. dr. klein also told you with respect to copd that everyone loses lung function as they age, but that five years after quitting smoking, a former smoker's decline in lung function is the same as a never-smoker. just a fact of life. as we all grow older, we are losing lung function. smokers lose it faster because of the way smoking is affecting their lungs. but if they stop, five years after they stopped, the rate at which their lung capacity decreases -- their lung function decreases is the same as that of a nonsmoker. and, of course, when you come to this comparative fault question, again, ladies and gentlemen, i suggest to you that this first board i showed you in many ways answers the important questions in this case. and what it really demonstrates to you is that only mrs. mccoy, only mrs. mccoy had the ability to change the events of this case. she is the only person. she is the only party to this lawsuit that could have made a decision for her to stop smoking and avoid her smoking-related disease. the choices that she made to ignore all the information that she got about the dangers of smoking and to continue to choose to smoke as opposed to quitting and choosing health, those choices that she made, including the choices that she made before either dr. prochaska or mr. mccoy said she is addicted, those are the only cause of mrs. mccoy's death. and when you consider this issue of comparative fault, we would ask that you please keep in mind that only she could have changed the outcome of this case. and as we just looked at, mr. mccoy testified, there is nothing anybody could have said that would have changed her behavior and caused her to quit smoking. what is my time? mr. keehfus: hour and a half. mr. furr: i've got ten more minutes, and then mr. tepikian is going to give you the hook. okay. damages, i'm not going to say too about much damages other than you will see in your instruction that damages must be fair and just in light of the evidence, fair and just in light of the evidence, that they are not done out of anger, they are not done out of emotion, but they have to be based on the evidence in this case. and that damages in this phase of the trial, i want to remind you that these are damages designed to compensate mr. mccoy for any loss that he has proved to you. these are not damages designed to punish the defendants. that is a second phase of the trial, if you get there, but today -- tomorrow when you are deliberating, your decision now is only what damages are designed to compensate mr. mccoy. and, once again, it is the plaintiff's burden of proof. the plaintiffs have the burden to prove to you their damages. they have to prove to you each and every dollar of damage. you know, it is easy to pluck out of the air a large number, like $12 million, and ask you for $9 million for the injury that mr. mccoy has already incurred and $2 million more for what he may incur in the future, for a total of $12. that is the request that was made of you on a wrongful death claim, but what is the evidence that supports a $12 million verdict? that is a lot of money. $12 million is a lot of money. what evidence supports that? how have plaintiffs proven to you that $12 million is the right number? how did they prove to you that even $1 million, even $1 million, a huge number, have they proven to you that $1 million is the right number? in this case, respectfully, the $12 million request just simply defies common sense. this is a case -- i've said it too many times maybe already today, but mrs. mccoy knew that smoking was dangerous and caused cancer and death starting in the '50s, but she enjoyed her smoking and did not want to quit. and the $12 million request just defies common sense. and you are going to have to decide whether or not the plaintiffs have proven to you, if you get to this issue, if you get to this issue, you have to decide: have plaintiffs actually proven to you that $12 million is the right number? did they even prove to you that $1 million is the right number? there is a final issue in this case, because not only did plaintiffs -- not only did they have a request of $12 million of you, they want you to come back for a second phase and award them more money above and beyond what is necessary to compensate. they want to come back to a second phase of this trial and ask you to award them more money in the form of punitive damages, punitive damages. and that is the last question on your verdict form. they are going to ask you to find, if you check yes, we come back here for a second phase so they can ask you for more money. what is important -- mr. schlesinger: objection. objection, your honor. the court: overruled. mr. furr: -- to understand is that if you get to that last question, if you get to that last question, there is a higher burden of proof. you know, as mr. schlesinger illustrated with his scales today, for these other questions in this first phase, there is a preponderance of the evidence burden of proof. but you will see in your instructions that if you get to this last question, and you will not get there unless you find that ms. mccoy's death was caused by concealment or agreement to conceal. those are the only questions that cause you to go forward to the punitive entitlement claim. you see, it is sort of the -- just the way the verdict form is instructed, you will see, it is a little abstract to talk to since you do not have your verdict form yet. but you will see you have directions on your verdict form that tell you you only get to that last question if you find that concealment or agreement to concealment was a cause of her death, which we know it was not because she knew that smoking was dangerous for decades. but, nonetheless, i'm going to talk to you briefly about this question because they have a higher, a higher burden of proof. they have to prove to you by clear and convincing evidence. you will see also, instruction 20 on page 24 of your instructions, that in determining whether punitive damages are warranted, you may also take into consideration any mitigating evidence. mitigating evidence is evidence which may demonstrate that there is no need to impose punitive damages against the defendants. so regardless of whether you think the conduct merited punishment, you may conclude that because of other evidence that mitigates against the need to punish, that you do not want to punish in this case. and i'm going to go through this pretty quickly. i know mr. tepikian is going to talk you about this. a couple things, though, that i think are important to keep in mind. number one, notwithstanding all of the negative things that were said about ctr, the ctr did some great work. with tobacco company money, the ctr funded $350 million of research, resulting in 7,000 peer-reviewed articles. more than 600 articles -- in these surgeon general reports that are talked about a great deal, more than 600 times, those reports have cited ctr-funded studies. another mitigating -- other mitigating evidence is that you are being asked to punish in 2015 for things that happened a very, very long time ago. you know, you saw all of the people that were claimed to be the actors in the conspiracy. they put up a board and said: this is a picture of all the people that were involved, but dr. proctor told you not a single one of these people works for the tobacco companies anymore and probably most of them are not even alive anymore. 2015, you are being asked to punish for things that happened a very long time ago. you also heard about the work that rj reynolds has done in trying to develop safer cigarettes. dr. proctor told you that rj reynolds has spent a billion dollars on one brand of cigarettes called the premier cigarette that was less mutagenic and he thought it would be safer, but the consumers rejected it because they did not like the way it tasted. rj reynolds did not stop trying. they took it back in-house. they re-engineered it, spent more money, reintroduced it. it failed again, but they tried. just like dr. proctor told you, the only safe cigarette is one that someone does not smoke, but rj reynolds spent a billion dollars trying to make a cigarette that would be less dangerous, rejected by consumers. i will let mr. tepikian talk about the fda, in the interest of time, but i do want to talk to you about this because this is really important. you are going to be asked to punish because of concealment or agreement to conceal that were a cause of mrs. mccoy's death. one thing is for sure, there is no concealment today because dr. proctor told you about the rj reynolds' website, that on the rj reynolds' website, which is a voluntary website, that rj reynolds tells the smoking and nonsmoking public the nicotine in cigarettes is addictive, that the best course of action for tobacco smokers concerned about their health is to quit. that smoking significantly increases the risk of serious diseases, lung cancer, heart disease, emphysema. that adults who do not use tobacco products should not start and adults who are using tobacco products should stop and that minors should never use tobacco products. the last thing i want to talk about. there is been a lot of discussion in this case about youth marketing and about smoking among adolescents. and it is been described as an epidemic, but the fact of the matter is that youth smoking rates today in the united states are at the lowest they have been since the 1920s. dr. proctor told you that the rates have fallen dramatically in the past 18 years, that youth smoking has decreased by 66 percent since 1966, and that there is been a 25 percent decline just in the last four years. and interestingly, today cigarettes are so stigmatized among youth that teenagers are more likely to smoke marijuana than to smoke cigarettes today. ladies and gentlemen, i'm going to end the way i started. so this is your question 10, your last question on the verdict form. i do not think you will get there because she was not injured by concealment or agreement to conceal. but if you do, for the reasons i just discussed and what mr. tepikian will discuss with you, the answer should be no to this question, and then the case will end regardless of what else you have done. okay. i'm going to end the way i started. it is a simple case. despite all the time we spent talking to you, it is a simple case. it is a case about personal responsibility, and i cannot say it any better than dr. hammond. (video clip played as follows:) voice: good evening. this is see it now, produced by the partnership of friendly and murrow. tonight the first of two reports on cigarettes and lung cancer. voice: in 1952, drs. hammond and horn of the american cancer society began an extended study of the smoking habits of american men. here is dr. hammond reporting on the results of the first two years. voice: it is now established, in my opinion, beyond a reasonable doubt, that cigarette smoking greatly increases the probability of developing lung cancer. in my opinion, people can be warned of the danger and they are being warned. what they then want to do, whether they want to smoke or not, is their own business. (video clip concluded.) mr. furr: people have the freedom in the united states to make choices, including the choices to do dangerous things. (video clip played as follows:) voice: this is a cbs news extra on smoking and health, the findings of the surgeon general's committee. voice: almost from the moment that cigarettes were introduced, they were attacked, but the attacks took a new turn ten years ago and culminated in today's report by the surgeon general's committee. this, in summary, is what the committee said: cigarette smoking is a major cause of lung cancer in men, and data on women smokers runs the same way. cigarette smoking is a significant cause of cancer of the larynx and probably the most important cause of chronic bronchitis. cigarette smoking may be related to other lung diseases. male smokers have a much higher death rate from heart disease, although it is not proven that smoking is the cause. on the question of filters, the committee says there is no evidence that they do any good, but it did not exclude the possibility that an effective filter might be developed. in short, the committee says: if you smoke cigarettes, you increase your chances of dying early. the sooner you start, the more you smoke, the more you inhale, the worse your chances are. in this kind of a country, it comes down to you, whether you like it or not. no one is going to forbid an adult to smoke, and it is now quite clear that no one is going to tell him it is good for him, either. the decision is his, the decision and the health that may depend on it. this is harry reasoner. good night. (video clip concluded.) mr. furr: it comes down to you, whether you like it or not. not only do we have freedom of choice in this country, the price that we paid for it is personal responsibility. why did mrs. mccoy smoke for between 40 and 50 years? (video clip played as follows:) q. mr. mccoy, mrs. mccoy would enjoy having a cigarette before and after her coffee, for example, right? a. right. q. and ms. mccoy loved to smoke after she ate, right? a. yes. mrs. mccoy loved to smoke, period. (video clip concluded.) mr. furr: mr. mccoy also told you that mrs. mccoy was responsible for making the decision to stop and conceded that mrs. mccoy was responsible for succeeding in quitting smoking. ladies and gentlemen, thank you very much for your patience with me. all that we ask of you is let the lessons we all learned in kindergarten about personal responsibility guide your decision-making in this case. mr. tepikian: may i? ladies and gentlemen, counsel, mr. mccoy, when i stood before you at opening statement and -- during my opening statement, i told you that what i thought the evidence would show in this case. i told you that i thought we would be able to show that mrs. mccoy knew the health risks of smoking, that she made the choice to continue smoking despite knowing those risks, that she ignored all the warnings throughout her life, that despite knowing she was putting her own health at risk, she continued to smoke and did not want to stop, that she did not make a serious quit attempt until her own health was at risk, and that she was capable of quitting smoking at any time because when she finally did get motivated to quit smoking, she quit cold turkey and never smoked again. i think we proved those facts, and i think we proved much more. now during the course of this trial, it may have seemed that you were listening to two different cases. it may have seemed that it was kind of like two ships passing in the night. mr. furr and i and other counsel for rj reynolds believe that this case was about mrs. mccoy. we believe it came down to those two words. mr. schlesinger: objection. the court: sustained. mr. tepikian: and that is because every question on the verdict form is about mrs. mccoy. now, as much as mr. schlesinger and mr. gdanski and mr. hammer wanted this case to be a referendum on cigarette smoking -- mr. schlesinger: objection. mr. tepikian: -- or tobacco companies -- the court: sustained. counsel, this is not about personal beliefs. mr. tepikian: this case is about one woman and whether her estate is entitled to recover damages for her death 18 years ago. now what i'd like to focus on are certain areas of the evidence. and as i told you in voir dire, i am not going to repeat everything that mr. furr said or that other counsel for rj reynolds, and i did my best to do that throughout the trial. but i am going to focus on a few key pieces of evidence and kind of expand on them a little bit more because i want to make sure that you understand some of the issues that are at issue for you to decide and because when mr. furr and i talked about the closing, we wanted to make sure that we had it covered and that we were not overlapping. so one of the things i want to talk to you about is the brands of cigarettes that mrs. mccoy smoked. now clearly, of the three people with personal knowledge about mrs. mccoy's smoking, two of them, mr. mccoy and scott mccoy, could not provide much information about the actual brands of cigarettes that mrs. mccoy smoked. and the third person that testified, keith mccoy, he did not testify about any brands of cigarettes that his mother smoked. but what is clear from the evidence is that mrs. mccoy was smoking unfiltered chesterfield cigarettes when mr. mccoy met her in 1994 -- in 1944, excuse me. and that scott mccoy testified that chesterfield was the first brand of cigarettes that he remembers his mom smoking in the '60s and that she continued to smoke that brand throughout the '80s. mr. mccoy also testified that he could not recall any brand of cigarettes his wife smoked in the 1970s. and the evidence is that mrs. mccoy alternated between unfiltered cigarettes, chesterfield, including chesterfields, and filtered cigarettes until some time in the mid-1980s. ladies and gentlemen, during the course of trial, you learned that unfiltered chesterfields, when mrs. mccoy was smoking, was manufactured by a company called liggett, and liggett is not a defendant in this case. and when you look at the verdict form that the judge will give you, you will see that liggett does not appear anywhere on the verdict form. ladies and gentlemen, it is pretty clear that chesterfield was a primary brand that mrs. mccoy smoked throughout her life. that is the brand that mr. mccoy remembered she started with. that is the brand that the one son who testified about brands remembered her first smoking, and that is an unfiltered brand that she smoked throughout her life until the mid-'80s. now one of the questions on the verdict form is question number 4, and this is not one that -- i do not think -- mr. schlesinger touched on it. i know that mr. furr did not. in question 4, assuming you get this far in your verdict form, it says: please state as to each defendant whether smoking cigarettes manufactured by the defendant was a legal cause of glodine mccoy's injuries. and it lists rj reynolds, philip morris, and lorillard tobacco company. it does not list liggett. now in closing argument -- mr. schlesinger: objection. objection. the court: sustained. mr. schlesinger: move to strike. the court: the jury is to disregard the last comment. mr. tepikian: in closing argument, mr. schlesinger said that he wanted you to award somewhere around $12 million to mr. mccoy against those three defendants, but the evidence is clear that chesterfield was mrs. mccoy's primary brand. so i'd suggest that you need to check no as to each one of those defendants with regard to whether or not cigarettes manufactured by those defendants were a legal cause of mrs. mccoy's injuries. and that is because the evidence that we have in this case is that she smoked those brands of cigarettes only intermittently during her life. think back to the evidence that you heard in this case. it was that she smoked some cigarettes, that she smoked some kent, she smoked some parliament. she may have smoked some virginia slims, but what was the length of time that she smoked any of those brands? it was never pinpointed down. the one brand that there was any kind of consistent testimony about was the chesterfield brand. now i want to touch a little bit on damages. 250 to 300 years, think about that, if someone made between $400,000 and $500,000 [sic] -- mr. schlesinger: objection, your honor. mr. tepikian: -- it would take -- mr. schlesinger: excuse me. pardon me. no earnings claim, your honor. objection. the court: overruled. mr. tepikian: if someone made between 400,000 and $500,000 [sic] a year, it would take between somewhere between 250 and 300 years -- mr. schlesinger: objection, your honor. mr. tepikian: -- to make $12 million. the court: excuse me. i overruled the objection. continue. mr. schlesinger: sorry, judge. mr. tepikian: it would take someone 250 to 300 years to make $12 million, and that is the demand that mr. schlesinger suggested you should enter on your verdict form. think about that. and mr. furr touched on damages, as well. they need to be fair and reasonable. think about that. if you get that far in the verdict form, you need to think about what is a fair and reasonable amount of damages. and i would suggest to you that $12 million is not when you think about how much money -- how long it would take someone to earn that if they made 40 to $50,000 a year. now mr. furr touched on reliance. let us talk a little bit about reliance. that goes to the fraudulent concealment and the conspiracy counts. those are questions 6 and 7 on the verdict form. and as mr. furr said: i do not think you get to those questions, but we need to address them. we need to address all the questions on the verdict form. so you have heard a lot of evidence about the tobacco companies and you saw some of the internal company documents. and no doubt, there is some things that you saw that caused you to shake your head. there is no question about that. but if you get this far, i think the thing that you need to ask yourself is, is there proof that any of the defendants fooled mrs. mccoy in some way that caused her to begin smoking or continue smoking, or did mrs. mccoy have the information she needed to make an informed choice about whether to smoke or quit smoking? mr. furr went through all of the information that mrs. mccoy had throughout her life in detail. i'm not going to go through all of that. but i want to hit on one thing that mr. schlesinger said this morning. he told you that mrs. mccoy was -- and i believe i wrote this down correctly -- addicted as a teenage girl, end quote. remember dr. prochaska? she testified, and this was on -- this was plaintiff's own expert. she testified that it was her opinion that mrs. mccoy was not addicted to -- not addicted to cigarettes. all right. so this is plaintiff's own expert opining on addiction, that mrs. mccoy was not addicted until some time in the 1960s. that would have meant that mrs. mccoy was somewhere in her mid-30s to early 40s. mr. furr discussed all that, but clearly by that point in time, mrs. mccoy had information about the health risks and dangers of smoking. and she would have been making an informed choice with regard to whether to continue smoking or stop smoking. now mr. gdanski and dr. proctor spent about two days going through the internal company documents. obviously, nothing that appeared in those documents is something that ms. mccoy was aware of or relied upon. but i suggest the critical thing is, what did mrs. mccoy believe? there was testimony in this case that mrs. mccoy heard statements by a tobacco company, but what did she believe? let us go back and look at what mr. mccoy's testimony was. when he was on the stand, mr. mccoy was on direct examination with mr. hammer. he was asked this question. he said: when you would talk to your wife -- to her, mrs. mccoy, about the health effects, what would she talk to you about as far as what her concerns were? the answer was: well, she did not have those concerns. she -- she consistently told me that the tobacco company said it was okay to smoke, they were doing the studies and the studies said: well, no, it is all right. keep on smoking. you know, we will come up with an answer of some kind, you know. and then here's the important thing. here's the next question: based on what you observed when she was telling you that, did it appear to you she believed that? did she believe what she said she was hearing from the tobacco companies? and mr. mccoy's answer, very candid: no. i do not think she did. i -- i -- maybe she did, maybe she did not. it was hard for me to tell at that time. i know we had to go out to -- should i keep on going? he told you that she did not believe what she said she was hearing from the tobacco companies. if she did not believe it, she could not have relied upon it. and when you look at the jury instructions, you will see it talks about detrimental reliance and reasonable reliance. and, ladies and gentlemen, i would suggest that this is proof, in and of itself, that she did not detrimentally rely on anything any defendant said or did not say or anything the defendants did or did not do. now one of the things i also want to make a note on with regard to questions 6 and 7, and mr. furr showed you the questions, so i'm not going to go through that again. but one of the things i think is important for you to understand if you get this far in the verdict form, i want to direct you to instruction number 15, instruction number 15, which is on page 18 of your jury instructions. in that, it discusses what the impact is of any comparative fault that you might find between mrs. mccoy and any tobacco company, if you get that far in the verdict form. and what this instruction tells you is that if you were to check yes to questions 6 or 7, the questions on fraudulent concealment and conspiracy, none of the comparative fault would apply. if you assigned mrs. mccoy 99 percent of the fault, because you check yes to question 6 and 7, it would not apply at all, and no comparative fault would be applied in this case. and i think it is important for you to understand that when you consider these questions, if you get that far in the verdict form. one of the other questions, and mr. furr touched on this, and i'm going to go a little bit further into it because mr. schlesinger spent a great deal of time talking about entitlement to punitive damages, which is the last question on the verdict form, question number 10. he spent a lot of time talking about that, and i would suggest that most of his closing argument was focused on question number 10 on the verdict form. so let us talk about that. it is the one that talks about entitlement to punitive damages. you only get to question number 10, you only answer question number 10 if you answer question 6 or 7 yes. and you will see that when you get the verdict form from your honor. but let us talk about what punitive damages are and what you would be asking -- be asked to decide, if you get that far. so you are not being asked to decide any amount of punitive damages. the issue is whether by clear and convincing evidence, that the plaintiff, mr. mccoy, has shown he is entitled to punitive damages. so do not spend a second thinking about the amount, if you get that far. the question is whether, based on the evidence, mr. mccoy has shown by clear and convincing evidence he is entitled to punitive damages. so if we get to that, there is going to be a whole nother phase to this trial, and your honor instructed you on that. mr. schlesinger touched on that, as did mr. furr, but there will be another phase to this trial. and plaintiff will have an opportunity to put on witnesses. rj reynolds and lorillard will have an opportunity. philip morris will. we will have additional closing arguments, and that is when you would consider the amount. so at this point, you would not be considering an amount at all, only whether there is entitlement. but i want you to focus on what the instructions are. it talks about clear and convincing evidence, which is a higher burden than the greater weight of the evidence. and your honor has instructed you on that, but let me direct you to what the actual language is. with respect to punitive damages, you will see that the evidence for clear and convincing needs to be precise, explicit, lacking in confusion and of such weight that it produces a fair belief or a conviction without hesitation about the matter at issue. and that is directly from the instructions that you were given. and let me tell you this: in the instructions, it also tells you that you can only punish for any conduct that harmed mrs. mccoy, and that is an important concept. so punitive damages are designed to punish and deter. and under the law, you can only punish for any harm to mrs. mccoy, if you get that far. the instructions, and mr. furr showed you the actual instruction on this, but for punitive damages, you also have to consider mitigating evidence. all right. and mitigating evidence is evidence that demonstrates that there is no need to impose punitive damages. so let us talk a little bit about what mitigating evidence you have already heard in this case, so that if you get to this question, you have this in mind. let us talk about the fda. now during his direct examination, dr. proctor told you that he did not think that the companies' behavior has changed at all. on cross-examination, you learned that it has. you learned that the tobacco institute and the council for tobacco research were disbanded in 1999. you learned that philip morris and rj reynolds, and mr. furr talked about it in his closing, have websites that talk about and state that cigarette smoking causes cancer and can be addictive, and that there are links on those sites to other public health places for people to go to get information about smoking and health. and that is the only way that these companies communicate with regard to smoking and health. you learned that in 2000, philip morris supported fda regulation of tobacco. and that in 2009, the fda entered significant regulation over tobacco. you learned that the fda can ban any ingredient in cigarettes except for nicotine. and that they can control the amount of nicotine in cigarettes. they cannot ban it, but they can control the amount of nicotine in cigarettes. you learned that the tobacco companies need to disclose their research, advertising, and marketing documents to the fda. you learned that the fda has to approve any changes to existing cigarette design or ingredients and that they have to approve any new cigarette design or ingredients before they can actually go on the market. you learned that the fda can make unannounced inspections at any of the tobacco companies' manufacturing or research facilities, and that they have. you learned that the fda now controls what goes into a cigarette, what comes out of a cigarette, and what could be said about a cigarette. the fact is that these companies act in a much more transparent and regulated environment than they ever have, and that has been the case for over a decade. i respectfully suggest the plaintiff has not met their burden of showing entitlement to punitive damages. and that if you get to this question, which is the last question, and i do not think you will, that you should check no with regard to entitlement to punitive damages. members of the jury, this case is about one smoker and whether she is a member of the engle class and whether her estate is entitled to recover money for her decisions to begin and quit and continue smoking. mr. schlesinger: objection, your honor. misstates the law. the court: sustained. mr. tepikian: this is a case about mrs. mccoy and what she knew about the risks of smoking and why she chose to continue smoking. mr. schlesinger: same objection, your honor. misstates the law. the court: thank you. mr. tepikian: the evidence is that mrs. mccoy is not an engle class member. the evidence is that she had information she needed to make an informed decision whether to smoke or stop smoking, and that she did not detrimentally rely on anything any defendant said or did not say. ladies and gentlemen, you have been incredibly intent, and you have shown that by just the questions that you have asked of the various witnesses. you have really paid a lot of attention, and we very much appreciate that. we have the greatest civil justice system in the world, and if it is not for people like you who have now taken about three weeks out of your lives to sit here and hear this case, we would not be able to do it. i know everybody thanks you for your time and your service. i thank you for your time and service. thank you for the opportunity to have brought the case to you. and with that, i will sit down. thank you.