(defendant philip morris closing argument) mr. geraghty: good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. you know my name is bill geraghty, and along with jeff michael, we represent philip morris usa. and it has been a long trial. and i want to start simply by thanking you for your jury service. i think i can speak on behalf of everyone involved, the court, the parties, and the lawyers, we know you have been paying extremely close attention to the case. we know that the examinations have probably taken, at times, longer than you would have preferred. but we know that you were paying attention because you asked a lot of questions yourselves. i know that not all of your questions were asked, but many of your questions were asked, and it clearly indicates that you were paying a lot of attention to the evidence as it was presented to you. and i just want to join mr. mitnik in saying that we understand that you are making an incredible sacrifice of your time to be here with -- you know, at this point, we are going on three weeks; right? but our system of justice would not work if we did not have people like you who were willing to make those sacrifices. so let me just say thank you here at the very beginning. we are getting very close to the end of the case. and i'm sure that is music to all of your ears. and it is almost time for you to retire to the jury room and deliberate. judge winesett has provided you with the legal instructions and a verdict form. and then you will be asked to head off and deliberate and decide the issues in the case. but before you do that, this is my opportunity to summarize for you the evidence that you have seen and heard over the last two weeks. now, when i spoke to you during my opening statement, which was almost exactly two weeks ago on thursday, i told you that the plaintiff would spend a lot of time talking about statements and ideas made by philip morris and rj reynolds, many of which were made 30, 40, and in some instances, more than 50 years ago. and we told you we would not try to defend those statements. that is what i told you two weeks ago. philip morris and rj reynolds made statements and had ideas that today neither you nor i would say or think. but i also told you that if that was all this case was about, if all the plaintiff had to prove in this case was that cigarette company executives said and did inappropriate things, we would not be here. we would not have spent the last two weeks here together. but we did. and we did that, ladies and gentlemen, because this case is not about all cigarette smokers. it is not about whether we believe people should smoke cigarettes. this case is about barbara mcmannis, about her life and her decisions. and that is why you will see, when you actually get the verdict form, that all of the questions, all of the questions on that verdict form ask you specifically about barbara mcmannis; not all cigarette smokers and not the general public. now, i want to remind you of what happened on monday. mr. mcmannis and his attorneys brought you dr. proctor, who already this year had testified in three other trials against philip morris and rj reynolds. he told you he had earned $25,000 in this particular case alone. dr. proctor testified for over six hours on monday, and he showed you the same documents and videotapes that he has shown in the 60 other cases in which he has testified. but after doing that for six hours, i actually had an opportunity to examine, to question dr. proctor. and he told you, for the very first time, that he knew nothing about barbara mcmannis. absolutely nothing about her. dr. proctor told you he had no idea what barbara mcmannis knew or did not know, did or did not do, or what she relied upon or did not rely upon. those were dr. proctor's exact words to you on monday afternoon. but what did barbara mcmannis's family tell you? the people that know her best. her husband, her two daughters, her younger sister. not a single person who knows barbara mcmannis walked into this courtroom and took that witness stand and told you that barbara mcmannis was somehow confused about the health risks of smoking, that she really did not know, that she did not believe that cigarette smoking caused lung cancer and other diseases. they all told you they believe she was addicted. so do not you think that if she was confused about the health risks of smoking, they would have come here and they would have told you that from the witness stand. but, in fact, they told you the exact opposite. they told you that barbara mcmannis was intelligent, independent, strong-willed, that she had a mind of her own. that is what every single person who knew barbara mcmannis told you. they told you she was the kind of person that made her own decisions in life. she did what she wanted to do no matter what anyone else said or thought about it. that is the kind of person that she was. and that included smoking cigarettes. you heard that barbara mcmannis enjoyed smoking cigarettes. now, i grant you, mr. mcmannis was reluctant to admit that when he testified on the witness stand. he was reluctant to admit that. and, of course, i think after hearing all of the evidence over the last two weeks, you know why that is the case. but eventually, even mr. mcmannis from the witness stand told you, my wife enjoyed smoking cigarettes for 40 years, for 40 years. the entire time that they were married. and, of course, your common sense tells you, your common sense tells you, of course she enjoyed smoking, and she did what she wanted to do for 40 years. now, let me say something about the findings from the earlier class action. you heard about those engle findings. and i told you again, i'm not here to debate those findings. but there is also no debate about this particular issue. those findings do not tell you how to answer any of the specific questions on the verdict form. that is because, ladies and gentlemen, you get to decide, based on the evidence you have heard over the last two weeks, by your verdict in this case, whether you believe, based on the evidence, that those findings have any applicability to barbara mcmannis and the lifestyle choices that she made. after all, this case is about barbara mcmannis. you just heard her husband, donald mcmannis, asking you to award him millions of dollars in damages for his wife's decision to smoke cigarettes, something that she enjoyed doing for years. you, ladies and gentlemen, are the only jury that has heard the story of barbara mcmannis and her life, and you get to decide the issues in this particular case. now, you may remember that i told you two weeks ago during my opening statement that this case was about two words. and the two words i told you were "control" and "responsibility". control and responsibility. and i asked you -- before i hurt myself here. i asked you to listen to the evidence. we are going to walk through all of the evidence we have seen and heard about barbara mcmannis over the last two weeks. i'm going to ask you again to ask yourselves the following series of questions as we review the evidence. who was in control of barbara mcmannis's lifestyle choices? who was in control of her decision to smoke cigarettes? who was in control of her efforts to quit smoking? whether she was ever motivated to quit smoking, before she was diagnosed with cancer in 1995? was barbara mcmannis addicted? and if so, was she someone whose addiction was so strong, so substantial in the language of the instructions the court will give you, that it prevented her from quitting smoking -- mr. mitnik: objection, your honor. mr. geraghty: -- that it prevented her -- mr. mitnik: hold on. mr. geraghty: can i finish the statement, please? the court: you need to make it come within the law. mr. geraghty: okay. was her addiction so strong, so substantial, that it hindered, hindered her ability to quit when she was motivated to do so? ask yourself that question as you listen to us review the evidence. and, finally, did barbara mcmannis rely on anything that philip morris or rj reynolds said or failed to say about the health risks of smoking? we walked through the significant events of mrs. mcmannis's life because this case is about her. and we are going to do that again in just a few moments. and i will show you that everything we told you about barbara mcmannis at the very beginning of this case has turned out to be true. i talked to you at the very beginning about what i called the sources of evidence. the sources of evidence. we asked you to pay close attention to the important sources of evidence. and what did i mean by that? the testimony of donald mcmannis, the plaintiff in this case, both here at the trial and two years ago when he gave his deposition under oath, and the testimony of barbara mcmannis's family. and as you saw throughout the course of this trial, much of what mr. mcmannis and his lawyers told you about her was contradicted. contradicted by what mr. mcmannis himself said on the witness stand when he testified and what he said in his deposition two years ago in 2012, by what barbara mcmannis's own family members told you, and by what your common sense now tells you, what your judgment now tells you about the way people behave, what motivates people to do the things that they do. and mr. mcmannis's testimony was contradicted on important issues, like whether his wife knew that cigarette smoking was dangerous for many decades before she was diagnosed with cancer; whether she ever motivated efforts to quit smoking until the last year or two of her life; and whether she believed, not whether her family members believed, but whether barbara mcmannis herself believed that she was addicted to cigarettes. and i ask you to pay close attention to those inconsistencies in the evidence because you get to decide what testimony you choose to believe in this case. judge winesett gave you the instructions. there is an instruction on the believability of witnesses. and in deciding what testimony you choose ultimately to believe, you can consider -- and these are right out of the judge's instructions -- the interest the person has in the outcome of the case and the reasonableness of the testimony of the witness considered in light of all of the evidence in the case and in light of your own experience and common sense. so as you think about the evidence you have heard, please remember that you get to decide whether you find each witness to be believable or whether you find that some of the things they said during the course of the trial were motivated by an interest, an interest they have in the outcome of the case. and the judge told you, you can believe all of what a witness says, part of what the witness says, or none of what the witness says. that is your job, ladies and gentlemen, and your job alone in this case. let me talk about the burden of proof. judge winesett has instructed you that mr. mcmannis has the burden to prove that something that philip morris said or failed to say had a direct connection to and a substantial impact on the decisions that barbara mcmannis made about cigarette smoking. and after hearing all the evidence in this case over the last two weeks, ladies and gentlemen, you know that barbara mcmannis was not paying attention to anything that cigarette companies were saying. mr. mcmannis told you that flat-out. he told you that flat-out about his wife. juan, would you pull that first slide, please? i have some boards, and i have some on the slides. and this first one is a slide. this is what donald mcmannis told you about his wife. he said, barbara mcmannis was the kind of person who was going to smoke cigarettes, no matter what you told her, no matter what you told her. barbara mcmannis was not waiting for philip morris or rj reynolds to tell her, smoking is dangerous; you need to quit. barbara mcmannis was the only person making those decisions in her life. i do not think it is coming up on your screen, is it? okay. i'm sorry about that. it does not come up here? mr. weaver: just there. mr. geraghty: oh, back there. i'm sorry. i'm blocking it from you. i'm going to use boards for most of what i'm going to do here. so that is the only, hopefully, glitch there. i apologize for that, ladies and gentlemen. barbara mcmannis was not waiting for philip morris or rj reynolds to tell her that smoking was dangerous, that she needed to quit. she was the only person making those decisions. you heard her family say she was independent, intelligent, and strong-willed. and, of course, after hearing the evidence, you know that that is how barbara mcmannis chose to live her life and that her attitude about cigarette smoking was no different. no different, ladies and gentlemen. barbara mcmannis knew that cigarette smoking was dangerous for decades, decades before she was diagnosed with cancer in 1995. you heard that barbara mcmannis and her entire family knew back in 1964 that her father died from smoking cigarettes. she knew that her younger sister had been diagnosed with copd. she knew that her best friend's husband had been diagnosed with the same disease, copd, and that that was caused by smoking cigarettes. ladies and gentlemen, you actually asked some of the most important questions of donald mcmannis during the course of this trial. and, frankly, the answers that mr. mcmannis gave to the questions that you posed tell you everything you need to know about how to decide the issues in this case. what did you ask mr. mcmannis? now, i paraphrased a little bit the language of your questions because i could not fit them all on one board. but these were among the questions that you asked, ladies and gentlemen. and in red, these are the direct answers that mr. mcmannis gave to your questions. one of you asked mr. mcmannis if mr. mcmannis knew -- if mrs. mcmannis knew smoking caused the sister's copd. the court: okay. counsel, i cannot see those. mr. geraghty: it is the same -- you have the slide there, your honor. the court: and these are in order? mr. geraghty: they should be exactly in order, yes, ma'am. that is -- you have got it. thank you. sorry about that. all right. sorry about that, ladies and gentlemen. you asked mr. mcmannis: did mrs. mcmannis know that smoking can cause illnesses? his answer, under oath, was: "i'm sure she knew it. i'm sure she knew it." one of you asked him a question, a very probing question: is there any difference between being strong-willed and having strong willpower? and, of course, mr. mcmannis gave the answer that i think we all would agree with: "i do not believe there would be a difference. i do not believe there would be a difference." one of you asked him: did mrs. mcmannis smoke after january 1995? in other words, did she quit smoking? his answer was: "not that i know of. she never did." he told you: "she never smoked a cigarette. she never asked for a cigarette. she never said she wanted a cigarette. she never talked about cigarettes after january of 1995." and finally, one of you asked: did mrs. mcmannis verbally tell you everything she enjoyed? and you will remember, i had this dialogue with mr. mcmannis: "did she enjoy smoking?" and he said i did not know. but of course, he knew she enjoyed boating, fishing, camping, lots of things. and mr. mcmannis's answer to that question, again, tells you everything you need to know. he did not actually come out and say it in words, but i knew. i knew she did. of course, he knew she did. they lived together for 39 years. they smoked cigarettes together for 39 years. of course, mr. mcmannis knows that his wife enjoyed smoking cigarettes. donald mcmannis, the man who filed this lawsuit and knows her better than anyone else, told you that his wife was not interested in quitting during most of the 39 years of their marriage. he said she never told him she wanted to quit smoking until the last year or two of her life. and, of course, he also told you that she never actually tried to quit smoking until the last year or two before she passed away. that, ladies and gentlemen, is the undisputed evidence in this case. there is absolutely no dispute about any of those facts because mr. mcmannis himself told us all those things. barbara mcmannis enjoyed smoking cigarettes for many decades. and she was simply not interested in quitting. that is why she smoked. and that is why she never tried to quit. if she did not enjoy smoking cigarettes, if she was truly some tortured smoker that hated the fact that she was addicted to these cigarettes, do not you think at some point she would have tried to quit in the first decade, the second decade, the third decade that she was smoking? but the undisputed evidence is she never did. donald mcmannis told you that his wife -- that if his wife was truly motivated to do something, she would be able to do it. that is the kind of person, he told you, she was. and when barbara mcmannis was finally motivated to quit smoking in january of 1995, when she was told that she probably only had a month left to live, she quit smoking and she quit for good. but the bottom line, ladies and gentlemen, is all of those decisions over the course of all of those years were made by barbara mcmannis and only barbara mcmannis, notwithstanding whatever mr. mcmannis told you. we have the right to make decisions for ourselves. we have that right in this country. even decisions that today, with the benefit of hindsight, we might say were not in our best interests. we believe in free will. that is a fundamental principle upon which this country was founded. you have not heard anything, any evidence to suggest that nicotine robbed barbara mcmannis of her free will. but with that right, with the right of free will comes the obligation to accept personal responsibility for the consequences of your decisions. let me take one more second and talk about the burden of proof, and then we are going to walk through the evidence you have seen and heard about barbara mcmannis. you have seen documents. you have seen medical records. you have heard several days now, weeks of testimony from the witnesses. mr. mcmannis bears the burden to prove all of his claims in this case by what is called the greater weight of the evidence. so what does that mean? well, mr. mitnik referred to tipping the scales. but what it means is that mr. mcmannis was required to bring more persuasive and more convincing evidence than the mountain of persuasive and convincing evidence that we have presented to you over the last two weeks that barbara mcmannis was always in control of her own decisions. plaintiff has simply failed to carry the burden that barbara mcmannis was addicted, that her addiction was a legal cause of her disease, that she had lung cancer. and we are going to walk through all of that evidence in just a moment. now, to kind of help walk through, we are going to go back to the 1930s to help walk through all of the significant events in barbara mcmannis's life. we have created a timeline. and we are going to use this timeline to walk through barbara mcmannis's -- can you see that there on the end? is that a little bit better? i'm sorry about that. so real quickly, just to orient you here, everything above this blue bar here right in the center of the timeline, everything above, these are events, significant events that occurred in barbara mcmannis's life. and everything below the blue bar is something that occurred here in the united states important with respect to cigarette smoking and health. so let us start here in the beginning. you heard that barbara mcmannis was born in 1935 in a small town called zanesville, ohio. she was the oldest of four children. you heard she had very strict parents. her mother had a strict rule: you cannot -- you do not smoke cigarettes. that was her mother's strict rule. let us drop below the blue bar here for a minute, and let us talk just briefly about the things that were going on here in this country with respect to cigarette smoking and health before barbara mcmannis was even born. mr. mitnik told you, he just told you a few moments ago, philip morris and rj reynolds somehow hid the fact that cigarette smoking was dangerous and potentially addictive, from the american public. and most of the american public did not know any of that for 50 years. well, after hearing the evidence you have heard over the last two weeks, you know that is simply not the case and certainly not the case as far as barbara mcmannis is concerned. dr. proctor told you -- dr. proctor told you yesterday: smoking and tobacco had been associated with cancer, cancer, lip, mouth, and oral cancer, going back to the 1860s. it is not even on the timeline. dr. henningfield told you that it was well known, well known that cigarette smoking can be addictive and difficult to quit more than 100 years ago. he told you as far back as the 1850s and 1860s, people were smoking hand-rolled, roll-your-own cigarettes. they were inhaling those cigarettes, and they were addictive, just as addictive and just as dangerous as manufactured cigarettes. that is what dr. henningfield told you. you heard that the state of florida actually banned the sale of cigarettes in this state, in the state of florida, in 1899, in part because they were dangerous and they were addictive, particularly to the youth and to women. that is what dr. proctor told you. he said cigarettes were recognized as the very worst form of tobacco addiction, as far back as 1907, 1907, by the florida department of health. we showed you that document. i originally showed that to you during dr. henningfield's examination. this was published in 1907. you heard that if we go back a hundred years ago, people referred to cigarettes as "coffin nails." later, in the '50s, they referred to cigarettes as "cancer sticks." they called cigarette smokers "nicotine fiends," and they said they had "nicotine fits." donald mcmannis told you that when he was growing up in zanesville, ohio, in the 1950s, before he ever met barbara mcmannis, he had heard the term "coffin nails, cancer sticks, and nicotine fiend," and he understood exactly what those terms meant. later on in the 1930s and '40s and 1950s, we showed you many articles, a number of which were from "reader's digest", that talked about the health risks and addictive nature of smoking. dr. proctor told you that "reader's digest" was the most popular magazine in the united states in the 1930s, '40s, and '50s. gloria cullipher, barbara mcmannis's younger sister said, we received "reader's digest" in our home in the 1940s and 1950s. that is what gloria cullipher told you. as we move into the early 1950s, you heard about some of the scientific research that was being published that specifically linked cigarette smoking with lung cancer. dr. proctor told you that these studies -- this is part of that mouse skin-painting study. they were front page news on newspapers and magazines all across the country. dr. proctor told you just yesterday: this information was so widespread, so widespread that by 1954, when barbara mcmannis was 18 years old, ninety percent of the american public had heard that cigarette smoking was a cause of lung cancer. ninety percent in 1954. this was the kind of information that was being published here in the united states, around the time that barbara mcmannis starts stealing cigarettes out of her father's pack. so let us go back up above the blue bar. we are here in the late 1940s. we know that both her mother and her father smoked cigarettes. her father is a heavy smoker of chesterfield. her mother is a lights cigarette smoker. despite her mother's rule that her children should not smoke, you heard that barbara mcmannis starts to steal cigarettes from her father's pack of cigarettes. and she goes to the bathroom and hides and smokes. she knows she should not be smoking, and that is why she is hiding her smoking from her parents. later on, you heard that her mother finally catches her smoking and punishes her by destroying the cigarettes. but gloria cullipher also told you -- she told you that at a very young age, her sister was headstrong and she wanted to be her own boss. so she continues to steal cigarettes from her father. barbara mcmannis was so determined to be her own boss that you heard, she drops out of school when she is about 16 years old. she runs off and marries a man, walter longstreth, that she had just met. this is in about 1952. walter longstreth joins the military, and the relationship ends not long thereafter. so barbara mcmannis eventually returns home to live with her parents. in about 1954, barbara mcmannis and her younger sister, gloria cullipher, enrolled in a beauty school in columbus, ohio, which is about 40 miles away from where they lived in zanesville. gloria cullipher told you that when they were in columbus during the week, they lived with their aunt beatrice. and aunt beatrice had the same rule that barbara mcmannis's mother had: my nieces are not permitted to smoke cigarettes. but you heard gloria cullipher say that she and her sister continued to smoke one or two cigarettes a day while they were living with their aunt in columbus, ohio. she was sneaking cigarettes while living with her aunt. that brings us to about 1955. and in 1955, barbara mcmannis meets the plaintiff, donald mcmannis. now, i want to back up and explain one part of this. you heard that the cigarettes, the cigarettes that they were stealing from their father, the cigarettes that they were stealing when they were living with their aunt beatrice, were chesterfield cigarettes. chesterfield cigarettes. and you heard had that chesterfield is not a brand that is made by either philip morris or rj reynolds. chesterfield was made by a company called liggett & myers, a company that is not a defendant in this case. and it is a brand that you heard that barbara mcmannis smoked from the time she started smoking in the '50s and into the 1960s. the important point i want to make here, ladies and gentlemen, is that the brand that barbara mcmannis started smoking and continued smoking for a number of years was a brand that was not made by either philip morris or rj reynolds, yet the plaintiffs still wants you to hold these companies responsible for that decision, for her decision to smoke those chesterfield cigarettes. now, i told you in 1955, she meets donald mcmannis. and you heard that donald mcmannis was a regular cigarette smoker himself at that point. and he told you that for the next 39 years they were married, they smoked cigarettes together almost all of the time. he was a cigarette smoker almost the entire time, until the last few years that they were married. now, we talked about this during the course of the trial. but you heard that in the late 1950s when she meets donald mcmannis into the 1960s, until they moved to florida, barbara mcmannis works at several different glass factories. she works on a conveyer belt -- mr. mitnik told you this -- where she has to pack glasses, moving quickly on a conveyer belt, into a box. her job does not permit her to smoke cigarettes. so for six-, seven-, eight-hour shifts, barbara mcmannis does not smoke cigarettes. i told you two weeks ago, ladies and gentlemen, that the evidence would show that barbara mcmannis could control where, when, and how much she smoked. and the fact that she worked at glass factories for ten to 15 years in ohio; never once complained to her husband; never said, you know what? i do not like this job because i cannot smoke. i'd rather work someplace where i can smoke at the same time. she never said any of those things. the evidence shows, ladies and gentlemen, barbara mcmannis controlled her smoking. cigarettes did not control her. now, that brings us to the early 1960s. and let me go to the next page of the timeline here. we are in the late '50s, early 1960s. and in 1959, you heard they moved from zanesville to lancaster, ohio. in 1961, their first daughter connie boykin is born. and that brings us to -- let us start here, in january of 1964. you heard that in january of 1964, the surgeon general of the united states issues a landmark report that concludes that cigarette smoking causes lung cancer. you heard it was front page news in every newspaper across the country. it was the lead news program -- the lead news story on every television station. we showed you a clip from the cbs news coverage of that report with harry reasoner in 1964. so every american, including barbara mcmannis, was told in 1964 that cigarette smoking causes lung cancer. that was more than 50 years ago, ladies and gentlemen, more than 50 years ago. dr. proctor told you yesterday, this was the turning point, the beginning of the end of cigarette smoking in this country. he told you that with the release of that surgeon general's report in 1964, per capita cigarette consumption -- remember the chart that i actually showed him -- per capita cigarette consumption started to fall with certain blips. and it is continued to steadily decline, and it is at its lowest point that it is been since the 1930s. that is what dr. proctor told you. dr. henningfield told you that since the release of that report, 65 million americans have quit smoking, one of the greatest public health successes, one of the greatest public health successes in history. later that same year, though, barbara mcmannis received a far more powerful and more personal warning that cigarette smoking causes disease. you heard that her father, raymond eppley -- let me see if i can find this here for you. you heard that her father, raymond eppley, was a heavy chain smoker. and he died suddenly in october of 1964 of a heart attack or a stroke. and here is what donald mcmannis told us about what everyone in the family believed. i asked him the following question: "barbara mcmannis's father died of a heart attack or stroke in the early 1960s? "answer: right. "and he was 59 years old? "answer: right. "and her father died from smoking cigarettes? "right. "okay. so that -- the entire family believed that her father's death was caused by the fact that he was a heavy cigarette smoker." and mr. mcmannis told you: "right." that was in 1964, ladies and gentlemen, 51 years ago. two years later, in 1966, congress passes a law that requires the very first warning label to appear on all packs of cigarettes. the warning label read: "caution: cigarette smoking may be hazardous to your health." "cigarette smoking may be hazardous to your health." mr. mcmannis told you, he and his wife saw that warning; and they understood exactly what it meant, exactly what it meant. here is his testimony. we put the warning label up above here. but here's what i asked him during my examination. "now, both you and your wife, barbara mcmannis, saw this warning, did you not?" his answer: "yes." "and you understood what that warning meant; right? "yes. "you understood that that warning meant that if you smoked cigarettes, you could develop diseases like cancer; correct?" his answer, unequivocally: "yes." that is what mr. mcmannis told you under oath. now, shortly after he said this on the witness stand, mr. mcmannis said something different. he admitted that he knew that smoking was bad for his health, but he told you what he meant by bad was, that cigarettes would make you skinny. that is what he told you, ladies and gentlemen. but, ladies and gentlemen, everyone has told you, the court has told you, we all agree, use your common sense and your judgment. judge winesett has instructed you that you can reach conclusions and draw inferences from the evidence you have heard based on your common sense and judgment. mr. mcmannis said all those things to you. but we all know that he and his wife knew as far back as 1966 that cigarette smoking caused lung cancer. and how do we know that for sure? how do we know that for sure? well, what happened one year later in 1967? just one year later. in 1967, donald mcmannis decides to quit smoking. he decides to quit smoking. and donald mcmannis testified that he decided to quit smoking in 1967 because he knew cigarette smoking was bad for his health, and he was concerned about his health. now, mr. mcmannis tried to deny on the witness stand, but he also told you that when he quit smoking in 1967, he encouraged his wife to quit at the same time. he encouraged her to quit because they both knew that cigarette smoking caused lung cancer. and he was concerned about her health. the evidence you have now heard is mr. mcmannis quit smoking cold turkey for about three or four years in 1967. but mr. mcmannis also told you that even though he talked to his wife about quitting smoking, she did not try to quit smoking in 1967. mr. mcmannis told you that it was his idea, not hers, his idea that she should quit smoking in 1967. he told you he left town for two or three days. and when he came back, she was smoking cigarettes. mr. mcmannis acknowledged to you, my wife was not motivated to quit smoking in 1967. both of the experts you have heard from, dr. henningfield and dr. dorce, already told you, many smokers enjoy smoking, and many are simply not interested in quitting. they both told you, if you do not want to quit, you are not going to quit. barbara mcmannis did not want to quit smoking in 1967. she knew smoking was dangerous. but she was 31 years old. she enjoyed smoking cigarettes, and she was in good health. so unlike her husband, she decides, i'm going to keep smoking. in 1969, you heard that mrs. and mr. mcmannis, they moved to florida. around the same period of time in 1970, there was another warning label that goes on cigarette packs. it says, "warning: the surgeon general has determined that cigarette smoking is dangerous to your health." in 1971, all cigarette ads are taken off of television and radio in the united states. and one year later, in 1972, this warning label is required to appear on every single print ad for a cigarette, in the newspaper, the magazine, or a billboard. now, at about the same period of time, you heard that donald mcmannis actually starts to smoke cigarettes again. and you heard the story. mr. and mrs. mcmannis would go out on their boat. they liked to fish. sometimes her cigarette would either not light because it got wet or it was windy, and she would ask her husband, can you help me light the cigarette. and mr. mcmannis said, after doing that several times, after puffing on the cigarette, he said to himself, you know what, i like the taste of this, i do not think i'm going to give it back. and he started smoking cigarettes again. and mr. mcmannis's decision to start smoking cigarettes again in 1971 or '72 is instructive because, frankly, it contradicts everything that mr. mitnik told you during his closing argument. donald mcmannis said, i decided to smoke -- start smoking cigarettes again because i liked the taste and i wanted to. when he made that decision in about 1971 or 1972, he was a 39- or 40-year-old adult. he knew that cigarette smoking caused disease. but he made a decision to start smoking cigarettes again because he enjoyed them, because he enjoyed them. it was his decision. he was not brainwashed by philip morris or rj reynolds. and so, ladies and gentlemen, mr. mcmannis knew all of that. he had that experience when he refused to acknowledge initially that his wife enjoyed smoking. but you now know after hearing all of the family testify, of course she enjoyed smoking. deborah mcmannis told you that. connie boykin told you that. connie boykin said, my mother loved coming home after a long day, taking her shoes off, putting her feet up, cracking a cold beer, and smoking cigarettes and watching tv. she enjoyed doing that every day that she worked. now, that brings us to the early to mid 1970s. and in this period of time, we are going to talk about this, you heard that their oldest daughter connie boykin, barbara mcmannis catches her oldest daughter smoking cigarettes in about 1973 or 1974. to teach her a lesson that smoking is bad for her, mr. and mrs. mcmannis force connie boykin to smoke an entire box of swisher sweets cigars. and connie boykin told you, i do not think i got to the bottom of the box. i got so sick, i heaved my guts out. two years later, they catch deborah mcmannis smoking cigarettes. they teach her a lesson the same way. they force her to sit down and smoke so many cigarettes that she is going to get sick. now, during the course of the testimony you heard, mr. mcmannis, deborah mcmannis, and connie boykin all tried to tell you, well, the reason our parents did not want us to smoke had nothing to do with health reasons. it had nothing to do -- nothing whatsoever to do with the fact that cigarette smoking causes disease. that is what they told you. again, ladies and gentlemen, you did not check your common sense and your judgment at the door when you walked into this courtroom two and a half weeks ago. we know, from the deposition testimony, barbara mcmannis believed her father had died from smoking cigarettes back in 1964. that is why we played for you -- we read you the testimony of dawn mcmannis, the third daughter, who you did not see testifying here. and what did you hear from dawn mcmannis in that very short passage we read? my parents caught me smoking too. they told me, do not smoke. and we asked dawn mcmannis, why did they tell you, do not smoke? because it was bad for me. it was bad for me. of course you know. parents do not want their children to smoke because they know it is dangerous. and mr. and mrs. mcmannis knew the same thing, and they told their children. they told their children, the reason you should not smoke is because it is bad, for your health. now, mr. mitnik tried to tell you that all of these warnings and health messages that we have been talking about now over the last 20 years somehow were drowned out by statements made by cigarette companies. but the evidence you heard shows just the opposite. remember what both dr. proctor and dr. henningfield told you. between 1964, when this first surgeon general's report came out, and in 1979, right about in here, both dr. proctor and dr. henningfield told you 30 million americans quit smoking. 30 million. that is 2 million people every single year. they have heard the same information as barbara mcmannis. dr. henningfield told you, according to his criteria, many of them were addicted. but 30 million make the choice to quit, and they quit for good. now, mr. mitnik tried to tell you, well, you know, but barbara mcmannis was fooled into believing that filters were safer for her, that somehow a filter on a cigarette meant she was not putting her health at risk by smoking cigarettes. you have not heard any evidence from any one of barbara mcmannis's family members that she ever believed anything like that. as a matter of fact, what you heard was the warning labels, the same warning label goes on an unfiltered cigarette and a filtered cigarette. that is the evidence you heard in this case, ladies and gentlemen. according to the testimony you have heard, she is smoking winston cigarettes and marlboro cigarettes in the 1970s, they have filters on them. when she is telling her children cigarette smoking is bad for you. that is the evidence you have heard in this case, ladies and gentlemen. that brings us to 1982 or 1983. you heard that her younger sister, gloria cullipher, is diagnosed with emphysema, a lung disease that you know can be fatal and is caused by cigarette smoking. gloria cullipher told you on the videotape, i was a chain smoker. i was smoking two packs-plus of cigarettes per day. but when the doctor told me, you know what, if you do not quit now, you may not be around in more than a year, she quit smoking cold turkey, just like that. and she urged her sister to quit smoking too. now, mr. mitnik has made a big deal out of what gloria cullipher said. and i want to put two things in perspective. gloria cullipher told you two things, two things that i think are important. first she told you -- and i'll read this passage. she says, "my sister did not try to quit for the first time until 1993 or 1994." that is what gloria cullipher told you. she also told you, you know what, when i would tell me sister "that my copd is caused by smoking, what she said to me was, it is not going to happen to everybody. it is not going to happen to everybody." she did not say, you know what, i do not believe it, it does not cause copd. she says, it is not going to happen to everybody. and that is a reaction that many people have when they know that they are engaging in a behavior that presents a risk to their health. and that was barbara mcmannis's attitude. now, that brings us to 1980 -- or into the 1980s. we are on the last page of the timeline here. in 1985, you know the warnings on the cigarette packs change again, and there is now a series of four rotating warnings, one of which says, "cigarette smoking causes lung cancer, heart disease, and emphysema." that is in 1985, ladies and gentlemen. but at this point, this warning is not telling barbara mcmannis anything she has not already known for decades, for decades. we go back above the blue bar here. i'm kind of going a little bit back in time. but you heard that for many years after moving to florida, barbara mcmannis worked cleaning hotels, time-shares, condominiums, and offices. her daughter connie boykin told you that when she would clean these offices and time-shares, she was not allowed to smoke when she was cleaning. connie boykin told you, we would work at night, six, seven hours, cleaning offices. we did not smoke cigarettes. they might take a dinner break about halfway through, and she said her mother would smoke one cigarette. so again, for a long period of time, substantial years, long hours during the course of the day, barbara mcmannis controlled where, when, and how much she smoked. that brings us to the late 1980s and into the early 1990s. you heard dick boggs, barbara mcmannis's best friend's husband is diagnosed with emphysema. mr. and mrs. mcmannis saw that dick boggs had emphysema. and, of course, they knew, they knew that cigarette smoking was the reason why he had that disease. this is now the third person very close to barbara mcmannis who has got a smoking-related illness. and you heard me ask donald mcmannis. i said, mr. mcmannis, did it ever occur to you, when you saw dick boggs to say, you know what, look at dick. maybe you should quit smoking. and mr. mcmannis's answer was -- tells you everything you need to know. mr. mcmannis said, you know what, i never said that to her because it would not have made a difference what i said to her. it would not have mattered. she had a mind of her own. and, ladies and gentlemen, that shows you that nothing that philip morris or rj reynolds might have said about cigarette smoking would have mattered to barbara mcmannis. only barbara mcmannis was going to make the decision whether or not she was going to quit. you also heard that mr. mcmannis himself starts to experience pretty serious breathing problems in either the late '80s or early 1990s. he had a really bad cough. he was coughing so hard, his daughter said she could hear him throwing up. he could not breathe. so mr. mcmannis says to himself, you know what, i'm going to quit. cigarettes are getting the best of me. that is what he told you. and mr. mcmannis quit smoking for good, cold turkey, somewhere in about 1990. now, mrs. mcmannis decides, i'm not going to quit smoking. i enjoy smoking, i'm healthy, i'm going to continue. but her husband has told her, you know what, i would prefer that you not smoke and i would prefer that you not smoke around me. and from that point forward, barbara mcmannis basically stops smoking around her husband. and mr. mcmannis told you he retired in about 1992 or 1993. he was home more often. they spent more time together. but barbara mcmannis stopped smoking around her husband. she moved into one room, their florida room, where she smoked outside. she never smoked when they were in the car together. the key point, again, is when she needed to, when she had a reason that was more important, barbara mcmannis could control where she smoked and when she smoked. now, that brings us to about roughly 1993, 1994. the time is not completely precise. but this is when mr. mcmannis told you that he believed his wife quit smoking for a short period of time. he said she went to a hypnotist. he took her to the hypnotist. and although he does not know for how long she quit -- because she was not smoking around him; he was not around her all the time -- he believes it was for about two or three days. two or three days. that is what he believes. he finds her smoking on their back porch in the florida room with one of their daughters. and that is how he knows that his wife has decided to resume smoking. now, i thought i heard mr. mitnik say that barbara mcmannis experienced all of these incredible withdrawal symptoms. well, remember what all of the experts told you, dr. henningfield and dr. dorce. you only experience withdrawal symptoms if you stop smoking. dr. dorce told you, nicotine is out of your system in two or three days. any withdrawal symptoms that a smoker might experience, they are gone in two or three or, at most, four weeks. but they are telling you she experienced severe withdrawal problems when the evidence you heard was she never quit for more than a day or two or three. that is the evidence you have heard. and from this point forward, as i told you, from this point forward, mr. mcmannis never says another word to his wife to encourage her to quit smoking again. and he testified the reason he never encouraged her again to try to quit was because, from his perspective, from their perspective, it was her decision, her decision whether she would smoke cigarettes or whether she would quit. now, that brings us to january of 1995. and you heard that in january of 1995, barbara mcmannis collapses. her husband finds her unresponsive, and she is rushed to the hospital. the doctors find a tumor in her brain. she is diagnosed with cancer. and she is told that her condition is terminal, meaning there is no cure. now, after being told she only has months left to live, barbara mcmannis stops smoking. she stops smoking. mr. mcmannis told you he was with his wife almost every day after she got out of the hospital. and he said she never smoked a cigarette. she never asked for a cigarette. she never talked about the cigarettes. she never mentioned the word "cigarette." so she quit smoking for good in 1995, a few months before she passed away. now, i told you -- because they mentioned gloria cullipher, i wanted to read this to you. the first time she had ever tried to quit smoking, tried to quit smoking, in all the evidence you heard, was 1993 or 1994. even gloria cullipher agrees with that. she was asked the following questions: "when is the first time that you recall your sister, barbara, trying to quit smoking? "answer: about two years before she died. "what was that? about 1993? "i do not know. "1993 was the first time you recall your sister, barbara, quitting smoking? "yes. "is that correct? "yes." that is what her sister told you. the first time that she ever told her husband that she was interested in quitting, the first time she expressed any motivation to quit was only a year or two before ultimately she passed away. when she was motivated in january of 1995, when she was determined, barbara mcmannis quit smoking and she quit for good. and those qualities, those intangible qualities, motivation and determination, she always had those within her, always. that is the kind of person that donald mcmannis and his family described. now, one of the issues you are going to have to decide, and you have already heard mr. mitnik go over this -- is whether barbara mcmannis had lung cancer caused by cigarette smoking or, rather, a cancer that started in another organ in her body. this is an important issue because if you find, if you determine that the plaintiff has failed to prove to you by persuasive and convincing evidence that barbara mcmannis had lung cancer, your verdict is for the defendants. the plaintiff and his attorneys want you to believe that she had lung cancer because she smoked cigarettes. their own expert, dr. villa, told you 85 to ninety percent of long-time, heavy cigarette smokers do not develop lung cancer. do not develop lung cancer. now, you did hear mr. mitnik mention the death certificate. and no question, ladies and gentlemen, the death certificate says that barbara mcmannis had lung cancer. but judge winesett instructed you -- you heard it -- that that death certificate is not prima facie evidence that barbara mcmannis had lung cancer. you simply consider that along with all of the other evidence that you have heard during the course of this trial. and remember what dr. villa himself told you, the plaintiff's expert. he told you, without an autopsy, without an autopsy, a death certificate is essentially worthless because they can be unreliable and prone to error. that is what the plaintiff's own expert told you. so what was the evidence you heard? well, on these points, frankly, dr. villa and dr. iannotti, the doctor we brought yesterday, said exactly the same thing. they told you, barbara mcmannis never had any symptoms to suggest that she had lung cancer. no respiratory problems. no shortness of breath. no chest pain or tightness. no coughing up of blood. nothing other than a bad headache. that was her only complaint. second, both dr. villa and dr. iannotti told you that the doctors who cared for mrs. mcmannis back in 1995 never found cancer in her lungs. they never found cancer in her lungs. you saw the pathology records. i will not repeat all that. but they all very clearly say, no malignant cells seen. now, dr. villa did try to tell you -- he tried to tell you, well, those tests, they do not mean anything. they were just kind of blindly looking for samples in her lungs. ladies and gentlemen, ask yourself this: do you really think, do you really think doctors are just poking with needles and brushes and washes in barbara mcmannis's lungs? do you think that is the way medicine is practiced? of course not. dr. iannotti told you. he told you that technology we have available today was available in 1995. when they did the bronchoscopy, they had the benefit of ct-scan-guided technology. they were looking in a particular part in barbara mcmannis's lungs. they had targeted a particular area. and they took not one, not two, four samples, four samples during the course of the bronchoscopy and the sputum. every single one of them came back, no malignant cells seen. now, you heard that we looked at the one pathology that -- sample that was positive that we have comes from the brain tumor, the brain tumor. and you heard that that was diagnosed by the pathologist as metastatic, undifferentiated, non-small cell carcinoma. you now know metastatic means it spread to the brain from someplace else. undifferentiated non-small cell carcinoma, all of the doctors told you that kind of cancer can arise in any organ in the body. any organ in the body. so when the doctor says, undifferentiated non-small cell carcinoma, dr. villa told you, that means he has no idea where in her body that cancer started. now, we have gone through all of this here. you heard that after being discharged from the hospital, barbara mcmannis receives palliative care, radiation, and chemotherapy. you heard that. we do not have any of the medical records to give us any real clue as to the specifics of any of that. but in april of 1995, you heard barbara mcmannis, unfortunately, passes away. you know that no autopsy was performed, and virtually no medical records were collected. and, ladies and gentlemen -- mr. michael: one hour. mr. geraghty: -- that is the story. mr. michael: one hour. mr. geraghty: that is the story that brings all of us here together today and has brought us here for the last two weeks. now, i told you two weeks ago; i told you at the beginning of my presentation that this case was about two words, control and responsibility. and even though that is what this case is about, you are not going to see those two words on the verdict form. with the time i have remaining, i would like to walk through the questions on the verdict form and explain to you how the evidence will help you answer each of those questions. and remember, now, on these questions we are going to talk about, the plaintiff bears the burden, not only to bring you evidence, but to bring you credible, reliable, and believable evidence. okay? a famous us senator was once quoted as saying that everyone is entitled to his own opinion, but not to his own set of facts. the facts are what the facts are. and one of you put that question very squarely to mr. mcmannis. and i'd ask you to think about that as we walk through the questions that you are ultimately going to be asked to answer on the verdict form. and this is important as you consider those questions. so let me put this first question. the first question you are going to be asked to decide on that verdict form will say, "do you find that barbara mcmannis had lung cancer, that she was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, and that an addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine was a legal cause of lung cancer?" and it says "lung cancer" here because they are presuming, if you get this far, you have already answered this question. so this is one question, but there is really three separate pieces to the question. so i put together this demonstrative just to try to walk you through this and explain what it is i'm going to be talking about here. there is really three separate pieces to the question. the first is a medical question, a medical causation question. has -- has mr. mcmannis proven that his wife had lung cancer caused by cigarette smoking? that is the fist part of the question. the second part of the question is, mr. mcmannis must prove that barbara mcmannis was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine. part two of the question. third part is, mr. mcmannis must prove that the claimed addiction was a legal cause of barbara mcmannis's lung cancer. three separate parts to one question. and if you determine that the answer to any one of these three parts is no, then your answer is no; and that is a verdict for the defendants in this case. so let us talk about these questions, if we could. let us talk about the medical question, first. and we have already talked a little bit about some of the evidence during the course of the presentation i gave you during the timeline. so let me highlight just a couple of points. point number one is, plaintiff bears the burden to prove that barbara mcmannis had lung cancer and that it was caused by cigarette smoking by the greater weight of the evidence. it is mr. mcmannis's burden to prove that to you. based on the medical records that we have available to us, ladies and gentlemen, based on the medical records, you can only say two things for sure in this case: one, mrs. mcmannis had a tumor in her brain; and, number two, number two, that the doctors did not find any cancer in her lungs. that is all the medical records tell us in this case. we showed you those pathology reports from fawcett memorial hospital. every single one of them said, no malignant cells seen. all of those tests were negative for lung cancer. negative for lung cancer. and the important point was, they were looking. they were looking, ladies and gentlemen. this was not some blind look into her lungs as dr. villa would have you believe. and the only witness you heard from, from the plaintiff, the only witness who testified was dr. villa. and you know that he never examined barbara mcmannis. he never treated barbara mcmannis. he never ran any diagnostic tests. but he tells you 20 years later, based on the few records we have, that she had lung cancer. but dr. villa also acknowledged to you, ladies and gentlemen, that based on the evidence in this case, no doctor in any hospital in the united states of america would diagnose or treat barbara mcmannis for lung cancer. that is what their own expert told you. what else did dr. villa tell you? dr. villa and dr. iannotti both told you, the pathology reports are negative for cancer. no question about it. dr. villa said he assumes, because we have a death certificate, he assumes that there was a tumor somewhere in barbara mcmannis's lungs. he told you that was an assumption he made for purposes of his testimony in this case. but dr. villa also told you, he admitted, if we had done an autopsy, and we had actually looked into barbara mcmannis's lungs and there was no evidence of a tumor in her lungs, i would change my opinion. i would say the same thing as dr. iannotti, barbara mcmannis had a cancer of unknown primary. and ask yourself, ladies and gentlemen, as you listen to the evidence on this issue, and when you retire to deliberate, if the information we have about barbara mcmannis is not enough in a hospital, why should it be enough for you in a court of law when the plaintiff is asking you to award him millions of dollars in damages? dr. villa also told you two important things. he told you that barbara mcmannis had a diagnosis of presumptive breast cancer back in 1975 and that she had been diagnosed with cancer on her ear and had cancer removed from her ear. dr. villa told you those things. we brought you dr. iannotti. and he told you, he agrees with dr. villa on one very important point, ladies and gentlemen. based on the evidence we have in this case, based on the evidence we have in this case, the evidence, it is impossible to medically diagnose barbara mcmannis's primary source of her cancer. that is the evidence we have. dr. iannotti told you that barbara mcmannis has what doctors refer to as a cancer of unknown primary. in situations like this, doctors perform a differential diagnosis. they list all of the type of problems that could be the cause of the plaintiff's condition. and they do the best with the information they have to eliminate all of the suspects, to narrow it down, to arrive at a firm, conclusive diagnosis. but both dr. villa and dr. iannotti told you, you know what, even when we have all the medical records, even when we have all the medical records, the best technology available, sometimes we cannot eliminate all the suspects. connie boykin testified in this case. this was last week, on wednesday. my mother and my father both told me that my mother had cancer on her ear and she had the cancer removed. that is what connie boykin told you all under oath in this case. mr. mcmannis then got up the very next day and denied it. denied it. why would mr. mcmannis deny, in this courtroom, during this trial, what he told his daughter years and years ago when no one was thinking about a lawsuit? take that into consideration, ladies and gentlemen, when you think about this particular issue. i told you in my opening statement, and i think the evidence now demonstrates very clearly, no one can tell you today based on the evidence we have what kind of cancer barbara mcmannis had. and the plaintiff has simply failed to carry his burden to prove to you that barbara mcmannis had lung cancer. and if you agree with that, ladies and gentlemen, your verdict is for philip morris and rj reynolds. the second part of the question asks you to determine whether mrs. mcmannis was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine. again, if you answer no to this question, your verdict is for the defendants. let me remind you that the court has not given you a definition of addiction or a set of criteria to determine whether barbara mcmannis herself was addicted. now, at the very beginning of this trial, during opening statements, mr. mitnik stood up, and in an effort to persuade you that barbara mcmannis was addicted, he told you that the evidence would show that barbara mcmannis smoked two packs of cigarettes a day and sometimes as many as three. that is what you were told in the opening statement by plaintiff's counsel. dr. henningfield told you the same thing when he testified. but that is not the evidence you have heard in this case. mr. mcmannis got up on the witness stand. and what did he tell you? my wife smoked, i think, about the same amount as me, a pack a day. one pack a day. he told you, you know what, i really only saw her smoke six or seven cigarettes per day. and he admitted to you that after he quit smoking in the early 1990s, he really did not see her smoke that often. that is what mr. mcmannis told you. the only evidence you ever heard that she ever smoked more than that came from connie boykin, her oldest daughter. and what did connie boykin tell you? she told you there was two months, a two-month period in 1982 when her mother was out of work. and she said she was nervous, stressed, anxious because she was out of work. and during that period of time, connie boykin said, you know what, i noticed my mother smoking more cigarettes than she had before. but what did connie boykin tell you? she said, when my mother found work two months later, she went back to smoking the same amount of cigarettes she always smoked. no one told you that she was some chain smoker who smoked two to three packs per day. no one said that. ask yourself, why would mr. mcmannis's attorneys and his experts tell you that barbara mcmannis smoked two and sometimes up to three packs per day when donald mcmannis himself told you that was not true? it is because they want you to believe that she was addicted. they brought you dr. henningfield. and while dr. henningfield certainly is well qualified on a number of topics, he told you, i'm not a medical doctor. i'm not asked to diagnose people as being addicted to anything. that is not what he does. dr. henningfield also told you that he is testified in about 45 to 50 cases just like this. and guess what? every single case in which dr. henningfield testified, he said, the smoker was addicted. so would you expect him to say anything else in this case? of course not. we brought you dr. daphne dorce, a psychiatrist and a board-certified addiction medicine specialist. she told you every single day she sees patients, she sees people who are using drugs, hard drugs, illegal drugs, oxycontin, heroin, cocaine, alcohol. she evaluates them. she determines whether they are addicted, and she comes up with a treatment plan to try to help them stop using those substances. and many of those people also smoke cigarettes. she provided you with a real medical criteria to determine whether someone is addicted, the dsm-5. she put it on the board. she answered all the questions i had. she answered all the questions mr. mitnik had. she answered all of your questions about that. dr. dorce gave you a definition that asks you important questions, asks you about the behavior of the person. are you really addicted if you can control where, when, and how much you smoke? are you really addicted if you can stop smoking, refrain from smoking around your loved ones, your mother, her mother, elizabeth maxwell, or her husband, donald mcmannis. and keep this in mind, ladies and gentlemen, unlike dr. henningfield, dr. dorce told you she is testified in cases just like this one where she found that the cigarette smoker was addicted, was addicted based on the facts in those particular cases. the court: counsel, you have used the hour and 15 minutes. mr. geraghty: thank you. so let us take a look at the evidence real quick. each of mr. mcmannis's family members, donald mcmannis, his two daughters, they told you, they told you that barbara mcmannis was addicted. but they also told you that she never tried to quit smoking until 1993 or 1994. and mr. mcmannis acknowledged, ladies and gentlemen, his wife never told him she was addicted. the two of you were smoking for most of the 39 years you were together; right? now, in the 39 years you were married, is not it true that barbara mcmannis never once told you that she believed she was addicted to cigarettes? she never told me. so when you evaluate this question of whether barbara mcmannis was addicted, keep in mind that it is the plaintiff who was telling you that his wife was addicted, the same person who is asked you now to award you $5 million in damages. but he admits that his wife never told him she wanted to quit smoking and never tried to quit smoking until the last year or two of his life -- of her life. and ask yourself, is that evidence sufficient in a court of law, or is something more required? tangible, credible, believable evidence from a source that does not have an interest in the outcome of the case. i think the answer should be obvious, ladies and gentlemen. and i think your answer to this second question should be no. but even if you get beyond the second question, you still have the third question. and that third question, your work is just beginning, because even if you find she was addicted, you still have to prove that addiction was a legal cause, that the claimed addiction to cigarettes was a legal cause of her lung cancer. now, the court gave you that instruction for legal cause. and mr. mitnik gave you an analogy. let me give you an analogy that i think explains better than the language, what we mean by this concept of legal cause. imagine someone walks across the street and they get hit by a bus. the bus is the medical cause of their injuries. but in order to know legal cause, you need to know more. for example, was the light green when the person tried to cross the street in front of the bus? was the person paying attention when she tried to cross the street? or was she talking on her cell phone? or texting? or listening with earbuds to music? did the person know that the bus was going to come every single day for the last 39 years and yet still cross in front of the streetlight? you need to know those sorts of things in order to know legal cause in this case. and, in a case like this, the question of legal cause really boils down to the issue of quitting. ask yourself, based on all the evidence you have heard, was barbara mcmannis's claimed addiction so strong, so substantial, that it stood in the way of a committed and determined effort on her part to quit smoking? the evidence in this case is undisputed, that barbara mcmannis never made an attempt to quit smoking until 1993 or 1994. all of the witnesses agree with that, ladies and gentlemen. mr. mcmannis told you that for most of the 39 years that they were married, she was not interested in quitting. if you decide, if you decide, ladies and gentlemen, that barbara mcmannis could have quit smoking whenever she was truly motivated to do so, then addiction is not a legal cause of her disease. rather, it is mrs. mcmannis' decision to smoke cigarettes for years in the face of all those warnings, and her decision not to try to quit until the last year or two of her life. that, ladies and gentlemen, is the one and the only legal cause in this case. and, frankly, ladies and gentlemen, to answer that question, you need to go no further than the plaintiff's own experts. dr. henningfield. what did he tell you? 65 million people have quit smoking in this country since 1964. 3,000 a day, 1.2 to 1.3 million smokers every single year. he called it one of the biggest public health successes in history. and he told you that the overwhelming majority of these people, by his criteria, would be addicted, but that ninety percent of them, ninety percent of them quit cold turkey without any assistance whatsoever. that is what dr. henningfield told you. all of the experts agree, anyone can quit smoking if they are motivated and determined. during the course of this trial, you heard no evidence that barbara mcmannis was any different. in fact, recall what her family told you. she was independent. she was intelligent. she was strong-willed, and she had strong willpower. there is no question about any of that. the truth is, that for most of her life, barbara mcmannis enjoyed smoking cigarettes and simply did not want to stop smoking. otherwise, she would have tried at some point prior to 1993. that is the evidence you have heard in this case. now, mr. mcmannis and his lawyers talked a lot about nicotine, and i'm sure mr. mitnik will talk about nicotine and brain receptors. all of those things you heard about. but you have not heard any evidence, ladies and gentlemen, any evidence that nicotine prevented barbara mcmannis from understanding that smoking is dangerous or that it prevented her from exercising her free will and making a decision to stop when that is what she decided she wanted to do. mr. mcmannis claims his wife was addicted, but addiction did not force her to smoke. and, ladies and gentlemen, that is what this first question, the last part of this first question is all about. that is what this last part of this question is all about. you have heard all the evidence. you know that barbara mcmannis was always in control, not philip morris, not rj reynolds, and not the nicotine in cigarettes. and your answer to this question should be no for all the reasons we have just explained. now, there is going to be a question number two on the verdict form. but because my time is running a little bit short, mr. weaver's going to talk about. question number two. i want to talk to you briefly about this question of comparative fault, which will be the third question on your verdict form. now, i do not think you are going to get that far, ladies and gentlemen, in your deliberations. but i want to respond because mr. mitnik did address this issue. you will be asked to state the percentage of fault that you assign to barbara mcmannis, philip morris, and rj reynolds. mr. mitnik told you that barbara mcmannis -- that her husband, on her behalf, accepts some responsibility for her smoking-related decisions, but only twenty percent. only twenty percent. that is what he told you. what does it mean to accept responsibility for the decisions we make in life? let me give you an example. for those of you who may drink alcohol, perhaps maybe once or twice you have had an occasion -- mr. mitnik: objection, your honor. are we going to start putting jurors' issues -- mr. weaver: speaking objection, your honor. mr. mitnik: golden rule. mr. geraghty: i'll rephrase the question. the court: go ahead. mr. geraghty: imagine someone who drinks alcohol, ladies and gentlemen. we have all drank alcohol; right? we have all had the experience. imagine someone one night drinks a little too much alcohol, one too many drinks, and they wake up the next day with a hangover. you wake up. your eyes are bloodshot. your eyes are bleary. you go to the mirror, and you look yourself in the mirror. and you say, you know what? i'm only twenty percent responsible for the decision i made to have those drinks last might. no one says that, ladies and gentlemen. no one says that. was anyone else responsible for the decision that barbara mcmannis made? the answer is of course not. of course not. the facts of this case show loud and clear that barbara mcmannis got up every single day, made her own decisions in life, and no one else made those decisions for her. the evidence shows that she did not even try to quit smoking until the last year or two of her life. accepting responsibility means simply that, accepting full responsibility for the consequences of one's actions. and that is what you should put down for barbara mcmannis if you get beyond this question. now, again, i do not think you will get that far, but there is a question four and a question five. and because mr. mitnik addressed it, i would like to talk briefly about it. these questions are going to ask you to state for each defendant whether the concealment or omission of material information about the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes or both were a legal cause of barbara mcmannis's death. and then there is a companion question five that refers to the agreement to conceal information. there is a line for you to check yes or no as to both question four and question five. let me make two quick points about these questions four and five. mr. mitnik got up here and one of the first things he told you was, you know what? we accept responsibility. it should not be all their fault, and he pointed to us, and he said, it is not. well, ladies and gentlemen, they have made two claims in this case. the claims that are part of question four and question five. if you answer yes to either one of those questions, then they are asking for one hundred percent of all the damages they have requested; the percentages of responsibility that mr. mitnik talked about in response to question number three go completely out the window; and plaintiff gets one hundred percent of any damages if you decided to award damages. and the judge told you that in the instructions. is that accepting responsibility? well, we have two claims where we accept responsibility. but we have two other claims, the fraudulent -- the fraud and the conspiracy where we are not accepting any responsibility. that is the plaintiff's position in this case. now, what these questions, four and five, are really asking you, the gist of it is the following: did barbara mcmannis make any decisions about cigarette smoking because of a statement made by a cigarette company? you heard dr. henningfield testify. you heard dr. proctor testify. but the case -- the evidence in this case is undisputed. not a single person testified that barbara mcmannis ever heard, ever saw, ever read a single statement about smoking and health made by philip morris or rj reynolds or any tobacco entity. you never heard any one of her family members come in here and say, you know what? barbara mcmannis did not believe that smoking caused cancer. she did not believe it was dangerous because she had heard what the defendants said. no one told you that. no one told you that. and the evidence demonstrates that nothing anyone said, not her husband, not her sister, not her best friend, influenced barbara mcmannis's decisions about smoking. barbara mcmannis knew smoking caused serious diseases like lung cancer and that she needed to quit for decades, decades before she was diagnosed with cancer in 1995. she knew her father had died from smoking in 1964. she had seen all of the warnings that were on packs of cigarettes for decades, decades, ladies and gentlemen. you heard it from mr. mcmannis himself. he said, it would not have mattered what you said to her. she was going to smoke whether you told her to or not. for many years, barbara mcmannis did not listen to what anyone told her about cigarette smoking. so why would any of us believe that she would have paid attention to anything that philip morris or rj reynolds might have said? the answer to both questions four and five on the verdict form, ladies and gentlemen, should be no. now, i want to talk very briefly about damages. i do not think you will get this far on the verdict form. but i want to respond to what mr. mitnik said. he asked you to award $5 million to mr. mcmannis. and when i heard mr. mitnik ask for that amount of money, i was trying to think, well, okay, what can i say to you? how can i put that in some sort of perspective so you have an understanding of what that amount really means? so a typical family here in florida makes about $50,000 a year. $50,000. so are you going to go to work -- mr. mitnik: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. mr. geraghty: i think i'm allowed to respond to the plaintiff's -- the court: would you like to approach? mr. geraghty: sure. (a discussion was held at the bench and out of the hearing of the jury.) mr. mitnik: this is a person. you cannot go into argument -- that is exactly what the law is. he is making the argument for, look how much you are going to get. let us talk about what -- other people's annual income, how much money, annual income has nothing to do with compensating for the losses in the courtroom. and there is no evidence in here what the annual income of people in central -- or around here. the court: what is the basis? or i'm going to sustain it. mr. geraghty: let me ask a hypothetical, your honor. he said $10 per hour for both defendants. i think i'm allowed to respond -- the court: the income of people in florida? mr. geraghty: he gave a hypothetical story of his daughter. let me give a hypothetical story. i'll -- the court: you asked the jurors about drinking. mr. geraghty: i rephrased it when your honor told me to. i'll make it more general. the court: i just want to -- you cannot go to evidence that is not here. that is the basis and i'm sustaining that. there is no evidence that they are going to -- mr. geraghty: i'll just say, imagine there is a family that makes $50,000 a year. i'm allowed to tell them that and then explain how much money they are asking for. i'm totally allowed to do that. mr. mitnik: it is irrelevant, and it is against the law. you cannot -- it is a play on prejudice, that the burden -- the evidence in this case is harm to him, not look how much this would be to somebody else, because here's the annual income. this is -- we cannot talk about their annual income. i do not want to get up on rebuttal and talk about their income. the court: just go somewhere else on that one. thank you. okay. mr. geraghty: thank you. (the sidebar discussion was concluded.) mr. geraghty: mr. mitnik asked you for -- asked you to award mr. mcmannis $5 million in damages, totally divorced from any sense of reality. he gave you no guidance, any sense to appreciate what that money is or what that money is actually being asked to address. here's the bottom line, ladies and gentlemen. if you decide that mr. mcmannis is entitled to recover damages, you use your best judgment about what you think is a fair amount and come to that amount based on the evidence you have heard, and that is what you record. but i want to make sure everyone understands two things. first, mr. mcmannis is not asking you to award him damages for any medical expenses paid for the treatment his wife received in 1995. he is not asking for that. and so there will be nothing on the verdict form for you to put that. but in a case like this, ladies and gentlemen, in which the evidence shows that barbara mcmannis enjoyed smoking cigarettes, enjoyed using a product for 40 years, and frankly did not try to stop using the product for nearly 40 years, there should be no question that millions of dollars, let alone hundreds of thousands of dollars, should be within the calculation. that is what the evidence shows in this case. now, the final question on the verdict form, ladies and gentlemen, asks you whether, by clear and convincing evidence, that punitive damages are warranted against the defendants in this case. and if you answer no to that question, you never get to the issue of punitive damages. let me talk briefly about it so you understand what you are being asked to decide. you are not being asked to decide the amount of punitive damages. the issue here is whether, by clear and convincing evidence, the plaintiff has shown that he is entitled to punitive damages. so do not spend one moment thinking about the amount. the question before you right now is whether mr. mcmannis has shown, under the evidence and the law, that he is entitled to punitive damages. if you were to decide that he is, there would be another phase of this trial. plaintiff would present evidence. philip morris would present evidence. rj reynolds would present evidence. all of the parties would present evidence. we have additional arguments. and then you would get to the amount stage. now, i want to make sure that if you get this issue, you clearly understand what you have to decide. when you look at the instructions, clear and convincing evidence is defined. it is a much higher standard of proof than the greater weight of the evidence. with respect to punitive damages, you will see that the evidence must be precise, explicit, lacking in confusion, and of such weight that it produces a firm belief or conviction without hesitation about the matter in issue. in other words, you need to be really, really, really convinced that punitive damages are appropriate. and let me tell you one more thing. you have to decide, if you get there, that punitive damages are warranted based on the conduct that relates to barbara mcmannis. this case is about barbara mcmannis. it is not a class action anymore. now, based on the evidence in this case, nothing that the defendants did or did not do harmed barbara mcmannis in any way. philip morris and rj reynolds manufactured and sold cigarettes. that alone cannot be the basis for liability in this case. barbara mcmannis always had the information available to her to make a decision whether she wanted to smoke cigarettes or whether she wanted to quit. and the evidence you have heard is that barbara mcmannis always had the ability to quit smoking when she was motivated to do so. she simply did not want to quit until the last year or two of her life. and there is no evidence that you have heard during the course of this trial that anything that the defendants said or did not say, did or did not do caused barbara mcmannis to begin smoking or to continue smoking. dr. proctor spent two days -- a day and a half talking to you about the culture of smoking and the tobacco companies. but he admitted to you that he knows nothing about barbara mcmannis, what she knew, why she smoked cigarettes. given the evidence you have heard, ladies and gentlemen, the plaintiff has simply not met his burden to prove to you that punitive damages are warranted in this case. so your answer to that question should be no. now, i'm going to sit down here in a minute, and you are going to get to hear from mr. weaver. and after that, mr. mitnik will have one more opportunity to speak to you. and that is because, as you have heard, the plaintiff bears the burden of proof. and because he has that burden, he has an opportunity to speak to you on what is referred to as rebuttal. now, i do not know exactly what mr. mitnik will say, but i can imagine he is going to say a lot of very critical things of philip morris and rj reynolds. i'm pretty positive of that. but as you listen to the things that mr. mitnik says, ask yourself -- ask yourself every time mr. mitnik says something, what does this have to do with barbara mcmannis? a woman who you now know lived her life exactly the way she wanted to live it, who enjoyed smoking cigarettes, and who never tried to quit smoking until 1993 or 1994. the truth is, ladies and gentlemen, we do enjoy a tremendous amount of freedom in this country. we have the right to make decisions and lifestyle choices that are not always in our best interests, that come with health risks. and with that freedom comes the obligation to take personal responsibility for the consequences of those decisions. and in the end, ladies and gentlemen, that is what this case is all about. are we going to hold philip morris and rj reynolds legally responsible for the decisions made by an intelligent, independent, and strong-willed person? that is what this case is all about. and based on the evidence, ladies and gentlemen, i think the answer is clear. based on the evidence you have heard in this case, in barbara mcmannis's case, the evidence supports one and only one true verdict. and that is a verdict in favor of philip morris and rj reynolds. so, ladies and gentlemen, this is my last opportunity to speak to you. and i simply just want to say thank you very much. you have been extremely patient this afternoon with me and patient during the course of the entire trial, and i cannot tell you how much i appreciate that. thank you. (defendant r.j. reynolds closing argument) mr. weaver: may it please the court? i think i'm actually going to have a few minutes to spend with you today. i'm very grateful for that opportunity. i feel like i should start out by re-introducing myself to you all over again, but i will not do that because you know who i am. i've been on the other side of the courtroom. i'm always the last to go. i'm sometimes forgotten. but i do have some things that i need to talk to you about. in some ways, it is almost like being at home with my family. hopefully, you recall my opening and you recall what i told you about how the facts of this case and how plaintiff cannot stand on one side of the podium and advocate to you that the tobacco companies are bad, come on the other side of the podium and advocate to you that barbara mcmannis was a smoker and that that is all there needs to be. there has to be a connection. there has to be some sort of link between the two sides of the podium. mr. mitnik talked about the impact of things during his closing statement. he said that what the tobacco companies did impacted people. well, we are not here to talk about people. mr. geraghty noted that in his closing. we are not here to talk about the evidence that those jurors in miami heard years ago when they reached a decision that ultimately resulted in the engle findings. we are here to talk about mrs. mcmannis. "what was the message that was put out?" mr. mitnik rhetorically asked you. what was the message that was put out? the plaintiff's burden of proof in this case is not to simply ask rhetorical questions about what message was put out. a burden of proof requires that he establish that the plaintiff prove what mrs. mcmannis heard, not what is out there, but what she heard and what she did and what she relied on. i think a burden of proof is more like some glasses, instead of scales that you need to tip. i look at a burden of proof as being a glass with which you need to fill with individual pebbles that constitute your evidence in the case. and once you get up for compensatory damages purposes to the greater weight of the evidence, the more persuasive and convincing force and effect of the entirety of the evidence, you have exceeded the halfway point of the glass. we will talk more about clear and convincing evidence, a much different, a much more difficult, a much more stringent burden. philip morris and rj reynolds are separate companies that compete with each other. the plaintiff has chosen to bring specific claims against my client as well. as a result, that is why i have two glasses there, because plaintiff has a burden as to each defendant in this case. now, i wish, even after saying just this, that i could look at you and say -- and point to mr. geraghty and say, "what he said." and i will to a certain extent, but there are very particular issues i would like to address. gloria cullipher was the first fact witness that you saw in this case. and mrs. cullipher said that her sister, barbara's, first cigarettes were unfiltered chesterfields stolen from their father and smoked in their bathroom in the late 1940s. by the early 1950s when barbara mcmannis moved out, she was a regular chesterfield cigarette smoker. dr. proctor, on my questions, conceded that in the '30s, '40s, and beyond, chesterfield was a quite popular brand in the united states. dr. proctor noted, as does this pack, that chesterfields are made by liggett & myers. gloria cullipher also told you that the only other brand of cigarettes she saw her sister smoke was unfiltered lucky strikes after mcmannis moved -- mrs. mcmannis moved to florida in 1969. that is very important. mrs. cullipher says, i saw my sister smoke two brands of cigarettes, chesterfield and lucky strike. and i did not see lucky strike until after they moved to florida in 1969. now, mr. mcmannis told you that when he was in the army, he smoked lucky strike. and he thought, when he returned from the service and began a relationship with mrs. mcmannis, then ms. eppley, that he thought she was smoking lucky strike. but you may recall that mr. geraghty asked him specifically if he had a recollection of the brand she was smoking in avondale, ohio, in the 1950s. and mr. mcmannis said he did not. and then i got up and i asked mr. mcmannis whether or not he had a specific memory of mrs. mcmannis smoking lucky strike in the '50s. and he said, no, i do not. mrs. mcmannis -- mr. mcmannis, excuse me, also told you that mrs. mcmannis smoked old gold made by lorillard tobacco company. so we know that a significant portion of the brands that mrs. mcmannis smoked in her life, especially in the early years of her life, from the late 1940s until sometime after they moved to florida in 1969, were manufactured by companies not present in this courtroom. based on the evidence, ladies and gentlemen, it is a reasonable conclusion for you to reach that almost half of the cigarettes she smoked in her entire life were not those of either philip morris or of rj reynolds. we also know that you did not see one piece of evidence in this case that barbara mcmannis smoked brands made by rj reynolds or philip morris until after she was an adult. until after she was an adult. now, there is no question that mrs. mcmannis smoked some quantity of cigarettes that were manufactured by my client, rj reynolds. but plaintiff's burden was to establish with evidence that cigarettes made by philip morris or rj reynolds were a substantial contributing factor in what the plaintiffs believe was lung cancer that caused her death. i'll address this issue again in a few minutes. no expert has come into this courtroom, ladies and gentlemen, and said that mr. geraghty's client or my client's cigarettes directly, in a natural and continuous sequence, produced or substantially contributed to mrs. mcmannis's lung cancer, if she had lung cancer, or to her death. now, drs. henningfield and dorce -- dorce, excuse me, all told you that anyone can quit smoking. you heard evidence that over 60 million people have already quit. dr. henningfield and dr. dorce also agree that quitting takes motivation. and without motivation, a person is unlikely to quit. plaintiff showed you a slide. and i want -- can i have the elmo, please? and i want to talk to you about this. here's the slide that plaintiff showed you, that barbara mcmannis was addicted to nicotine. and they listed the individuals, dr. jack henningfield and the four fact witnesses. and way down here, they put daphne dorce. now, i want to talk about that for a minute. and let us go back to the slides, please. make no mistake. dr. henningfield knows a lot about pharmacology. he knows a lot about epidemiology, but he is not a medical doctor. you heard dr. henningfield concede, admit, agree that addiction is a medical diagnosis with specific medical criteria. and dr. henningfield told you that he does not diagnose or treat people with addictions. one of the first questions mr. geraghty asked dr. henningfield, a ph.d., is: "well, you said several times on friday that addiction is a disease? "yeah. "so it is a medical diagnosis? "yeah." that leaves dr. daphne dorce, the only medical doctor who talked to you about addiction. dr. dorce is a board-certified medical doctor. she believes that addiction is a medical diagnosis. and she explained why mrs. mcmannis did not satisfy the medical criteria of the dsm-5, the diagnostic statistical manual, fifth version. mrs. mcmannis was not addicted, ladies and gentlemen. but even if you were to find that she was, you still have to determine whether the addiction was a legal cause of her disease and death. think about all the evidence that you have heard in this case. mr. mitnik, in his closing argument, used the word vulnerable, claiming that mrs. mcmannis was a vulnerable person or part of a vulnerable population. but you have heard no evidence of vulnerability. you have not heard that she was fragile or helpless, powerless, or controlled by nicotine addiction, left with no choice. and of the medical records we have, none of them diagnose her as being addicted. barbara mcmannis enjoyed smoking and was not motivated to quit until she got sick in 1995. no witness described her the way plaintiff would have you believe she was. that is just not who barbara mcmannis was to the fact witnesses. so despite having the burden of proof on these issues, plaintiff has not established that mrs. mcmannis had lung cancer, that she had -- i'm sorry -- had lung cancer that was caused by smoking either reynolds or philip morris's cigarettes, that she was addicted to the nicotine in cigarettes, or that her addiction was a legal cause of her disease or death, such that, but for the addiction, she would not have gotten a smoking-related disease and died. plaintiffs spent a long time with both dr. henningfield and dr. proctor talking about company conduct. and since mr. geraghty talked to you about medical issues already, i would like to focus on the company conduct for a couple of minutes. more specifically, you need to be asking yourselves in deliberations, i would submit, ladies and gentlemen, whether there is a direct and substantial connection between the testimony about tobacco company conduct and barbara mcmannis. you cannot just have them swimming in different pools that are next to each other. there has to be that nexus. so when you go back to the jury room to deliberate this case and you look at your notes and the evidence, you should always be asking yourself a very simple question: what does the -- what do the historical documents and the witness testimony have to do with barbara mcmannis and the decisions she made about smoking? dr. proctor came to this courtroom -- i was going to say from stanford university, but it was actually from the other side of the state where he was testifying -- and he admitted to you that he knew nothing about barbara mcmannis. i would submit, ladies and gentlemen, that the plaintiff is wishing that your passions about what was in the company documents will carry the day. but there has to be the link, ladies and gentlemen. and it was plaintiff's job to show you how the conduct was connected. seventeen days after you showed up for the first time for jury selection, there has not been a link established. we know that barbara mcmannis heard consistent messages throughout her life that smoking could be hazardous. she kept up with current events. she made informed choices. simply put, there should be no doubt that she possessed the requisite knowledge about the hazards of smoking. she knew the risks. dr. proctor showed you a lot of different advertisements, advertisements with santa claus, with movie stars, with athletes. but what evidence did you hear about whether those advertisements impacted barbara mcmannis? mr. mcmannis testified that he, like barbara, eppley at the time, grew up in a very rural part of ohio called zanesville. mr. mcmannis told you that he did not remember being exposed to advertising in the '30s, '40s, or '50s. not when i was growing up. that came later on in life, when mr. stevens asked him about ads. it must have been sometime in the '60s. gloria cullipher noted that they did read the newspaper, and they went to the movies. but in the videotaped deposition you saw, you heard no one asking ms. cullipher questions to establish a satisfaction of a burden of proof. you heard no one asking her questions about identifying ads that she saw. why is that? the plaintiff has the burden of proof, ladies and gentlemen. it is that simple. we know that her first regular brand was chesterfield. they chose that brand because they stole it from their father when they began their smoking. concealment is one of the issues that you are going to have to link to barbara mcmannis. you have to look at the engle findings, if you get that far, and you have to ask yourself, was the concealment a legal cause? and when you look at instruction number nine, you will see that it contains the requirements that there had to be material information concealed that establishes the legal cause to barbara mcmannis. you will see, i believe it is instruction ten, that material information means of such importance that a reasonable person would consider the same significant in their decision-making process. it has to concern the health risks or addictive nature of cigarette smoking or both. and if so, it has to directly and, in a natural and continuous sequence, produce or contributed substantially to producing mrs. mcmannis's death. so that but for the concealment, mrs. mcmannis's death would not have occurred. plaintiff has failed to prove a link to barbara mcmannis. it is just that simple. now, dr. henningfield talked about ammonia. he talked about ph. and he talked about one document in particular that i want to highlight with you. it is called root technology. he made a number of references to the use of ammonia. and he referenced this document from brown & williamson, one of the predecessors of my client, rj reynolds. dr. henningfield wanted you to think that this was a secret. but then on cross examination, i showed him one of the appendices, the list, the three-page list of the various root technology patents. and we looked at three of them. and dr. henningfield, when he was talking to you about how the manipulation of ph, the adding of ammonia might affect the level of ph and might affect something called the nicotine kick, that that was somehow a secret. he told me, though, that the nicotine kick was directly related to the satisfaction of the smoker. and when we looked at the patents, ladies and gentlemen, the patent clearly disclosed to the public and to all that the compounds of ammonia affect the ph, can increase the ph of the total particulate matter delivered upon smoking -- that is the smoke -- and increase levels of strength perception. so the ammonia issue is not an issue. plaintiff has not brought you any evidence that mrs. mcmannis would have acted differently if she had only seen the root technology document or even the patents that are publicly available. now, i want to also talk to you about the question of whether punitive damages are appropriate in this case. as you deliberate on question number nine, please do not forget that it is plaintiff's burden to establish a link. mr. mitnik, in his closing, talked about how the defendants should share in responsibility for what they did and how they went about it. what they did and how they went about it. and he showed you instruction number 14. may i have the elmo, please? instruction number 14 is the one that talks about punitive damages. and i believe that i highlighted what mr. mitnik showed you. and he read you what was highlighted in yellow. but what was not highlighted? the conduct causing mrs. mcmannis's death. this case is about barbara mcmannis. and there has to be a connection to barbara mcmannis. even when you look at the following instruction, on entitlement to damages that mrs. mitnik showed you, when -- and this is 15. when considering entitlement, you may consider any harm the conduct of reynolds and philip morris caused to mrs. mcmannis. the court: you have five minutes, counsel. mr. weaver: caused to mrs. mcmannis. let us go back to the slide, please. the court: did you hear me, sir? mr. weaver: thank you, judge. i apologize for not acknowledging. mr. mitnik talked about mrs. mcmannis being caught in a net. but the evidence does not place mrs. mcmannis in the net. youth marketing was another topic the plaintiffs spent an awful lot of time on. but the evidence is that youth marketing had no effect on barbara mcmannis. she was smoking chesterfield cigarettes from 1948 until perhaps as late as 1969 or 1970. i would submit to you that there is no evidence in this case that barbara mcmannis smoked a brand of cigarettes manufactured by reynolds or philip morris before she was 18. and if you accept the possibility that mrs. mcmannis did not smoke a reynolds brand cigarette until lucky strike in 1969 in florida, as gloria testified, she was 34 years old when she first smoked a reynolds brand. she made and continued to make informed decisions about whether to continue smoking. and she did not make an effort to quit until 1993. she was personally responsible for those decisions. finally, and i'm going to go through this a little faster. let us remember some of the history that dr. proctor told us about. let us see the cancer scare. do you remember these two articles? dr. proctor talked about these articles from the early 1950s. and he testified that it was a giant story. it caused a stock market crash. he told you that "cancer by the carton" was possibly the most important article of the decade. the scare in 1952 and 1953, according to dr. proctor, caused the most significant decline ever in absolute cigarette consumption as a result of this widespread publicity of the deadly harms of smoking. what are the chances that barbara mcmannis was unaware of the cancer scare that gripped the nation, according to dr. proctor, at this time? mrs. mcmannis was not caught in a net. one last point on whether punitive damages are warranted. the evidence will show that both philip morris and my client, rj reynolds, spent a tremendous amount of time and money working to reduce the hazards of cigarettes and make other products available to the public. do you remember the nordine study? provide other products, away from conventional cigarettes, which meet the same needs cigarettes now meet, without the harmful effects. dr. henningfield told you about next cigarettes manufactured by philip morris in the 1980s. that used a special chemical process similar to that for decaffeinating coffee. you may recall the testimony that dr. henningfield agreed that philip morris went so far as to buy general foods just to get the technology from sanka so they could make next a denicotinized cigarette. he also explained that reynolds invested over a billion dollars to develop premier and eclipse. revolutionary technology. you actually held one of each in your hands. "the lancet" said, "premier would seem to be a near perfect, low-tar cigarette. there is no doubt that it would be less harmful than most other brands on the market." reynolds tried. philip morris tried. the products are still available. ladies and gentlemen, let me just say one thing about the verdict form, and i will conclude. can i have the elmo, please? question number three talks about the percentage of fault. you cannot hold philip morris or rj reynolds responsible for smoking cigarettes that were manufactured by lorillard or liggett & myers. as a result, you will have to take that into consideration and use your own common sense and judgment about how that plays in, should you even get this far. i do not think that you will, but should you get this far. we are not going to show this slide, ms. terio, but you heard with dr. henningfield about the john quincy adams letter. well, we know historically that john quincy adams' father was also a guy named john adams, our second president. before he was president, he was a simple lawyer in boston. and he was asked, in 1770, to defend the british soldiers that were accused of inciting what we now know is called the boston massacre. and in arguing to the jury in that case, adams said, "facts are stubborn things. but whatever may be our wishes, our passions, or our inclinations, these things can never change the facts and the evidence." if you focus, ladies and gentlemen, on only the things that are connected to barbara mcmannis, your task is simple. and i would submit, respectfully, that it would require a no answer to all the questions. but even if you look beyond that, if you focus on things that are not connected to barbara mcmannis, you will be permitting your passions, your wishes, or your inclinations to dictate the outcome. mrs. mcmannis -- mr. mcmannis has not given you any basis on which to second-guess barbara mcmannis's decisions. in any event, barbara mcmannis was one hundred percent responsible for her own choices, for her own decisions, and we should not second guess that. i want to thank you for your time. i want to thank you for your service. and thank you for your patience.