(plaintiff's closing argument) mr. mitnik: good morning. we have been together for a long time. we have been together long enough i've had to give myself a haircut. that is a while. but now we can do what is called argument about the evidence. opening statement we were presenting it to you, laying it out. we can actually bring it together in our view, our positions. and i want to do that. but i want to keep it tied to the evidence. and most importantly, i want to keep it tied to the law. because in this case, the true guiding stick in here is what the judge gave you, bringing the law as your guidance. and it is going to be particularly important here because we have gone back-and-forth with evidence, and it is kind of a bit of a rollercoaster up and down. but there is certain parameters that are not clear at the beginning because you do not get the full instructions now. and those parameters, i think, will guide you to a just result in this case, and to put all that evidence in the proper framework so decisions get made not on suggestions of what it might be, but on what the law really is. and i think when you hear what the law really is, it is going to be clear we met our burden of proof. and before i start going through that, there are a couple things i do want to do. i first want to thank you very much for your time. i'm not going to go back through a description of the importance of this. everybody understands, you made the duty, you have been here. and we all know it was a difficult, long journey. thank you on behalf of that. now, i want to talk to you first about the burden of proof. and the burden of proof in the case is not that we prove this by -- to the exclusion of all other evidence, not by the beyond a reasonable doubt. this is not a criminal case where we have a burden where creating doubt creates an out. that is not the law here. this is not like a criminal case where someone can throw up evidence and things and create some doubt, and if the juror thinks it is reasonable, then there would be a not guilty. this is a civil case. and we have a very different burden. it is a burden that is based on what weighs more. it is a weighing process. greater weight of the evidence means more persuasive, convincing force and effect of the entire evidence in the case. you do not take one piece of evidence out of context. it is all put together. you put your collective wisdom together, and you say, does our evidence weigh? is it the greater weight of the evidence? is it more persuasive, more convincing? and i'm intentionally emphasizing the word "more" because it is not the only evidence. it is not the most. it is more. meaning often people say, you tilt the scale. it is got to weigh more. that is not literally what the law says, but it is often interpreted that way. another way it is often called is what is more like -- what is more likely right than wrong. what is more likely right than wrong? what is more persuasive? what is more convincing? what makes more sense to me, looking at the totality of the evidence? what is more likely right than wrong? so you have the freedom to use your common sense and apply it here and weigh it, and do not have a black-and-white type certainty that would be in a criminal case that could lead to circumstances where jurors say, gosh, i really, in my heart of hearts, think that this side's right, but there is a little doubt and i'd have to say a verdict that was contrary to where my heart was and my common sense was. so this is a -- something that is manageable for a jury, and it happens to be, most importantly, the law in the case. next thing i want to point out is that -- and we said this at the front. but i want to bring this back full circle. from the first piece of paper filed in this lawsuit, mr. mcmannis, on behalf of his wife, barbara mcmannis, has accepted responsibility for her share in this. and i'm going to talk to you a little bit more about some suggestions of how to divide that up. but the important point -- and sometimes during trial, i sit here and get antsy and wish, gosh, i could get up and say it right now and remind people -- when you start hearing evidence of, well, was not there a big surgeon general report? did not this make big news? did not a family member die and at least they were telling you it was from cancer? and it is very easy to say, well, how can you say it is all their fault? well, that is a very reasonable reaction. it should not be all their fault. and the point here is, it is not. she is taken responsibility. and the judge, under the law, has laid out how all that percentages and all will work. and she is you telling how it works. but the fact of the matter is there is an acknowledgment of fault on her part too. but what we are here to do is to prove that she does not bear that responsibility alone. that the evidence and the facts of what these defendants did that had an impact on her -- and i'm going to talk about the evidence of that impact in -- shortly -- but had an impact on her makes them share in the responsibility. and i'm going to share with you the lion's share of the responsibility because of the things that they did and how they went about it. but this is not a circumstance where we are walking in the courtroom saying, it is all their fault; i've got no responsibility under these facts. that would not be the position that we have taken. and the judge will tell you how all that fits into the law. but that is an important fact, that if i could have, i would have popped up every day at the end of evidence and said, please remember this, because i think it is an important perspective. now, having said that, i want to talk to you next about the law, what brought us here, which is this engle case. and the judge has laid the circumstances out when she described them in the jury instructions. and the -- we have got this little cartoonish diagram just to simply give it some context of -- and i'm sorry. i'm forgetting your screen's here and i'm marching all in front of you. mr. geraghty: your honor, objection, your honor. could we approach? mr. weaver: may we briefly approach? the court: you may. (a discussion was held at the bench and out of the hearing of the jury.) the court: it is closing time. mr. geraghty: i understand. two issues -- we asked -- mr. mitnik was not here. but i asked mr. prysock if there were demonstratives above and beyond the documents that have been admitted to evidence; and if so, could i see them before they were shown. he said they were not going to use any demonstratives. mr. mitnik: he was standing here when that happened, and we said we are using demonstratives. absolutely. that is a falsehood. mr. geraghty: no, that is not. the court: let us take a look, then. show them to me. mr. geraghty: they have never shown to us. and the second objection is just telling them all about the -- mr. mitnik: he absolutely told you he had them. mr. geraghty: that is not what i heard you said. mr. mitnik: you rolled your eyes and shrugged. the court: mr. prysock -- mr. geraghty: about when -- how about you relax? the court: how many are there? mr. geraghty: we just need to see them. that is all, your honor. (the sidebar discussion was concluded.) the court: you may proceed, mr. mitnik. mr. mitnik: yes. okay. can you put that back up on the monitor? okay. we will put it up in a moment. let me -- so i'm not just standing here and wasting your time and mine, let me talk to you about what i'm going to be showing you in a few minutes, that this started, as you know, back in the 19 -- in the 19 -- here we go. let me get out of your way -- started in the 1950s, back when you heard when the conspiracy started with all of this. there was a trial down in south florida in 1998, and the jury sat for a whole year. and after that, they came -- mr. geraghty: objection, that is not -- that is not in evidence, your honor. the court: the case went up to the florida supreme court in '99. and from that is the judge -- and i'm not going to go into details of what the supreme court did. because her honor, as it is going to be in your instruction, laid out what happened. but from the supreme court of florida came these findings that in 2006, these type -- mr. weaver: objection, your honor. misstates the law. the court: the final decision, with a final -- findings were made final was what year? mr. mitnik: came out of the supreme court in '90 -- i mean, the findings came out in 2006. the court: okay. and those findings come into this courtroom with a -- an authority. and we talked about this in voir dire. there are certain things we have to prove before they come in -- come into a full force and effect. and if we do not prove them, then we have lost the case. it is that simple. and if we did prove them -- and i'm going to talk to you about what we have to prove and why we have in just a minute. but once we have proven -- and if we have not, we are gone. but once we do, then those findings come into this courtroom with full force and effect, period. they have to be accepted. that is just the law. and then, there are things we will have to prove that i'm going to talk to you about that showed that those findings then had a relationship under what is called a legal cause. "a". and i'm going to say this repeatedly. i'm going to use some demonstrative. and every time you will see the word in quotes and in bold, "a legal cause." and that is very important. this is one of those law points that i'm so grateful that you got the instructions before i got up because it need not be the sole cause. it is a cause. so long -- and it can act in combination with other factors so long as it contributes substantially to the outcome. it cannot be something that is un -- insubstantial or insignificant. but if it contributes in a meaningful way, then it has met the legal-proof requirements of it being a legal cause. and we will be presenting you evidence to show, once those findings come in, the findings involving the concealment, the findings involving the fraud, the findings involving a defective product, the findings involving negligence, that those findings do have applicability to mrs. mcmannis that it did have an impact. it was not frivolous or meaningless. that it had an impact. and once we have shown that, we have met all of the proof on that aspect. and then the next part of it will be to talk about the damages, cause, and what is fair and reasonable value under the circumstances just -- and then we will talk about the piece of this that deals with our punitive damages warranted to punish and deter. and this case is about mrs. mcmannis. make no mistake about it. she has requirements under the law, proof requirements, evidence under the law that has to be presented before we can reach these steps. but at the end when i'm talking about these and we have gone through the evidence as it meshes with the law, what we will be talking to you about is that the case is about more than just ms. mcmannis. but, because she qualifies for the criteria under the law the court gives you and the evidence presented here in this case, that it provides an opportunity under the law to attempt to utilize this process where we have local citizens come into court and be seated as a jury and give up their time to try to deter conduct of these defendants and others similarly situated, to provide a motivation for change to protect the next generation. so this case involves clearly ms. mcmannis. if she does not meet the criteria, she cannot provide that opportunity. but once i've shown that she does meet that criteria, then we will be talking about that additional important purpose. now, next, i want to talk to you about the class membership. and i want to give you a brief analogy before i give that to you. and that is -- i'm walking -- i apologize. i'm a pacer, and i'm probably going to walk in front of you. here is an analogy that i find helpful in describing a legal cause. and that is like a bicycle built for two. you can have more than one force driving towards the same destination. for example, someone can have the ability to quit. it is not impossible to quit. someone can have some choice left or, quote, free will, left and not be a total zombie. and that is not the proof requirements here, that you have to have had no control or no ability -- mr. geraghty: i object to the argument, your honor. the court: that is not the law of the land in this courtroom. the law is that the addiction has to be a cause. and a cause -- mr. geraghty: i object. it is a legal cause, your honor. mr. mitnik: yeah. i'll fix that. it has to be a legal cause. and let us look at what the law is on legal cause quickly. you have heard it. but i want to point this out because i believe, as i said, keeping the facts within the road and not having them go off the road so that there is a miscarriage of justice because we get off there, the legal track. i want to point this out. here is the description. ms. mcmannis was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine and that this addiction was a legal cause of her lung cancer. addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine was a legal cause of ms. mcmannis's lung cancer if it directly and in natural continuous consequence -- sequence -- i'm sorry, produces or -- i put a highlighter there on purpose -- or contributes substantially to producing her lung cancer. and i did not highlight here. but in order to be the legal cause of ms. mcmannis's lung cancer, addiction need not be the only cause. addiction may be a legal cause of her lung cancer, even though it operates in combination with the act of another, some natural cause, or some other cause, if the addiction contributes substantially to producing mrs. mcmannis's lung cancer. so the question is not, can she quit? the question is, was addiction -- a, was she addicted, and was the addiction one of the reasons, not an insignificant reason -- mr. geraghty: objection to the misstatement of the law. mr. mitnik: may i finish? the court: you can proceed. mr. mitnik: was it, could not be some insignificant reason that she smoked so much as to get sick, but it had to have been a reason that contributed in a meaningful way. as you just saw with the instruction, it is a contributing cause that is substantial. cannot be insubstantial. in other words, when she got up in the morning first thing and decided to lit -- light a stick on fire with tobacco in it and suck it in her lungs -- not an iced tea, not a coffee -- the first thing she wanted was to suck the nicotine out. and not just puff it a couple times for the joy of it, but deep down into her lungs every morning for 40 years. maybe not so many the first few years, but most of the 40 years, start every single morning. and the reason is, you heard from dr. henningfield, who has spent his life on this subject, that that is a substantial piece of evidence in determining if someone is addicted or dependent on nicotine because they had slept through the night and they are wanting to relieve the feelings of having been without something that you are dependent on and they do it right away. that is a profound piece of evidence of whether or not someone is addicted. but not just to stop there. but that she then smoked more. it is not like i have one in the morning because this is so much fun to smoke, suck -- smoke deep down in my lungs. not once, but puff after puff. and every single puff, it is undisputed, delivers nicotine, the highly addictive drug. you saw me lay the cigarettes out. i'm not going to do that again. it would be too gimmicky to do it again. but you saw a pack. so it is a pack. when you start seeing how many cigarettes -- and the evidence is a pack to a pack and a half. but just take the pack. if it is a pack and a half, it is 30. in a pack, it is 20. ten times, it takes ten minutes out of your life. and it is ten hits on average per cigarette. one after another after another after another, on the way to work, every opportunity. you heard the testimony. when she worked somewhere where she was inside where she could not smoke, wherever -- and remember, you could smoke everywhere back then. but certain circumstances, like, if she is in a nice office, they would not want her smoking in the nice office, perhaps, later in life, or in a bottling place where your hands are busy. but is it all just a big coincidence that she would, on every opportunity, what all of the evidence -- totally undisputed, when there was a break and an opportunity, she smoked another one of these, deep in her lungs. not one hit. ten hits. and then would return to whatever she was doing. and that would be the pattern throughout the day. not one day. not for a while, a while it was a fad. for her whole life after becoming a teenager. and then on the way home, more. then on the way home, first thing, you get home and cooking dinner or whatever you are doing, and then all evening. she is got ashtrays all throughout the house. she is got them by her bed. she smokes in bed. i guess we have got a debate over whether she smoked in bed laying down or sitting up. she smoked in bed, for goodness' sake. her daughter said she would wake up and see her get up at night and smoke cigarettes. at night. it is like the tina turner song, "what is love got to do with it." is the suggestion what is addiction got to do with it, got to do with it? of course, it contributed to the insane-sounding circumstances for that long. dr. henningfield could not have been more clear. and put his credentials up against dr. dorce. and you know what is not on that? nothing on there says, according to the dsm-iv medical, it is this addictive. nothing on there says, according to something that is not even called addiction in that book. it is tobacco-use disorder. no longer do you call it -- that you have to use a book that calls it something else to do it. nowhere does it say anything. it is, was she addicted to nicotine. you saw the definition of dr. dorce's back there that she says is the definition she uses. it had nothing to do with all these criteria and dsm-iv. and then you saw what i pulled out and showed what she was doing to the criteria. i went through and showed it. that was being fairly assessed, unbiased assessment, not by someone who is doing lots of work for cigarette companies or their lawyers, that she would have even met the criteria under that. all of her family said -- you heard them come in court and testify -- she was addicted. you heard her sister on video. she was addicted. every time she tried to quit, it made her feel so lousy, she said, i cannot. she was told by her sister, i've got copd, and it is from smoking. now, take addiction out of the equation. let us just lift it up and put it out of the room. this lady ain't addicted; it is just pleasure. man, this is so much fun. and her beloved sister tells her, please stop. i just found out i've got a deadly disease from smoking. take addiction out of the equation and explain her response of, i do not believe it. i do not think it is causing your lung cancer, and i do not think it is going to hurt me. that is flat denial. it is the ugly face of addiction screaming. the ugly face of addiction is where denial is not a stubbornness, it is a drug-driven phenomenon that makes no sense, and it is so frustrating to loved ones around them. and to say, that is just because she enjoyed it. did she enjoy smoking some? you do not get addicted to a substance if it does not bring some pleasure. that is what the drug does. it is pleasurable to feel not euphoric, because it is not a euphoria drug that intoxicates, but it is pleasurable to have the relief of the feelings of being without it. it is pleasurable to have that sense of well-being where you have energy but you do not feel wiry and jittery, where you can focus, but you feel relaxed and at the same time you have energy. and that is become a baseline after decades, all day long. now, you take it away and they feel totally different. now, are we ever going to know exactly how she felt? no. she is not alive to be interviewed and say, tell me how all that felt. but you heard her sister talk about the profound withdrawal that she told her about and how hard it was for her, because she even used the word hurt. she was miserable. that is addiction. greater weight of the evidence. is there a plausible argument? could, if we were in a criminal case, some doubt be created? sure. we are not in a criminal case. what is more persuasive? what more convincing? what makes more sense? what is more likely right than wrong that she was addicted, and that her addiction was a contributing cause to her death? it was a cause that was a substantial factor in her smoking so much. this is her sister's testimony. she was not, when she used the patches. when she used the gum. even after her diagnosis where you heard they scooped part of her brain out. they prescribed nicotine replacement therapies. she tried. she went to a hypnotist. she tried gum. they put ashtrays out of the house. her husband, who all of the evidence is, they had a loving relationship. not everybody has a great marriage, regretfully, but some do. and this was his soulmate. they adored each other. and when he wanted her to do something that was important to him, within reason, she respected that and did it for him. that is what loving spouses do. but not this one. he had stopped. and he stopped and did not want her doing it. and he is asked her to. and you heard him. she could not deliver on that important request. but that is just because she liked it so much. was she addicted? the evidence on the greater weight, there is no question we met that burden. if you take it to -- we can prove it further, but we need not, because it is not the law. now, was it a contributing cause, a meaningful, substantial, not insubstantial, cause contributing to smoking enough to get sick. that is the question. legal cause. was the addiction one of the reasons -- because you heard the evidence. you do not get cancer, lung cancer, from smoking occasionally or for a short period of time. it takes a lot for a long time. forty years, 20-or-plus cigarettes every day starting first thing in the morning. if she is addicted, which clearly the evidence shows she was, then how can you say the addiction was not one of the reasons, a meaningful one, that she smoked like, as they use in those old statements, fiend? that much over-usage? you see what it does. you heard their own expert, their last witness that came in here say, yes, if she had lung cancer, the smoking would have been a substantially contributing cause. and the question is, are we going to say, but gosh, if you took addiction out of the equation, she would have smoked that much for that long, when you have heard the statistics, almost everybody wants to be quit in three to five years. and they are not because they get hooked. and you saw their internal documents talking about the power of nicotine addiction. is not it wonderful that they cannot quit. addiction. a product that most of their customers would quit if they could. we showed the document from mr. camel [sic] that said finding a level or whatever the phrase was, to keep them hooked. this entire industry has been built on the power of nicotine addiction to keep people smoking in spite of information swirling because the addiction does it. on the supply/demand world for them, addiction gives them an unfair advantage on the demand side. the demand is drug driven. and it is impervious to much. and to say that addiction had nothing to do, it was not a contributing cause, that is what would have to be found here, that the greater weight of the evidence showed that addiction was just, a, not present, or had nothing to do with this. not the only reason she smoked so much. she was not a robot. but a significant reason, a contributing cause. once that is proven, once that is proven, then the finding -- oh, one more piece, lung cancer, i want to talk to you about. but let me -- i'm being signaled to point these out. these were some of those documents that you saw, we are in the business of selling a nicotine-addictive drug; nicotine, a potent drug, the industry's upon it; put a hungry rat in a cage; smoke the cigarette -- and smoking the cigarette is pushing the level [sic]. very few customers are aware of the effects of nicotine, its addictive nature. without the chemical compound nicotine, the cigarette market would collapse. we cannot ever be comfortable selling a product which most of our customers would stop using if they could. and then we look to the public statements. two factors refute that smoking is a matter of free choice; starting smoking as teenagers, and they then become addicted. nicotine addiction is the fundamental reason, that is 2010 surgeon general report of the united states of america. nicotine addiction is the fundamental reason that individuals persist in using tobacco products. enough of that. the last step in class membership is, did she more likely than not. is the more persuasive evidence that she had lung cancer? and i do not -- it is frustrating not to have all of those records available because of the length of time. but thank goodness, in america, justice does not get frustrated so easily. the pursuit of justice has a fighting chance in this courtroom. mr. geraghty: your honor, i object to that argument. the court: what more evidence do we need than her attending doctor? not somebody that was there from hospice and was really unaware, just put something down to fill it out. but somebody that put down that was the attending, who would have been in the middle of bringing the specialist in, in every task that was run. we do not have all the results of all the tests. we do not know what all tests were run. we have a handful that, for whatever reason, when the hospital's purging for space, a smattering of them survived. but we do not have all the tests. we do not have all the mris. we do not have all the information. but we have something that is just as good when the burden of proof is not, do you know for sure. remember questions. this is one of the reasons i wanted to start with the burden of proof. you had questions, both of dr. villa and the guy, the doctor they brought last, about would you fill out a death certificate just with the information you got now? and the answer universally is no. they do not want to fill it out unless both said you really are very comfortable, almost definitive diagnosis. because it is an important things to put down. so does that mean, okay, gosh, these guys just cannot prove it. no. because we have here the person who was in the best position to have all of that information -- mr. geraghty: your honor, i would object to that argument. not in evidence. the court: sustained. mr. mitnik: we have here on this document filled out by dr. brinson. and he says, and we know now, dr. brinson, the person they brought to court, did not -- did not, when he rendered his opinions formally at his deposition, did not even realize that was the attending doctor. i had to point it out. but the attending doctor, from the hospitalization in question, said that she had metastatic pulmonary carcinoma -- that is lung cancer -- to the brain. and right at the end, there was a question from one of the jurors to their last witness -- i do not remember the exact words. but basically, is there some reason to question his answer in here as being a knowledgeable or reliable or honest response that he wrote in there? and dr. iannotti said, no, there is no reason to question it. in fact, your patient's just died and it is a very somber, emotional time. well, so there is the answer. and it did not stop there. you saw other evidence of it. you saw the consent forms for treatment. they are in evidence. two different radiation consent forms said the same thing, lung cancer. we do not have all the records and tests that were done that led to the conclusion that got in here and then got into the medical records on the consent forms, or treatment, for goodness' sake. but does that mean it is not reliable in a court of law? no. it is the most persuasive evidence under the circumstances that we can bring forward to you, and we did. there is one thing that i do want to clear up. there was an instruction the court gave you on prima facie evidence. and i want to touch on that because this is another one where i'm so pleased the judge read the instruction before i got up. and we have a clear path to justice outlined on the sides of the street by the law. and that is the description of what prima facie evidence means. while he gets that, i'm going to talk to you in common-sense terms of it, and then i'll put the actual language up for you. prima facie evidence means that it is not -- prima facie evidence means it is not the end of the discussion. it does not mean we present the death certificate and that is it. what it means, though, it does not -- prima facie -- it is not -- prima facie evidence does not in any way diminish the power of that evidence below any other evidence that is coming to the court. mr. geraghty: i object, your honor. that misstates your instruction. the court: it does not diminish in any way its importance and its value to you than any other evidence in the case. it is simply saying it does not rise up to the point of, now we have just proven we are done with it. but you take that evidence as valuable evidence and weigh it. put it on the scale. and then put whatever's on the other side. and what is on the other side, really? what, other than to say we have a lack of evidence? what is on the other side? someone who ultimately, from a better question than i asked, from the jury said, i've really got no reason to question the guy. well, now, he raised other questions. but let us keep in mind that he is the guy who had -- i do not remember the exact number, whether it was 20 or 30 or 30 or 40. but he had other cases for the cigarette companies through their lawyers, all lined up. and he is paid by them. and he is a cancer doctor who put aside a room full of cancer patients and moved them so he could come to court and testify on behalf of a cigarette company. mr. geraghty: your honor, i would object to the aspersion being suggested by that. the court: sustained. mr. geraghty: move to strike. the court: strike it. mr. mitnik: and did not bother to even inform himself that the person who filled out the death certificate was the attending doctor. the evidence in this cases includes a certificate of mcmannis's death and two radiation consent forms. these documents do not constitute prima facie proof of the cause of death. and here comes the definition. prima facie proof means evidence that established -- establishes a fact as true without any other supporting evidence. in other words, it is the be-all, end-all unless the defendants present evidence that rebuts the prima facie evidence. in other words, it is the end, over, unless they came forward with contradictory evidence. that is a rare situation where you have prima facie evidence. this is not there. but it goes on to say, you are to consider this evidence along with the other evidence and testimony in reaching your verdict. it is a -- all that says at the end of the day is, it is another piece of evidence for you to consider. it does not get special treatment. it does not get diminished treatment. it is another piece of evidence. but when you put it in these circumstances, what is the other evidence when dr. iannotti acknowledges, i really cannot question this. and acknowledge that person would have had access to all of the tests, any follow-up tests, any x-rays, whatever there was, he had it all. okay. once we have -- and you can accept or reject the defendants' attempts to rebut or to prove or to show to the contrary that that was not the cause of death. and what we know, not just from dr. villa, but even from -- and not just from the death certificate signed by the attending doctor, but from the person they brought, admitted that if indeed it was lung cancer, if what he wrote down there is actually right and not made up or misguided, then smoking was a substantial contributing cause to that lung cancer and death. so now i have completed the cycle of evidence on the burden of proof of more persuasive, more convincing force and effect of it all as to class membership. then class -- after class membership, then the evidence comes down from the findings. you have heard the findings from the court. i'm not going to reread those now because i'm trying to save some time for what is called rebuttal. so i'm going to skip over them because you had them, and you will have them in your package back in the jury room to look at what those findings are. and the jury instructions show that, as to that each of those findings, it is that same standard of cause that says a legal cause; that the conduct, for example, conspiracy; for example, the concealment or fraud; for example, the negligence and the defective product. the burden for us of the greater weight of the evidence is to show that those -- that conduct, those things, were, a, again, legal cause of her lung cancer and death; that it contributed, and it cannot be insubstantial and substantial alike. i want to talk -- that is the parameter. i want to talk to you about that law briefly, i mean, about the evidence in that regard. and in doing so, i've got two things i want to point out. number one, what was the message that was put out? one, there is a real controversy here, folks. ms. mcmannis -- and you heard the evidence. you were not -- you did not have to see an individual, the frank statement, for example, or this broadcast. you did not have to see any of it under the law because we have something called circumstantial evidence. mr. geraghty: i object, your honor. it misstates -- the court: you did not have to see any single piece under the law because we have what is called circumstantial evidence. there is an instruction in there that says you can use reasonable inferences from the evidence. and there was a comment that counsel for the defense made about actions speak louder than words, with one of the witnesses. and i could not agree more. and it is illegal for you to use something called circumstantial evidence or actions speak louder than words. i'm going to talk to you about that evidence and how it lines up here. but before i do, i want to point out, put the context. a, these defendants found out that their product was causing lung cancer, found it out early. and they did not come clean. they did not come forward and say, it is true. they came -- they created together and joined together as an industry, including these two defendants, to intentionally mislead their customers in america and did not do it line cane-pole fishing or door-to-door salesmen, but in a massive way, like casting a big net. and the question is, was ms. mcmannis one of those caught in the net that ended up on the boat? and how do we look at that? when it is something that is done at a broad, broad, huge sums of money spent for decades, way outspending, one day, more than public health would spend. they would -- one day of public health -- i'm sorry. in a whole year of public health, they would spend more in one day. that message was out to where someone had to live in a hole, not to know this is the "cigarette controversy" era. without seeing a single piece of paper, you would have known, gosh, this is a hotly debated subject. some would believe it and say, gosh, it does. some would say not. but nobody was hearing a unified message and saying, this ain't open for debate. if a manufacturer admits it, everybody admits it. instead, there was a made-up, cooked-up, scientific debate created on purpose so people would keep smoking while these defendants in this courtroom knew the consequence was going to be an epidemic of disease and death, horrible deaths, because it was making them a lot of money; and they wanted a holding strategy to hold them to keep smoking. the purpose of -- remember, they do not even want someone to go one cigarette less. remember how much that would cost them if it was one cigarette less? they did not want anyone even trying to quit or cut down. when someone went a long period of time, when sense and reason would have said, for goodness' sake, this should be a fight-or-flight situation; you should be fighting to run for your life; or if addiction's hard, you ought to be trying over and over. there is this horrible information everybody knows. it is there. it is not up for debate because they have admitted it. we did not have that at all. what we had was addicted customers like ms. mannis [sic] who are vulnerable to these kind of messages because of denial, because vulnerability, denial is a real phenomena that comes with addiction, and it is like putting a -- having a computer virus come on the computer. it does not mean it does not run. it does not just quit running. but it does not run the way it otherwise would. and the glitch, one of the big glitches it creates is this denial. and they exploited it on purpose, for money, knowing people like ms. mcmannis were going to die. twenty years, they are bragging, looking back to it. single strategy to defend on three major fronts: litigation, politics, and public opinion, and brilliantly executed. holding strategy creating doubt about the health change -- charge without actually denying it. and they used what they seemingly -- they had spokespersons. remember the testimony of dr. proctor. they had handsome-looking, good-talking, joking spokespersons that would go out to give credibility and give this message. and it was actually in secret or behind-the-scenes documents that were not available to the public or to ms. mcmannis, for goodness' sake; that it was a shield and a front. and they would have been in a deplorable position, except for their defensive operation. it was operation stumbling block. and think about what the purpose of it was and the consequences of it were: controversy. psychological crutch. self-rationale to keep smoking. some factors are factors other than smoking may be involved, one which death certificates or classifications of such a disease are questioned, one showing that many lung cancers may be metastatic from some other organ. as part of the conspiracy, they were actually having papers to go out to doctors doing these type things to try to enlist the doctors to help. they paid $20 million to the ama to keep them on the sideline. the president of the united states, beloved president kennedy, in '64, commissioned the surgeon general to get an answer: is this really causing lung cancer? he did not know. but ms. mcmannis is supposed to know. mr. geraghty: your honor, i would object, your honor. that calls for speculation. the court: sustained, on his knowledge. mr. mitnik: and here's what it was. a holding strategy. remember the document, "doubt is our product," to give the impression to the barbara mcmannises of the world that there is a real controversy, that scientists cannot agree, and wait and see. it is perfectly fine for you to wait and see. this stuff does not hurt you, if at all, for you to wait it out. so just wait and see. remember, let the scientists do the worrying while you go on enjoying driving your car, having your meals, and smoking your cigarettes. that was the message that was so broad, barbara mcmannis could not have missed the fact that that was the buzz in this trickle-down effect of how it was designed. they had too many customers to get to go door to door and say, look at this. they shot across the bound, covering the united states with that, quote, controversy. and the controversy was cooked up and made up, because here's what was concealed from barbara mcmannis and the rest of the america. some people could accept, hey, i'm going to believe what the surgeon general says. and some did. but why is there a question if you are going to believe them? why is that a subject for debate? because they made it so on purpose to make money, knowing the consequences. and this case is about consequences. and this case is about truth. what was concealed? the controversy was cooked up and made up. what else was concealed? the scientists did agree. remember? british tobacco came over way back. and everybody agreed in the industry. remember all the way at '94, these defendants' heads of their corporations stood in front of congress and raised their hands and swore to tell the truth and denied it all the way in '94. and you saw the evidence of everything they did in between and how they countered. when the psas, the public service announcement, came and they started working, they came off the air so the freebie to the public health would not run anymore. you saw how they countered it. they came up with the truth squad, which was just one vehicle. and you saw the guy standing -- here's one of those spokespersons, looking good, standing there, talking good on the steps of congress: all these scientists say... and bill dwyer, standing with a bank of microphones. everybody knew. how come it is a hot news item if bill dwyer is saying, heaven forbid, if califano gets into the more intimate business of ours. and they knew the truth. and they said barbara mcmannis knew all she needed to know. she did not know that the controversy was made up. she did not know that scientists really did agree because they were loading up scientists to make it look otherwise. and she did not need to hear a scientist say it for that, they had gotten into society, that this is a controversial subject. and what else she did not know is that it was not okay to wait and see because there was nothing left to wait and see about. you need to do everything in your power to break free. this stuff really does kill in a horrible way. not: you heard it from somewhere. and is that material? you are going to get -- you have got an instruction -- i'm not going to slow to pull it out -- on materiality, that says -- in materiality says, for one of these -- for information that is concealed -- and, remember, if something's concealed, she cannot have seen what is concealed. it is concealed. but what was concealed was this information that scientists do agree the controversy is cooked up, made up, and it is not okay to wait and see. would that have been material? here's the materiality instruction. the material fact is one that is of such importance that a reasonable person would consider the same significant in their decision-making process. would that not be important information for a reasonable person to know? would it not be significant to know, hey, this whole thing's been made up by us? everybody's -- scientists really do agree. and you cannot -- you do not have the luxury of waiting and seeing. get on it before you get deeper into the addictive cycle. get on it before you get deeper into the addictive cycle because the longer you do it, the deeper you get. and she started as a young person. so she is hardwired. but for goodness' sake, to have a fighting chance, start soon, not -- rather than later. and they were intentionally, quote, holding her and everybody else to keep them from trying, to convince them there was no real reason to try to stop. you do not even need to try. wait and see. would that have been material to know the truth of what we have seen in this courtroom, which clearly that book of secrets, those documents, were not available to ms. mcmannis. so let us talk real quick about that. and then i want to move forward. whats is the evidence? i said circumstantial evidence. and, you know, sometimes circumstantial evidence can be more powerful than direct evidence. let me explain that. when i was younger, my daughter -- mr. geraghty: your honor, i would object to telling personal stories. mr. mitnik: all right. i'll take my daughter out of it. mr. geraghty: your honor -- i object, your honor. mr. mitnik: let me give you an example. the court: let him give his personal experience. mr. mitnik: sure. let me give you an example. if somebody was sitting at a dining room table, working in the evening, and they had a daughter who liked to drink coca-cola before they went to bed and they were young and the coca-cola would get them ramped up from the caffeine and they did not sleep good. so they were not supposed to drink coke right before bed. and that the person, the youngster, was in the kitchen. and the person, the father at the table, says, what are you doing in there? because they hear the refrigerator. you are not getting into the coke, are you? let us hypothetically call her jennifer. you are not getting into the coke, are you, jennifer? and she says, no, daddy. thirty seconds or later, you hear (indicating). and the man gets up to go check on what is going on. and there is a 2-liter bottle of coca-cola on the ground with the top off, fizzing all over. and there is a glass in jennifer's hand, and it is gotten all over her. and that man said, jennifer, you did not get into the coke, did you? which is a dumb question. but it is calling for direct evidence. and the direct evidence was, no, daddy. but the circumstantial evidence is the liter, 2 liter of coke, foaming all over. which is more believable? which is more persuasive? and on these circumstances, these defendants got coca-cola all over them. so let us look at that evidence in this case. because we are talking about what their -- with these defendants, what they were -- you take what their aim was. and then let us look and see, did it fit what their aim was? their aim was to influence smokers like ms. mcmannis to do something that otherwise does not make sense. do not even try. suck hot smoke into your lungs when you are a kid, where you have to fight to get through it because it is nauseous to you at first. and then do it every day, early in the morning, non-stop. and do it for decades for as long as we can, till death do us part. let us see. did she fit into this pattern, looking at the coca-cola? she started when she was 13 or 14. the aim that they were trying was to get them to start young because people do not start unless they are young. you saw the ads. she inhaled. engineering, additives, all of those things that are put in to make it less harsh and more inhalable, which speeds delivery and makes the likelihood of addiction go through the ceiling. she did just that. she made her way up to, not smoking casually as someone non-addicted, which would not help their business model, as we saw, but to smoke it exactly the way they intended it. not as some abuser of the product. that product is designed to be used like she used it, all day, every day. that is why they give dose packs of 20 and you are -- so you get you through the day so you can get back to your carton or more of them. she used them exactly the way designed in this excessive manner, driven by a highly addictive drug. she was smoking at a time when sixty percent of the doctors were smoking. she was smoking first thing in the morning, all day. that was the influence that they wanted to exert. that was the aim. did she follow it? check. she started when she was 13. check. she inhaled. check. she smoked a pack or pack and a half a day, as their aim was, of the conspiracy. remember, you have got public health saying, do not. and they are over here saying, oh, come on, chicken little. boy crying wolf. scientists cannot agree. wait and see. check. she switched to filters. you saw the documents; psychological crutch. you saw the documents; the illusion of filtration. you saw the documents; that the public did not realize they did not work. but she switched right when everybody was switching to filters. and to market it in an underlying way to give the impression it was a healthy alternative to trying to quit. and what it -- did it work? well, she is not here to come in here and say, that is why i switched, exactly that. and if she did, she would be subject to cross examination if she was alive on "that is self-serving." mr. geraghty: your honor, that is calling for speculation. the court: actions speak louder than words. she did it when everybody was doing it, exactly the way they designed it to be done. is that reliance? does that prove the element that it had, and it was a legal cause? that, in and of itself, is enough to prove legal cause without any of the rest of it. mr. geraghty: your honor, i would object. misstates the legal instructions. the court: that, in and of itself, would be enough to show it was a legal cause. she switched, rather than try to quit with all her might. check. she smoked the most heavily advertised brands of the time, these defendants' products, winston, raleigh, marlboro, just like they wanted her to do. check. she went these long stretches without even trying to quit. it makes no sense but for this powerful circumstantial evidence that was having an effect on her. for goodness' sake, addiction might override her; but you are trying more, unless you now have a reason to say -- and here's a powerful piece of evidence, and i'm going to check it before i say it -- her own sister calling her, and she will not accept that it came from smoking. you think this did not give her that to prop up on, this message did not get to her? where in -- where else would that have come from? who else but this conspiracy, these defendants, was leading anyone to believe your doctor does not know what they are talking about? scientists cannot agree. that was one of the really horrendous things about this, was that it took the natural family protection system, where family members would try to protect another, and it disarmed them. because how does a family member -- mr. geraghty: your honor, this is all speculation. it is not in evidence. the court: how does a family member know more than these scientists? and if they cannot agree -- and it is been years now, and it is still this open debate -- how do you know, sister, husband? how do you know? they do not know. and they disarm what should have been a natural protection system. smokers of psychological crutch itself, self-rationale to continue smoking. so she went long stretches in an irrational way without even trying, which is screaming evidence that this had an impact on her. does that mean, okay, she is got no responsibility? no. but does it mean they are responsible here too? yes. failed quit attempts. a, you have addiction and you have a conspiracy that is piggybacking on addiction and denial so that when someone does try to muster the strength to quit, they have got this unending, hammering message that there really is no reason, wait and see, in their ear, and everybody around them using the same product. did it work on her? well, her quit attempts were not very energized. could it just be because i'm just doing it for donald? could be. but what is more persuasive and more convincing when you look at the power of the message, the aim of the message, and that she did exactly what they hoped? do not try, and when you do, do not sustain. do not want to lose one cigarette a day. and she stayed on the defendants' money train all the way until it was too late, and to die. she is a cigarette company success story. now, i want to finish going through this on a couple of points, and i will save some time here. there is a -- there is a issue in here where it talks about the fault and the comparative fault. and the judge will instruct you on that law. but this is one of those times where, at the end of the evidence, i want to make a suggestion to you. and at the end of the day, what i say to you or the other lawyers say to you is not evidence. and you use your collective wisdom and your fairness to do what is fair and right and reasonable under the circumstances. but i do feel compelled to make some suggestion. and i would suggest on that, where you look at the percentages of fault, that it be divided up twenty percent to my client. remember, you heard the instruction from the court about you factor in when they are young, when they start, that started this whole train running. an addiction cannot be taken out of any of this story. and she was young, 13, 14 years old, when you get hardwired into the brain. and on the other hand, what do we have? well, we have two defendants, which actually one of them deals with two more, that it merged in with them. the american tobacco company and brown & williamson for which rj reynolds' responsible. and if you take those four and my client and just made that even, which i suggest is not even, but if you did, that is twenty percent and eighty percent, when you total those that are responsible for altogether. and then the last part of that is the part about the damages. and i -- you saw from the instruction, the punitive damages, are they warranted, is it this phase? it is not this phase. if you find we met our burden of proof and find punitive damages are warranted here for the things that they have done, then we will come back and ask you for one more day to try to accomplish that which we have set out to do in this case under the law, to get to the point of trying to deter and lay out that plan. now is not the time. on this phase, i'm going to talk to you about the damages to donald mcmannis. and in that context, here's what i would ask you. and again, what i tell you on that, these are ultimately your decisions. but i would be remiss if -- i feel, if i did not give some suggestions to you to help in the process, to be added into the pot of processing all this information when you go back and do the all-important job of deliberating. and let me start the beginning of that with a very brief explanation. those damages that are compens-- not punitive damages. compensatory damages do not -- what that has to do with, is not how -- the proper framework is not how much are you going to get. the proper framework is how much was taken, what is a reasonable value of your loss in what is called a wrongful death suit, for the loss of the companion and the suffering that it has left him, for 26 years. it is been 20 years. and the life expectancy was 6.7. so six to seven years to go. and you have to look at it as a couple things. we do not come back a few years from now and do an update. this is a verdict for all time. so we have got to get it right today. and, we have to view the evidence in this specific case, and the circumstances of this specific case, because we are talking not about someone who had a lousy marriage, but an adoring relationship. we know that. we heard about how his sister -- barbara's sister said, mr. mcmannis was a lost soul, withdrawn, and isolated. you heard, undisputed, he fairly quickly sold the marital home to move out of it. and that they had an adoring, devoted relationship to one another. those are circumstances. so it would be a different set of circumstances if you had somebody that was, you know, really bickering and had separations and things. we do not have that. we also have a man that now it has been 20 years and has lost his soulmate and has not even dated. and he is withdrawn and isolated, rather than in the golden years, having his wife there to share this time. those are part of the circumstances that have to be weighed in looking at this. and we also have to look at the value of time. and the value of time, what do i mean by that? we are talking about 20 years, past, and reasonable predictions of six to seven years into the future. it could have been more or less. no one knows for sure, but that is the evidence to be considered here. and when you put that together, we do not live life in chunks. we do not say, okay, i wake up and it is two days later, unless someone's in a coma. we live life moment by moment, hour by hour. so to look in that time in the context of the value of time and try to put some reasonable perspective on it, i would suggest, is one method to look at this. the other point that i want to make is that we have to look at this also in the circumstances that are part of his suffering, that are unique to him in this case, but they are this case, which was that the -- once that -- after she had died, and in the suffering in those months after she was diagnosed with a lung cancer to the point that she died, and then going forward, people have to process their grief and their loss. and this was a loss of great value to him. something -- his greatest treasure was taken. under circumstances where he has to process, in his grieving and his going forward, the helplessness that he felt to this product. the helplessness that he felt to cigarettes. mr. geraghty: your honor, i would object. that is not a proper basis when considering compensatory damages. the court: overruled. mr. geraghty: move to strike. the court: that is part of his grieving, is he does not start fresh after she dies, and forget, and the things that he has with him, going forward from her death, is the helplessness that he felt with the product that ultimately led to her death. and the information that he is learned that is part of his processing of his grief, about what was going on that he did not know about at the time -- mr. geraghty: your honor, objection. that calls for speculation. the court: sustained. mr. mitnik: i would suggest to you, if you take the circumstances of this particular case under this evidence that we are here in this courtroom on -- not some other case. this -- that if you took $10 an hour over the -- including the 20 years in the past, and the 26 to 27 years left, according to the life expectancy tables, and put it for both defendants, rj reynolds and philip morris, as a reasonable measuring stick, that that would be a reasonable way to look at it. and if you take that over the time frame we are talking about, that is a -- total, including both defendants -- that is a total of $5 million. and i would suggest to you, that is a lot of money. but this case is not about how much you are going to get. this case is about what is the fair value for what was taken? and i suggest to you, under the unique circumstances of this case, that that is fair and that is reasonable. thank you. i'm going to save a little time. wait one second. now, the last part of it -- you are going to have a jury stretch. i say thank you and i -- kind of fits and starts here. is the last part. and do we have -- can you pull that instruction for me? you are going to be -- we are going to be asking you to find -- and this has a bit of a different burden. remember, i've talked extensively about the proper burden of proof. more persuasive, more convincing. when now we are talking about are punitive damages warranted under the evidence in this case, and the law that the judge gives you, i want to talk to you briefly about that law. but the punitive damages, under these circumstances, have to be by the clear and convincing evidence. can you give -- here it is. clear and convincing evidence. this is a higher burden of proof before we can establish that punitive damages are warranted. and it ought to be. it is a serious matter. and clear and convincing is greater -- is -- differs from greater weight of the evidence. it is more compelling and more persuasive. it is the -- again, the full force and effect of the entire evidence in the case -- i'm sorry, in contrast, clear and convincing evidence is evidence that is precise, explicit, lacking in confusion, and of such weight that it produces a firm belief or conviction about the matter at issue. that is the burden for us to prove to you that punitive damages are warranted in this case. and here's the factors that you look at on if punitive damages are warranted in the circumstances of this case as -- as, if we prove these things -- as -- and here's the purpose of them -- to punish and deter, as punishment and as deterrents to others. that is what i'm asking. that is the other significant part of us being here. punitive damages are warranted against the defendants if you find by clear and convincing evidence -- i wanted to tell you that first so you can be using that lens to listen to the circumstances -- if the conduct was so gross and flagrant as to show a reckless disregard of human life or of the safety of persons exposed to the effects of such conduct. that is clear. that is convincing. that is precise. that is exactly what they did. the conduct showed such an entire lack of care that the defendants must have been consciously indifferent to the consequences. how could it be otherwise? they knew it was causing cancer. and they set out on this, not just individually, but an industry-wide pool-your-money-and-resources conspiracy to get people to keep smoking in a holding strategy by deception. you saw from the evidence they are masters of deception, and they did it for money. and they did it knowing the consequences. how could that be -- not be -- how could that be any more clear. where is the rest? the conduct showed such an entire lack of care that the defendants must have wantonly and recklessly disregarded the safety and welfare of the public. how can we answer that question by any other means than yes, with the clear and convincing, precise evidence we presented. the conduct showed such reckless indifference to the right of others as to be equivalent to an intentional violation of those rights. this evidence is crystal clear. they did every one of those things. in determining entitlement, you also may consider similar harms suffered by other persons not parties to this lawsuit in assessing the reprehensibility or wrongfulness of the acts. and that is why we have put in evidence of the -- now up to nearly a half a million people die every year in the united states. and way back in the '50s, early '50s, is when they hatch this plot. right when those sales were coming down hard, nosediving. the consumption graph, whichever one you use, was nosediving. and they got together at the plaza hotel, way back when, and they did not say what are we going to do to stop this. they said, would not we be wonderful if we were the first to come up with a cancer-free cigarette and we got to create doubt and still fears. and they ultimately said it was never designed. it was a victory. it was a whole new strategy. and they celebrated how well it worked 20 years later and then poured the fire on going forward, attacking the surgeon general when he tried to say that. undermining faith. going off the air when ads and public service announcements were. anything to keep people smoking and keep the money coming in. not reasonable money from like a cigar product, where someone is using it reasonably. but from that non-stop-type usage that drives the sales through the ceiling that was driven by addiction because they were now in the business of selling nicotine, an addictive drug. and while they tried to get the fly in the ointment out, which is the disease -- they would love to get a healthy cigarette. one thing you do not hear -- see is they are not taking the addiction out. and you heard the evidence. mr. geraghty: your honor, i would object and move to strike that. improper argument. the court: over -- i'll sustain that objection. mr. mitnik: you heard evidence that they, from way back, could produce it with nicotine levels so low they were not addictive -- mr. geraghty: same objection, your honor. mr. mitnik: it goes to reprehensibility. the court: -- from way back, and they can grow it without it. but while the disease is the fly in the ointment, the addiction is the secret sauce. and punitive damages are warranted because that is the set of circumstances today. and you saw the evidence. while we sit here in court, rj reynolds' web site is still trivializing addiction, saying it is not the thing that causes harm. it is just the burnt tobacco, creating this gap between the true culprit, the catalyst that kills the nicotine, and the cigarette, creating the illusion of safety for teenagers today. thank you. (plaintiff's rebuttal closing argument) mr. mitnik: okay. i've got some replowing territory here, and i'm going to be -- i apologize to madam court reporter, i've got to move fairly quickly here, and bear with me, i'm going to talk a little fast. i have more to say than i have time to say. first of all, i want to start with the law. i'm glad i get to get up and have the last word so i can point this out to you. number one, they showed you, on the concealment, this part, and left this part out. and it is the essential part. and by not putting on it on the elmo does not change the law. so let us see what the law is. in order to be -- and this is on plaintiff's claim for concealment. legal cause, a legal cause, which i showed you both of these. and then it says, in order to be regarded as a legal cause of mrs. mcmannis's death, the concealment by rj reynolds and/or philip morris need not be the only cause. and it may be a legal cause of her death, even though it operates in combination with the act of another or some other natural cause or some other cause. so the fact that she may have some choice left in the matter and is not a robot, does not change the fact that it is a legal cause, so long as it contributes and in rather than some trivial or unsubstantial way, but in a meaningful way. number one -- and we have certainly shown that. the switch to filters alone shows that. switching to filters at the precise time. and they say, she did not say that she switched because of that. she is not here. it is a wrongful death claim. she cannot come in here and tell you why. but what we do know is -- what we do have is some evidence that helps us answer the question. the evidence is that people would have to, quote, remember the word compensate for the filters. and what they would have to do, because they were addicted, was have to suck harder -- mr. weaver: objection, your honor, facts not in evidence. mr. mitnik: it most certainly is in evidence. the court: that they would have to compensate, and that they were smoking harder to get it in, and that they were being promoted and touted as safer. so they are being promoted as safer. she switches, at the time this information is coming out, from a product that she is addicted to and according to them is enjoying wonderfully, to something now that has a something on the end of it that makes you have to go, (indicating) harder to get it. i guess it could be a big coincidence. but she would be a group of -- you saw the evidence -- millions who switch for that very reason and just be that one odd person out. it is possible. but it is it likely? what is more persuasive? so, no, she cannot come in here and answer the question personally, but we have got plenty of evidence to suggest that was not just a big coincidence. next on the law, they suggested on the punitive damages, and showed part of the instruction. and again, i will show you the rest of the law. they said the conduct causing mrs. mcmannis's death was so flagrant and -- as to show a reckless disregard for human life, safety of others, in effect -- exposed to the effects of such conduct. the law is clear that in assessing whether punitive damages are warranted, that you look to -- not just to mcmannis, but harm to others. there is an instruction on it i showed you before. and it talks about disregarding the safety and welfare of the public, not just of mrs. mcmannis, and reckless indifference to the rights of others. so it is clearly harm that they have done to others showing that callous, reckless disregard to show punitive damages are warranted, including the continued marketing to teenagers today. today. still selling an addictive product to youngsters when the addiction can be fixed. knowing they are starting, and all of the data shows, thinking they are going to stop and not be hurt, and not appreciate the seriousness of this addiction, all the while the defendant, rj reynolds, putting on their web site today, nicotine -- can you pull that up while i'm talking -- that nicotine is not a problem. nicotine in tobacco products is addictive but is not considered a significant threat to health. and it is the smoke inhaled from burning tobacco which poses the most significant risk of disease. separating into this artificial void that you can put all the additives in. you can put all of the things they have done in. you can put in all of the children smoking in. you can put in whatever you want in this convenient gap because, by golly, this nicotine addiction stuff does not have anything to do with what is hurting you, kids. punitive damages are warranted. sixty years ago, they did it to barbara mcmannis. and they are still doing it today. the difference is, when there was this scientific breakthrough as to the medical problems, the breakthrough was half the story and they did not know the deep, dark black heart of the -- of the conspiracy was to hide the addiction was causing the disease. that was the change. that was never told to barbara mcmannis. the surgeon general did not even know it. and when you look at the instructions -- can you give me the engle instructions real quick? engle finding. never mind. here, i got it. give me one or the other. mr. weaver: pick one. mr. mitnik: the defendants concealed or omitted material information -- and this is important. these are the findings that are binding in this courtroom; not otherwise known or available, knowing the material was false or misleading, or failing to disclose material facts concerning the effects -- health effects or addictive nature. not otherwise known or available. now, let me talk about the evidence. does -- has there been any evidence in this case that barbara mcmannis knew what they were up to, that she saw all these top secret documents we have shown you here in this courtroom. and would that be material to her to know how they were talking about addiction, how they were talking about rats in a cage, how they were talking about the death and the disease, how they were bragging about how successful they had been, how they called the arm that they use so much, t-i-r-c, and tirc, and ctr at arms as fronts and shields. would that be important and material to know what was going on behind the scenes to somebody growing up through this era? and they say nothing would have stopped her from smoking. well, addiction is a insipidus-type disease, and the longer or deeper you are injured, the harder it is. you get more and more wired into it. and way back, this started -- in 1954 is when the conspiracy kicked off, what is more likely right than wrong and more persuasive, and it would have mattered for her to know the truth about all the additives and things they were putting in to make it as addictive, highly addictive as possible, and all the things they wrote, and had known it way back when it would have been easier and more successful than to say, hey, none of it would have ever mattered. and to suggest, what if somebody was -- got drunk and then wanted to say it was somebody else's fault. let us flip that. what if an adult took a kid and started serving alcohol for profit, and kept doing it until they got addicted, became an alcoholic; how fair would it be for the adult that did that to say it is all the kid's fault? i take no responsibility, it is all his. there are three rules of personal responsibility: one, first and foremost, hold the mirror up. we hear a lot about personal responsibility and free will in america. first rule, hold a mirror up to yourself before you start pointing the finger. my client did that through her husband when we filed this case. second, if you are going to talk the talk, walk the walk. the clients have done it, did not they? and, lastly, do not ever be a stumbling block to someone who was trying to deal with the responsibilities, trying to convince someone there is no reason to try to quit. and one of the most powerful proofs in this case that the conspiracy worked is the completely irrational conduct if you took addiction, piggybacking -- or, i'm sorry, the conspiracy piggybacking on addiction out of the picture, why would she ever go that long without trying to at least back down, cut back, if this conspiracy was not having impact and exploiting the denial that they stuck in there in the kid's brain with addiction? she smoked lucky strikes. i want to -- can you pull up 39? this is important. again, i'm glad i get to get back up. they suggested to you that her sister only said that she did not believe that she -- that barbara would get sick from smoking. and i had told you on the front end that she had said she did not think her sister was and did not think it would happen to her. let us see what -- this is from the videotape that you saw with your own eyes. she did not laugh. she just sort of -- it is not a "ha, ha." like she sort of just commented like it is not going to happen to everybody, and she did not really believe it could be cigarettes, you know. but did you tell her the doctor had told you that it was caused by cigarettes? yes, i did. yes, i did. she did not believe that her sister -- there is the actual proof and what the lawyers say in evidence. and then if you could give me 49, this is the actual transcript. why do you feel that your mom was addicted to cigarettes? all the times that she attempted to quit, she could not. and she chain-smoked. i mean, when she was nervous, she chain-smoked. they want to say, oh, she gets nervous, so you smoke more. that is the drug. and when she was off of work, she chain-smoked. that is the drug. fifty-one. how would you describe her? can you describe it -- that there were any changes in your mom's personality after surgery? she was getting more forgetful. she was a little bit more uptight, seemed a little stressed out. did your dad throw out all the cigarettes and ashtrays? yes. did your mom ever smoke again? not that i know of. she wanted cigarettes. did -- so explain to the ladies and gentlemen of the jury how your mom was able to stop, and if she did just stop and without wanting to smoke. answer: she still wanted to smoke. how did she show you that? how did she bring your attention? she asked me for cigarettes and i would not give them to him [sic]. and do not forget, they say there is no medical diagnosis of addiction. when she was in the hospital, we do not have those records. but what we do know is that they were prescribing repeatedly a nicoderm patch, which is maybe just given to somebody for the fun of it, but is typically given for somebody that is addicted. she is going through chemo and has had her brain scooped out and is still asking for cigarettes. but what is addiction got to do with it, got to do with it? this is just pleasure. the thing about dr. henningfield saying that -- he is not a doctor, so what is he doing in the courtroom talking to you about it? i'm not going to take the time to pull the instruction. but when you get back there, look if it says anything about addiction according to medical doctors or addiction according to dsm. it does not say anything remotely like that. dr. henningfield teaches doctors. he is the one the us military goes through on nicotine addiction. he is the one that the surgeon general of the united states of america goes to, and nida, the national institute on drug abuse. he is the guy that people go to to find out the roots -- that really knows addiction. not someone that dabbles in it in a psychiatric unit when someone happens to come there not for nicotine, that happens to be a smoker too. that is who we brought you. and he assessed it and said she was highly addicted. and all you are doing is assessing it in a court of law. if we were in a hospital suite, that argument might fly. and, by the way, even under the dsm-iv, when you piece together my cross examination with dr. dorce, she said -- she described the difference between dsm-iv and dsm-5. the early one actually talked about someone being addicted under the -- dependency. and she said it took three criteria. and i went earlier through and showed you there were more than three criteria if you were treating it fairly. so if she had been using the one book that did use addiction and done it fairly, she would have had to tell you she was addicted too. and dorce says, very important answer to a jury question -- one of the more profound answers during the trial, surprisingly from her, who is got all these cases for the cigarette companies. she says -- this was mr. geraghty. it was not a jury question. mr. geraghty asked, based on your training, your experience, and your medical practice, based on your review -- you can read it. i'm tired of reading. what is your opinion? that she had -- that the reason why she is smoking, that she had benefits from the nicotine in the cigarettes. even she had to admit that. that is addiction. no matter how much she wants to say no. this is evidence in the case. addiction, to some extent, the argument revolving around free choice is being negated on the grounds of diction addiction. this is how they were talking in private, back in '73. 1980, here's how they talked amongst themselves in private. the entire matter -- our lawyers remind us, the entire matter of addiction is the most potent weapon a prosecuting attorney can have in a lung cancer case. we cannot defend continued smoking as free choice if the person was addicted. today, nicotine can be addictive, but it does not cause harm. remember, dorce said occasionally she found someone in one of these cases to be addicted. but in every single case with the same questions that you have to answer, you have now seen, that are -- and was the addiction a legal cause? every time her answer was -- mr. geraghty: objection, your honor. this was not in evidence. mr. mitnik: it most certainly is. the court: just a moment. every single time she answered the question, no, it did not cause -- was not a legal cause. every time. because this same artificial divide is there between, okay, now -- now it is addictive, but so what. it does not cause any harm. do we need punitive damages warranted? is there justification to give us one more day and come back? so under the facts and the law, we can participate in the process to encourage and motivate change? yes. mr. weaver: objection, your honor. improper argument. the court: yeah. the brands. lucky strikes, in the 1950s. that is the evidence that you heard. that is rj reynolds -- or that was american tobacco. i cannot keep it straight with american tobacco and the other one, brown & williamson. lucky strikes, which is -- they are responsible. in the 1950s. and then she smoked in the '60s raleighs, which is brown & williamson, for which r.j. reynolds was responsible for. and then she smoked winstons and marlboros from the late '60s on. and the testimony was, those were her primary brands. so absolutely these are the defendants in the courtroom. she did smoke some chesterfields when she was sneaking a few out that is not theirs, from way back when, a few cigarettes. but the primary brand she smoked, the defendants are in the courtroom and they are the two primary, largest defendants in the industry and are here for -- mr. weaver: objection, your honor. improper argument. may we approach? the court: no. i'll sustain. mr. weaver: cautionary, please. the court: and why did she smoke? it had nothing to do with ads, would be the suggestion. it is all just a big coincidence. people do not realize typically how effective the ads are. but you have now seen how they talked about it, that clip from marlboro. they are very powerful. these people are not wasting all that money on something that is not effective. pull up 40, please. i'm going to leave that up and just let you all look because i want to flip through some notes. you-all do not need me to just read it. this is testimony from her sister. i'm going to have him pull out some of these just to give you a picture because, remember, i said we had to be oriented to time and place; and it was a different time and place, to see what she would have been surrounded -- barbara mcmannis would have been surrounded with back at the time this was going on, unlike today, what she was surrounded with at the time that we are talking about today. while he is putting them out, withdrawal symptoms. you heard about withdrawal symptoms. how would she even know if she had withdrawal? she did not try to quit enough times. well, you heard the evidence that she had them, and she had them bad when she did. but that is not the only time someone feels withdrawal symptoms. what do you think -- i do not need to ask you what do you think. what did dr. henningfield tell you? the reason it is so important in evidence why someone smokes first thing in the morning, to relieve withdrawal symptoms. that is why they smoke. they are waking up and having the onset of withdrawal from being without overnight. this -- she would wake up sometimes and not make it to the morning and have a smoke in the middle of the night. but when she made it to the morning, every morning, first thing lighting up, that is to relieve withdrawal. there is proof all through the case, every day for 40 years, of withdrawal. maybe there would be a morning, maybe, one morning maybe she did not have a cigarette. let us say i'm going to skip one today, but i'll have one at noon. you have no evidence, ever. i want to cover, before i -- i do not want to run out of time on this, the death issue, because that is a part of our proof. not -- this is by the greater weight of the evidence, more persuasive, more convincing force and effect of the evidence. one thing they said, there is no coughing or blood and no shortness of breath. true. so why do not we pack up and go home? because, a, dr. villa told you, that is hit or miss. it may be there or not. but more importantly, let us leave dr. villa -- hey, we hired dr. villa. so let us put him aside for a minute. i'm not saying reject him because of that. but for purposes of my point, let us put him aside for just a moment. do you think dr. brinson did not know that? do you remember when their expert came in and said, oh -- mr. geraghty: your honor, it is calling for speculation now at this point. mr. mitnik: it is a reasonable inference from the evidence. the court: their own expert said you take a detailed history and you get all this information. remember that testimony? she is come to the hospital. there is no evidence that we have in the records that we have or from the family of shortness of breath or blood. yet dr. brinson signs in the official -- as the attending doctor, in the official hospital records that cause of death was lung cancer. is that truly this big issue the defense is making? and if so, how do we square that? what is the more persuasive evidence here? the suggestion -- the suggestion that you could -- the technology had not changed in 20 years. it is the exact technology in 20 years in medicine, common sense. and dr. villa said, which their doctor came and did not say a word about this, was he was talking about sonography attachments that go on the end of the tube and go in. and that that was not available for him. and that that is what he was talkings about, the distinction. this is making an issue out of something that is totally apples-and-oranges different. but it does not matter because then we hear about the ear. here's another one. let us blame it -- let us draw questions as to the death certificate. and let us blame it on, maybe it came from somewhere else. and in doing so, we hear about one daughter said that there was a cancer on her ear. she did. and the other daughter said it turned out to be a mole. she did not have some screaming melanoma. there, a picture's worth a thousand words. you saw the picture. do you have to cut someone's entire ear off to get it? of course not. but when someone's got a melanoma, you heard, they go get the margins out. they have got to make sure they do not just -- you do not cut it like a mole. you cut a little mole out, and it goes off to the lab. it is either good news or bad. and if it is bad, it is got to make sure nothing is left. and if this was a melanoma, let us use a little common sense, that was so advanced that it ended up going to her brain and killing her, how big of an incision would it be to make sure the margins are clean? and you saw the pictures. there is nothing like that. there was a mole. but once again, we do not need to see what mr. mitnik's piecing together evidence-wise. why do not we go to dr. brinson, the attending physician, who would have, according to their expert, taken a very detailed history and examined her and looked. and he does not say this came from the ear, a melanoma, or anything like that, lung cancer. and in addition, the consent forms to treat say the same. this is not just dr. brinson, the attending. this is dr. brinson that, according to their expert, would have brought in all these consultants and specialists to have examined it and reported back to him and completed other tests, whatever tests need to be done or follow-up tests need to be done. and we do not have a complete chart. but we know what his ultimate conclusion was, and that the undifferentiated non-small cell cancer is large cell cancer, and that that cancer is undisputed comes -- can come from cancer because their own expert said if, indeed, it was lung cancer, this cancer would have more likely than not come from smoking. they said that dr. villa said the death certificate's worthless. he did not say it is worthless. he said sometimes it is done by doctors who do not know anything about the circumstances. but it is a whole different animal when it is the attending doctor. verdict form. can you give me the -- look, i do not want to be gimmicky for all this stuff. and i almost say do not do it, because if it was a little gimmicky, i understand. but i want to make a point. here's the point i'm trying to make. i cannot figure out verbally how to get this point across, in all fairness, without some demonstration. this is the best i can come up with. i cannot put us in a time capsule and take us back into the '50s and '60s. but this is the stuff that barbara mcmannis would be surrounded with. and in here somewhere -- could someone help me -- is -- here's one of these public service announcements. and you heard the difference in the budgets. so, yes, this is going to be out there somewhere. but all of this is here, and this is not even talking about all of the money spent for them hammering away with their projects, coming out of ti and tirc and ctr. they created the point that, remember, strong will, intelligent. well, the strong-willed and intelligent included people like harry reasoner that was reporting on it. mr. geraghty: your honor, i would object -- the court: sustained. mr. mitnik: the thing about her, mr. mcmannis said, the family heard that they were -- that her father died of a heart attack and stroke back in the '60s, and it was from smoking. and that is his testimony. however, you also heard the testimony laying the circumstances out from dr. proctor. they were still struggling about lung cancer back then. this whole issue of heart attacks and strokes did not come up until later from smoking. so i do not know whether mr. mcmannis -- sometimes -- i can tell you sometimes people look back in time and transpose information looking back in time from what you know today. but i do not know. that was his testimony. but here's what i do know. i do know that if they were told -- mr. geraghty: your honor, i would object to him saying "i know." mr. mitnik: i said "i do not know." mr. geraghty: or "i know" or "i do not know." mr. mitnik: i'll leave out an "i know." i do not know. that is the honest answer. i do not know. but i do know, this is one part and the evidence shows -- here we go. that is where i said i know -- that the evidence shows, is that mrs. mcmannis, out when her sister, years later, had copd and told her it came from smoking, she did not believe it. does that make sense? no. does it sound like addiction? yeah. does it sound like addiction all by itself? no. it sounds like addiction together with a very powerful conspiracy hammering away at doubt, doubt, create doubt, doubt, create doubt, scientists and your sister, how would you know. we are years, '80s, and they still cannot agree. how do you know where your doctor -- that is just one more person saying the same nonsense that is being said since '64 when the surgeon general said it. does that ever happen but for this conspiracy? just common sense. swimming in different pools. that was one of the analogies. this pool is not different. that is the pool she was swimming in, (indicating). there is no dispute she swam through the pool of the cigarette controversy era that was totally made up. there is no question she switched to filters. there is no question she smoked the most popular brands. there is no question she smoked primarily their brands that were highly advertised. there is no question that she went years without trying to stop, which makes no sense if you take the conspiracy out. not try? there is no question that she smoked to the point of no return. that is nonsensical if you take addiction and the conspiracy and the fraud out of the story. so she was a success story for the industry and fits to a t what they were -- their aim of the conspiracy was. they had an aim, and then there was an outcome, and they are masters at influencing outcomes. and it is just a big coincidence? that her outcome was exactly what their aim was. could be. does that make more sense? is that more persuasive or convincing? the court: about five minutes, counsel. mr. mitnik: okay. additional evidence that you saw. the court: and did you hear, sir? mr. mitnik: i'm sorry? i did. five minutes. yes, ma'am. i'm sorry. i did not mean to ignore you. i'm just... the court: okay. mr. mitnik: what are you trying to do? what do you all want? i've got five minutes. what do you all want? dr. dorce talked about there were some questions they brought up about -- let me hush. there is virtually no evidence -- this is out of the ftc report, 1967. no evidence that the warning statements on cigarette packages had any significant effect. even during the january, february '96 [sic], the first two months the warnings appeared on cigarette packs, cigarette sales were higher than they had been during the same months of the preceding year. you want to see screaming evidence and the power of that industry and this fraud, and this conspiracy and the power of nicotine addiction? take a look at that. on every cigarette. and more sales. that could be that we have got a lunatic society that was just all suicidal, or it could be -- mr. geraghty: your honor, i would object to the comment, your honor. improper. the court: -- or it could be what they did and kept -- they did not just say, gosh, we will try it for ten years, it did not work. no, their internal documents bragged in 20 years how well it was and geared back up, and they kept spending all that money for 50 years. i think it worked. and it is my client's wife who did exactly what they wanted. hers is just a coincidence. had nothing to do with that. it is just a by god, she could not get enough of that smokey stuff. you cannot substitute pleasure for addiction or disclosure of truth. verdict form. i would ask you to go through this with the seriousness of heart and the respect for the process that you have given these proceedings. did you find barbara mcmannis had lung cancer, that she was addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, and that the addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine was a legal cause of lung cancer? this is not a situation where we have a doubt campaign, because this is not a criminal case. this is a case where we have what is more persuasive, more convincing, what makes more sense, what is more likely right than wrong. i would suggest strongly we have met that burden. yes. please state whether barbara mcmannis's -- what is -- whether barbara mcmannis's smoking each defendant's cigarettes containing nicotine was a legal cause of her death. yes. yes. they were her primary brands, and included in the '60s and the '50s. the percentage of fault, i've already gone through that with you, that i would suggest, and i gave you my reasons for the suggestion. please -- and please state whether the concealment or omission of material facts about the health effects or addiction, either one -- if you find they did not tell the truth about addiction and concealed the truth about the power of nicotine addiction, and that that would have contributed to the circumstances that got her hooked, that leads to yes. even without the conspiracy. then add in the evidence that the, in all likelihood, facts show actions speak louder than words. her actions suggest they did have an impact on her. and i would suggest the answer is clearly, under the burden of proof, yes, yes. whether the concealment -- you can have two of them. there is the concealment, and then the agreement to conceal. and the answer, for the same reason, is yes. those two questions, if you answer yes to, then we have the opportunity to talk about punitive damages being warranted, and only if those are answered yes. what is the total amount of damages? i've talked to you about that. in determining the total amount of damages, you do not make any reduction for any fault. that is a matter that the court follows the law on. and then under the circumstances. and i would suggest to you, under this evidence, it is significant and it is important to reach this last question, and that the law justifies it. the answer -- i skipped some for the sake of time and i'm being told, and he is right, the answers should be yes to all of them on this evidence. and if the answer is yes, then we reach the question, under the circumstances of this case, state whether you find clear and convincing evidence that punitive damages are warranted against each defendant. and you have seen the evidence here. it is clear and convincing that what they did falls under those descriptions of the kind of conduct that warrants punitive damages and that when somebody does these things and continues to say things on their web site like they say, that punitive damages are warranted, when they are still marketing to youth today, that punitive damages are warranted and that by finding yes to this, i'm asking you-all to give us one more day. and that is it so that we can lay this out so that this trial where we are involved in this process permitted under the law, proven by the -- not just walking in here and saying it, but under the law the judge gave you and the evidence that we presented provides an opportunity to make a step that we can talk about in more detail if we get there tomorrow. the court: sir, your time is up. mr. mitnik: okay. can i -- yeah. i'm being told i just misstated something. can i just correct this piece right here on the law? the court: okay. mr. mitnik: where it says, if you say -- answer no to question two, four, and five as to both defendants, your verdict is for the defendants and you should not proceed further except to sign and date this verdict form and return it to the courtroom. so i'm asking you to deliberate on this seriously. mr. prysock: the second part. mr. mitnik: and if you answer yes as to any of questions two, four, or five as to either or both defendants, please proceed to answer question six and then answer seven as to that or those defendants -- that that is the essential gateway to make this all happen.