mr. rosenblum: accept your invitation. thank you, your honor. good morning, ladies and gentlemen. i'm going to speak to you first, as the court has told you, then mr. alvarez is going to speak to you about some of the different issues in the case. what i want to talk to you first about are the first three questions that you are going to be asked to answer. after the court reads you the instructions on the law, you are going to get 3128 a form. it is called the verdict form, and it has some questions on it. and what i'm going to be talking to you about now are those first three questions on the verdict form, which i'm going to go through with you, and they relate to the issue of class membership. you may recall in the opening statements we talked about the fact that the first thing you have to decide in this case is whether or not carmenza merino was a member of the class. and in order to do that there are three questions you are going to be asked. and before i go through those questions with you, i want to talk to you about what class membership is not about. and it is not about the following: it is not about fault of any party. it has nothing to do with awareness of the health risks of smoking, nothing to do about that. so what you just saw, the 30-minute presentation that you just saw about all these reports and all these articles -- and mr. alvarez is going to address that in his portion -- that has nothing to do with the first three questions that you are going to answer. because whether or not carmenza merino was a 3129 member of the class has nothing to do with what she knew, what she believed, what she thought. it has nothing to do whether people can quit smoking. it has nothing to do with whether she bears responsibility for smoking. and it has nothing to do with whether or not she ever in her life saw or heard anything from a tobacco company. that has nothing to do with what we are going to talk about. so the first question that you are going to be asked to answer is this: "was smoking cigarettes a legal cause of carmenza merino's oral cancer?" and what that is essentially asking you is, did smoking cause her cancer? so let us talk about that. you heard from dr. califano, who is an otolaryngologist from johns hopkins. he is devoted his entire professional career to head and neck cancer. that is all he is ever done is head and neck cancer. and i'm not going to go through all of his qualifications. we talked about that. you saw him. you heard him testify. and he told you some very important things, many of which are not disputed, about 3130 oral cavity cancer. and i say oral cavity cancer because that is an important point that we are going to talk about in a moment. he told you that 95 to 99 percent of oral cavity cancers are caused by smoking cigarettes. now, if i stopped right there and i said nothing more to you and i said, what is the probability that carmenza merino's oral cavity cancer was caused by smoking cigarettes, just knowing that 95 to 99 percent of the time it is caused by smoking, there is no question that it was caused by smoking. and what the court is going to tell you about our burden of proof, what we have to prove to you is that we have to prove our case by what is called the greater weight of the evidence. as you heard, this is not a criminal case. no one has to prove anything beyond a reasonable doubt. that does not apply here. it is the greater weight of the evidence. what is more likely than not? 51 percent. what is more likely than not? is it more likely that smoking cigarettes caused her cancer when we know that 95 to 99 percent of the time it does? but we are not just resting on some 3131 statistical association. we are not just saying to you, well, wait a minute, 95 to 99 percent of the time it is smoking and your job is done. that is where we start, but there is more to it. there is no dispute that her cancer was in the oral cavity and that therefore 95 to 99 percent of the time it is caused by smoking. but dr. califano also told you about the specifics and the characteristics of her cancer that tell you why it was caused by smoking, in addition to the fact that 95 to 99 percent of the time they are caused by smoking. we know that it was well-differentiated. you have heard about what that means. you know that it was keratinizing. these are things that all tell someone like dr. califano, who has been doing this exclusively his entire career, head and neck cancer, that this was caused by cigarette smoking. and he knows her smoking history, one to two packs a day for approximately 32 years. and so we could stop right there and say you can answer that question, the first question, yes. was it a legal cause? was her smoking cigarettes a legal cause of her oral cavity 3132 cancer? but we have to talk about something else because it is been raised in this case, and that is the human papilloma virus. and i'm going to talk to you about the evidence about that, but before i do we need to point out a couple of things that are actually very important before we even talk about whether or not the human papilloma virus had anything to do in this case. start with this. there is no evidence in this case that she had hpv. let us start with that. it is a nonstarter. we do not start with the proposition that we know that carmenza merino had hpv, therefore, we must now consider whether or not that hpv contributed in some way to her cancer. we start the opposite. we start with there is no evidence in this case that she had hpv, because she was not tested for hpv. so we cannot say that she even had hpv. it is a nonstarter and the discussion can stop there. but it does not. in order to determine that she had -- even had hpv, before we even talk about all the reasons why it is completely inconsistent with hpv, it requires complete speculation on your 3133 part. you are going to have to speculate about a lot of things that are not in evidence. and his honor, judge cueto, is going to tell you that you cannot do that. you are not allowed to speculate about matters that are not in evidence. but this is what it requires you to do. we do not know when she got it. we do not know where she got it. we do not know how long she had it. we do not even know what type of hpv she had. and why is that important? because everyone admits, including the defense witnesses, that most types of hpv are noncancer-causing. the vast majority of them do not cause cancer. and we do not even know what type of hpv she had, if she had hpv at all. but we brought you dr. westra, who is an expert on hpv in the head and in the neck. and i emphasize in the head and in the neck because i'm going to end up talking to you in a moment about another witness that you heard from the other day, dr. felix, who does not specialize in hpv of the head and of the neck. and i'll explain to you and i think you will remember what it is he did specialize in. 3134 i'm not going to go through all of dr. westra's qualifications. you probably remember him. he is probably the world's leading authority when we talk about hpv as it relates to the head and neck. he has done tons of research on this. he has published extensively on this. he has studied this virtually his entire career. and both dr. westra and dr. califano told you the same thing, that number one, if cancers in the oral cavity can be caused by hpv, if they can, because you will remember there was some discussion by them that some of these are misclassified because of the location between the oral cavity and the oropharynx, et cetera. if it occurs it occurs between 1 to 5 percent of the time. so i go back to what i said before. if i stopped right there you would say that 95 to 99 percent of the time it is not hpv, and we could stop right there based on the greater weight of the evidence, what is more likely to have happened here, and there is no question that if we get beyond the problem that she does not even have hpv and it has not been shown that she even has it, we then say, okay, if you want to say 3135 maybe she has it, there is a 95 to 99 percent chance that it is not hpv, this tumor that she had in the oral cavity. it is the wrong cell type. it is in the wrong location. it is keratinizing. you remember from the pathology report this discussion of hyperplasia versus dysplasia. what that basically means is in the pathology report the pathologist wrote "hyperplasia," which was described to you as an inflammation or a thickening of the tissue, a completely benign finding, a benign finding as it relates to the sample where it says suggestive of human papilloma virus. it did not say dysplasia. and you have heard the evidence about the difference between those two. dysplasia basically means pre-cancerous. it is a red flag. we have to look at this. that is not what this says. johns hopkins does not even test oral cavity cancers for hpv because it is never found. you do not find it in the oral cavity. they do not even test for it. so i mentioned i was going to talk to you about dr. felix, and i'd like to do that. couple observations about dr. felix. if this 3136 were a cervical cancer case dr. felix may have been the right person to talk to you. he certainly knows a lot about cervical cancer, and he developed or assisted in developing a vaccine for it. he has certainly studied and there is no question that he knows cervical cancer. he is not a head and neck pathologist. he is not even the most qualified person at his facility to come here and testify, because he told you there are pathologists that he works with at his facility that specialize in head and neck cancer, that specialize in head and neck cancer. and that is not him. he does not specialize in head and neck cancer, which, of course, begs the question, well, you know, why was dr. felix called as a witness? well, he is never testified that a cancer was caused by smoking in a tobacco case. he admits that eighty percent, this is his statistic, he admits that eighty percent plus of cancers in the oral cavity are caused by cigarette smoking. so he will not agree to 95 to 99 percent, but he agrees 80 plus, more likely than not, 51 percent. their own witness tells you there is an eighty percent plus chance that this was not caused by hpv and it was caused by 3137 smoking, because that is what he told you. he admits -- he gives a little bit of a higher percentage. he will not agree to 1.5 percent, but he admits 5 to ten percent of oral cavity cancers are hpv-related. so there is a 90 to 95 percent chance that it is not hpv-related based on dr. felix's own testimony. and of course we talked about the differences in the cell types, most tobacco well-differentiated, most tobacco ones are keratinizing. we know that these were not either of those things, and obviously that weighs against it being hpv. he admits there is no reason to dispute that smoking increases the chance of getting cancer in the mouth by a factor of 2 to 400 percent. and you know where you just heard that, five minutes ago when ms. soto showed you some of the documents, some of the public documents. she showed you two of them, one of which said that the risk of incidence of oral cancer is 4 times greater from smoking. and then she showed you another one that said that the risk of mouth cancer in women who smoke is six times more likely, 600 percent increase in the incidence of 3138 mouth cancer from smoking. that is what the defense just showed you on the slides they presented with you. and dr. felix actually agrees with most of that. he just said it is a little bit less, maybe to two to four times more likely. but those documents said up to six times more likely. he saw the recommendations for working up oral cavity cancer in 2015. you will recall this. and for oropharyngeal cancer, the back of the throat, oropharyngeal, not oral cavity cancer, it was recommended to test for human papilloma virus. for oral cavity cancer you do not test for it. and he told you a lot of other things. one of the things he said was, she was not tested in 1996 because at that time it was just beginning to be understood that hpv could cause cancers of the oral cavity. but you will recall that when he was being questioned by the defense he was shown documents where he said, oh, we have known since the '80s, we have known since the 1980s there is a correlation between oral cavity cancer and hpv. but then he told you, no, she was not tested in 3139 1996 because we were just beginning to understand that. he admits it is possible that smoking cigarettes may have contributed to her oral cavity cancer but he claims if it did it was insignificant. and you will recall one of the last things he said was -- he was trying to cast doubt on whether or not her cancer was relating to the oral cavity. you will recall that at the end of his testimony he said, well, it was really kind of back -- it was really on the back part of her tongue, almost suggesting that maybe it was not the oral cavity, maybe it was the oropharynx. but of course the problem with that is that it is completely one hundred percent undisputed in this case. these are her medical records. there is no dispute. this is where her cancer was. it was in the oral cavity. and i'll tell you who else tells you it was in the oral cavity is dr. blaustein, which i'm going to get to in a moment. so dr. blaustein told us a number of things. first of all, he gave no opinion -- he is an oncologist. dr. blaustein gave no opinion about 3140 what he thinks caused ms. merino's oral cavity cancer. he is a cancer specialist. he did not come in here and refute what dr. califano or dr. westra told you. dr. blaustein did not say, look, i'm an oncologist. i deal with this every day, and i'm telling you that her cigarette was not caused by cigarette smoking. you did not hear him say that. he did not give any opinion about what he thinks caused her oral cavity cancer. all dr. blaustein said was that, i'm reading dr. saldana's report and this is what it says. that is basically what he said. he did not dispute any of the testimony of drs. califano or westra. dr. felix said she could have been tested for hpv. dr. blaustein disagreed, no, she could not have. dr. felix said she could have. dr. blaustein agreed there was a difference in the level of association between the cancers of the oral cavity, which is where ms. merino's was, and cancers of the oropharynx, which is where hers was not. he also confirmed, by the way, there is no question that her cancer was in the oral cavity. that was the first question that mr. olin asked him, and he said that, he 3141 said, no, there is no question. it was oral cavity cancer, just like her medical records say. he said he is not an expert in hpv. and now we get to the final point about hpv, just to put this issue to rest once and for all. so we started with the fact there is no evidence she had it. then we talked about the fact that statistically it is overwhelmingly improbable that she had it. then we talked about all the reasons why it is inconsistent with hpv and we talked about their testimony. but here's what it boils down to, even if she had hpv, even if she did, which we start with the proposition that there is no evidence that she did and you have to speculate about that, but even if she did, dr. califano told you that even if she had hpv, smoking cigarettes was still the overwhelming cause of her oral cavity cancer. this is what the judge is going to tell you about legal cause: "smoking cigarettes was a legal cause of oral cancer if it directly and in natural and continuous sequence produced or contributed substantially to producing the oral cancer such that but for smoking cigarettes she 3142 would not have developed oral cancer." we talked about what our burden of proof is. the answer to the first question, "was smoking cigarettes a legal cause of carmenza merino's oral cancer?" the answer is yes. if you say no to that this case ends, as it says right there. if your answer to this question is no, your verdict is for the defendant and this case is over. they knew, meaning the tobacco industry, and philip morris specifically, they knew about cigarettes causing disease. the ones in red that you are going to see are all philip morris documents. these are all historical documents that are in evidence. "carcinogens are found in practically every class of compound in smoke." "the amount of evidence accumulated to indict cigarette smoke as a health hazard is overwhelming," et cetera. there is no question the industry knew that. second question you are going to be asked: was her addiction to american cigarettes containing nicotine -- was she addicted -- i'm sorry. was carmenza merino addicted to american 3143 cigarettes containing nicotine, and if so, was that addiction a legal cause of her oral cavity cancer? so let me talk to you about what the evidence is on that. so we start with the fact that this is undisputed in this case. this is undisputed. she only smoked american brand cigarettes. you have heard no testimony from any witness who said that carmenza merino smoked colombian brand cigarettes. she only smoked american brand cigarettes. and you heard about the brands that she smoked. so the question -- when you determine whether or not she was addicted, there is no question that if she was addicted it was to american brand cigarettes because those are the only cigarettes that she smoked, and there is no evidence to the contrary in this case to that fact. we know about smoking marlboro in medellín, colombia. you heard about it. she smoked it. her parents smoked it. you heard from her friend alicia upegui who told you that her first husband smoked marlboro back in colombia before they got divorced. you have heard about marlboro 3144 advertising, et cetera. and we showed you a lot of other evidence about marlboro worldwide, including colombia. we know that in a second-grader's yearbook in 1959 there is a promotion or an advertisement for marlboro from an agent selling marlboro. you just saw some slides before i stood up that talked about this discussion about the health hazards of smoking. what message was this sending in the yearbook of a second-grader that there is a marlboro ad in 1959? mr. reilly: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. mr. rosenblum: we have philip morris' annual reports in evidence from 1969. mr. reilly: motion, your honor. (the following discussion was held at sidebar:) mr. reilly: counsel's argument that this is somehow probative is contrary to your honor's instruction about whether or not this can serve as a basis for any liability in this case. yet counsel just said, what message does this send in colombia? that is in opposition to the instruction your honor is going to give this 3145 jury, and it is inconsistent with all the evidence in the case. mr. rosenblum: the defense just stood up and presented a half hour of slides of what happened in colombia, about public awareness of people understanding the health hazards of smoking. i have a yearbook of a second-grader in colombia from 1959 where marlboro is being presented and advertised. and my argument, what message does this send? that is to directly refute the idea that public awareness was being shaped by the articles. public awareness can also be shaped in a yearbook by advertising. the court: all right. overruled. (sidebar discussion was concluded, and the following proceedings were held in open court:) mr. rosenblum: and so we have the philip morris annual reports in evidence from 1969, the number of countries in which the brands are manufactured and marketed by licensees continues to grow. licensees including colombia. you have seen that. we know that marlboro was the greatest success in tobacco history. their annual reports, their overseas division in 1955, their 3146 worldwide sales organization, 150 countries and territories. and of course ms. merino testified. it is your recollection that marlboro had more advertising than by far and away the largest selling cigarette in colombia. and she said, i do not know if marlboro cigarettes or pielroja cigarettes were sold more, which one was sold more, but in the circles where i was the advertising for marlboro were much higher than pielroja. and of course you have seen the video regarding marlboro cigarettes, the greatest success in tobacco history. (video clip was played and taken down to the best of the reporter's ability as follows:) voice: to launch the new marlboro, a revolutionary new package was designed, the now famous flip-top box. the flip-top box was bold, eye-catching. over the years the red roof has proved to be an outstanding logo, and it is now the most famous symbol in the history of advertising. the move in 1954 by philip morris to reposition marlboro was bold and innovative. 3147 this decision, combined with many others along the way, has made marlboro the greatest success in tobacco history. television advertising of cigarettes ended in the u.s. in 1971, but marlboro made a smooth transition to print and outdoor advertising. over the years marlboro smokers have recognized the quality of marlboro and its leadership position, resulting in continued growth. in 1950. (video paused.) mr. rosenblum: we have a technical issue but i'm going to continue going because of my time, your honor. so let me go to the issues. so that talks about marlboro in colombia. we have now talked about that, the advertising, the smoking of american brand cigarettes, because her addiction has to be to american brand cigarettes. now let us talk about addiction. so you have heard a lot about this. i'm not going to go through all of the criteria and all of the things you heard. you heard a lot about it yesterday. i just want to repeat one thing i said to you in the opening statement of this 3148 case when i stood up before you and i said, here's what is not going to happen; what is not going to happen is his honor, judge cueto, is not going to say to you, ladies and gentlemen, in determining whether or not carmenza merino was addicted to nicotine in cigarettes, you must apply the following criteria, or you must look at the following test, you must look at the dsm-5, you must look at fagerstrom, you must look at the national institute of drug abuse's definition. that is not going to happen. addiction means whatever you think it means. but you were brought testimony about certain ways that people think about addiction and certain criteria that you might think applies, but you do not have to apply anything. it is completely up to you in this case what addiction means. and you saw all these things. and i'm really not going to go through them all again. the only thing i really want to mention is two things. number one, you heard from an expert on our side of the case in addiction, and you heard from a psychiatrist on the defense side of the case on addiction, and i want you to just for a 3149 second forget the experts. let us take both of them out of the equation. let us say you take dr. drobes and put him aside and you take dr. kaplan and you put him aside. if a person is sitting at a bar or a restaurant and they are having a conversation with somebody and that person says, look, i want to tell you about a friend of mine. i want to go through all the things that this person -- the way they smoked for 30 years, one to two packs a day, getting up in the middle of the night, leaving church, leaving restaurants, crying and telling her daughter the night before surgery that she cannot stop, smoking after she was diagnosed with cancer of the mouth and continuing to smoke after all those things, trying to cut down but not able to stop, trying to stop once and made a promise to god with her priest that she would do it if her mother would get better. and then that person said, let me ask you a question. do you think that person is addicted? you know, you would not need dr. drobes, you would not need dr. kaplan to come in and explain it to you because the answer would be obvious. 3150 the answer is of course that person is addicted. there is no question about that. and you heard from dr. drobes. and he -- i'm not going to go through all of his qualifications, but he explained to you his extensive experience and he told you that carmenza merino was addicted. he went through some of the criteria. you heard about the fagerstrom test and some of the criteria that one looks at to determine if a person is addicted to nicotine. he went through that with you. she got a 9 out of 10. that means she is very, very high dependence. he talked about the dsm-5, the same test that dr. kaplan talked about. the two of them obviously have a disagreement about that, but he went through these criteria and he told you that she met 10 out of the 11, which is severe addiction. so there is only one witness in this case who has told you that she was not addicted and that was dr. kaplan. every other witness you have heard -- you have heard that the plaintiff believes she was addicted. her daughter believes she was addicted. monica, her other daughter, told dr. kaplan that she felt she was 3151 addicted. you heard that. her friend alicia, who has known her since the '80s, said she was addicted. her brother said she was addicted. dr. drobes said she was addicted. but dr. kaplan disagrees, and so let us talk about dr. kaplan's testimony because i think that there is certain positions that dr. kaplan took that i'm going to talk to you about. when you think about them i just do not know that they resonate as comporting really with common sense. but when you talk about dr. kaplan, we know how he got involved in this kind of work. he met mr. reilly on an airplane in 1997. he began a long and what i say is a profitable relationship with the tobacco industry. he is earned about 1.5 million dollars testifying for tobacco companies. every single time he has testified, every single time, it is either been either that a person was not addicted or, remember, he told you that about a third of the time he says that people are addicted, but then he had to admit when i questioned him that, okay, but even when i said that, i then went on to say the addiction was not a cause of their illness. he refused to acknowledge that she satisfied the criterion 3152 about smoking in bed. remember that one that says smoking in bed was the example? and there is no question in this -- i mean, there is no question in this case she smoked in bed. and he said, no, i could not give her that one either because she did not light the place on fire. but there is nothing in the dsm-5 that even said that that he pointed out to us. it just says smoking in bed. and he would not give her that. you heard about his qualifications. he may be a very, very qualified psychiatrist. but with respect to nicotine addiction, he is never researched it, he is never published it, he is never been consulted. there is a board certification of addiction medicine. he does not have it. he admits that there is no question that nicotine is addictive. he talked about the brains of addicted smokers on autopsy. he admitted that the younger a person starts smoking the more likely they are to become addicted. we know that she started at age 14. and i think he created some cassette tape that you could purchase about addiction. he would not even admit that the definition and diagnosis of addiction is partially 3153 subjective. when he was asked that question about that he said, no, it is completely objective. and then i got up and i said, yeah, but did not you tell me you have to apply your clinical judgment? and does not that make it somewhat subjective? no, it is completely objective. of course you heard about her smoking in bed. and there is no question that that happened. he would not give her this criterion that there is a great deal of time spent using the substance, in this case nicotine. we know that if she smoked a pack and a half a day for 32 years, if she locked herself in a room that means she would have spent 12 and a half years of her life smoking. and at two packs a day over 32 years if she locked herself in a room she would have spent in excess of 16 years of her life smoking. but dr. kaplan would not say that she satisfied that criterion. addiction is a legal cause if it can be said that but for the addiction the oral cancer would not have occurred. but for the addiction, if she was not addicted to nicotine would she have 3154 smoked a pack and a half to two packs a day for 32 years and developed her oral cavity cancer? that is the question. look at what is not in the instruction. you are not going to be instructed anything about choice. judge cueto is not going to tell you that in determining whether or not she was addicted to nicotine in cigarettes you should consider whether she made a choice to smoke. that is not the law. that is not what the judge is going to tell you. this is how it works. addiction causes you to continue smoking, which caused the oral cavity cancer. it directly produced or contributed substantially to producing oral cavity cancer. was she addicted to american cigarettes and was that addiction a legal cause? the answer is yes. if you say no to that this case ends. and that is what it says: if your answer is no, your verdict is for the defendant. you sign and date the verdict form and the case is over. of course philip morris and its co-conspirators knew about nicotine, and i'm not going to go through all this right now. 3155 the last question: was smoking cigarettes manufactured by defendant philip morris a legal cause of her oral cancer? this one is actually i think the quickest because there is no evidence to the contrary on this issue, and i'm going to show it to you. so the question is -- we know the philip morris brand cigarette that she smoked between 1964 and approximately 1982 was marlboro. we know that. and that is undisputed. there is no evidence that that did not happen. there is no evidence to the contrary. the undisputed testimony from dr. califano is that ms. merino's smoking of cigarettes during that time period, and he even backed it up a little bit, he even said late '70s into the early '80s, was a substantial contributing cause of her oral cavity cancer. and when defense called dr. blaustein, an oncology expert, dr. blaustein did not get up here and say, wait a minute. that is not true. that period of time is not enough to cause or substantially contribute to oral cavity cancer. this is the undisputed testimony. there is no question about 3156 this. and what the judge is going to tell you on the law is that in order to be regarded as a legal cause of her oral cancer, smoking cigarettes manufactured by philip morris need not be the only cause. smoking cigarettes manufactured by philip morris may be a legal cause even though it operates in combination with the act of another, some natural cause or some other cause. the reason why you are going to be told that is because you heard that she smoked other cigarettes too. and what dr. califano said was all of it contributed to her smoking. so the fact that ms. merino switched brands in about 1982 to vantage and continued smoking and then went back to marlboro lights later, but the fact that she switched brands does not get them off the hook if you believe that their cigarette smoking substantially contributed to her cancer, which is exactly what dr. califano said. so on the question was smoking cigarettes manufactured by philip morris a legal cause of her oral cavity cancer, the answer to that question has to be yes. there is simply no 3157 testimony or evidence to the contrary. at this time, your honor, i would turn it over to mr. alvarez. mr. alvarez: counsel. counsel. still morning. good morning. i started my opening statement a few weeks ago with telling you that you were going to learn something. i hope you did. i hope two things happened. i hope that you learned something from some high-quality world-renowned experts. and i hope that this process enriched your experience about the civil justice system. and remember i said that i needed lucky six, seven jurors, and hopefully you feel that way, that this was an interesting process. and we really mean that. so thank you. so let me get through this because i only have 45 minutes. okay. so, listen, i do not want to go through the engle findings. the judge is going to read them to you. you know what they are. if she is a class member they apply. you have to follow the law. you have to accept the engle findings. and we know what they are, and the judge is going to read them to you. and this is what 3159 they are. so i want to talk to you about the verdict form. and i'm going to go through the verdict form. there is eight questions on the verdict form. randy went through the first three. you have to answer every single one of those questions yes, or pretty much all of them yes. the first three yes or we go home, we pretty much go home. and i will tell you that we have met our burden on each and every single question. each and every single question we have met our burden. but let me tell you about these because these are very important. this is question four and five. question four is: "did carmenza merino reasonably rely, to her detriment, on defendant philip morris usa's concealment or omission of material facts concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes that would have been necessary to make statements by the defendant philip morris usa inc. not misleading, and, if so, was such reliance a legal cause of her oral cancer?" let me tell you what that means. it is legal 3160 words and what it means is they had a duty to tell the truth and not conceal, okay. if they concealed, and they did, there is an engle finding that says if she is a class member they concealed, if she relied on the concealment, what they did not tell her, because they had a duty to tell her, okay, not conceal, they had a duty to tell, if they concealed information that she relied on, and i'm going to tell you what those statements were that she made in court, we have met our burden of proof on this issue. the second one is basically the same thing but with regards to the conspiracy count. let me tell you what the conspiracy count is. we have a conspiracy count that if any other of the tobacco companies, whether it is reynolds, lorillard, rj reynolds, brown and williamson, liggett, all of those, okay, if they did something, if their advertisement, and they did, did something that she relied on to her detriment, they are responsible for it. mr. reilly: objection, your honor. that is a mischaracterization. the court: come sidebar. (the following discussion was held at 3161 sidebar:) the court: why? mr. reilly: because there is no determination of what the conspiracy consisted of. he is just said that whatever they did we are responsible for. that is exactly what he just said, if they advertised something we are responsible for it. and, in fact, there is no determination of that. and, in fact, there is actually been testimony in this courtroom on what is the scope of the conspiracy. mr. alvarez: you cannot relitigate engle. they have already been found responsible under engle under the conspiracy count. mr. reilly: i'm not disputing the finding. i'm only saying when counsel says this is it, there is no determination on that. mr. alvarez: if she relied on a concealment by any of the other defendants in this case, i.e., smoked vantage because she thought it was healthier, not as dangerous, that is detrimental reliance and they are responsible for that under engle and under the case law. mr. reilly: actually, your honor has actually instructed them on part of this, but, 3162 again, i object because it is an overstatement of what the scope and conspiracy is. and, in fact, they actually got testimony from their dr. proctor on what was the scope of the conspiracy. and he said, as far as advertising was concerned, it was only the failure to report some health risk. the court: overruled. (sidebar discussion was concluded, and the following proceedings were held in open court:) mr. alvarez: may i continue, your honor? the court: yes, please. mr. alvarez: so this is the question: did carmenza merino reasonably rely to her detriment on the concealment or omission of material facts concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes that would have been necessary to make the statements made in furtherance of defendant philip morris usa inc.'s agreement to conceal, not misleading, and, if so, was such reliance a legal cause of her oral cancer? and think about it this way. think about if you have three kids who are up to no good. they are playing with rocks and they are throwing 3163 rocks at cars that go by. one kid throws a rock and hits a car. all three of them are responsible because -- mr. reilly: objection, your honor. this is an inappropriate analogy, throwing rocks at cars. the court: you are getting close to it being inappropriate so be careful. mr. alvarez: so i just want you to get you the concept of what that means, and that is what it means. now, what did they conceal? these are the things that they knew, okay, that they knew, that philip morris knew and had to disclose, okay, that my client did not know. the other tobacco companies formed a conspiracy in 1953 to conceal the health effects and addictive nature of smoking. she did not know that. their co-conspirators hired scientists and doctors to mislead the public about the health effects and addictive nature of smoking. its co-conspirators were misleading the surgeon 3164 general and other public health care authorities on the health effects and addictive nature of smoking. their co-conspirators had studied nicotine and knew it was a highly addictive drug. their co-conspirators studied teenage smoking and knew that at least ninety percent of all smokers started as teens. their co-conspirators knew that fifty percent of all smokers would die from a smoking-related disease. their co-conspirators knew that smoking was killing hundreds of thousands of americans per year. they had a duty to disclose that. they had a duty to tell her. they had a duty to tell the american people. they did not do it. and that is why they are responsible in this case. because they did not come forward and tell the truth. they had a duty to disclose, not conceal. philip morris and their co- -- she did not know that philip morris and their 3165 co-conspirators manipulated the levels of nicotine to keep smokers buying their cigarettes. she did not know that there were over 70 cancer-causing agents in every puff of cigarettes that she was inhaling. she did not know that there were chemicals like arsenic, cyanide, radioactive polonium-210 in cigarettes. their co-conspirators knew that the filters were no safer than nonfiltered cigarettes. their co-conspirators knew that low-tar cigarettes were no safer than nonfilter cigarettes. their co-conspirators purposely misled the public about the safety of filters and low-tar cigarettes so they could keep people smoking. they had a responsibility, a legal duty to do it, to tell the truth. they did not do it, and that is why they are responsible because they did not tell her any of those things. let us talk about the history of the lies. i'm going to talk to you about when she came in 3166 1974 what happened, and i'm going to tell you before that so -- to put things in context what happened, okay. because in 1953 the internal documents, which we have now, talk about how linking cigarettes to smoking and cancer with some smaller companies an opportunity to promote the sale of filter-tip cigarettes, making use of therapeutic claims. it is purely a merchandising and sales promotion proposition. the tobacco companies knew that back then. like i said, the tobacco company industry misled the public about the safety of filters. this is a philip morris document. "the illusion of filtration is as important as the fact of filtration." "winds up smoking more units in order to provide himself with the same delivery which he had before." 1976. "the smoker of a filter cigarette was getting much or more nicotine and tar than he would have gotten from a regular cigarette." no one was disclosing that information. they were touting low-tar filtered cigarettes as a safer alternative. they were telling the 3167 people that. the campaign of doubt and confusion and deceit. "if this committee had not been formed the cigarette industry by now would have been in a deplorable position. the tirc has been a successful defensive operation." smokers -- "we must in the near future provide some answers which will give smokers a psychological crutch and a self-rationale to continue smoking." think about what that means because this is very important. because by casting doubt in the minds of the smoker saying, hey, it has not been proven, we do not know, put a filter on it, we will put filters, it will keep you safe, what are they doing? because if you have an addictive smoker who is smoking and they get two competing information, one from the health care authorities and one from a tobacco company and the tobacco company is saying, do not worry about it, it has not been proven, but even if it is, smoke filtered or low-tar cigarettes, they are completely safe, what does the addicted smoker do? when the whole time they know that is not true, they know that is not true. they know it is 3168 not true. and they had a duty to disclose. they had a responsibility under the law to do it. they did not do it. and that is why they are responsible to this lady in this case in this courthouse today. another document. 1972. "for nearly 20 years the industry has employed a single strategy, to defend itself on three major fronts, litigation, politics and public opinion. while the strategy was brilliantly conceived and executed over the years helping us win important battles, it is only fair to say that it is not nor was intended to be a vehicle for victory." victory, that is how they tout themselves. this is a victory; we fooled people. this is a victory; we keep selling cigarettes. that is all they cared about. they care about profits instead of people. on the contrary, it has always been a holding strategy consisting of creating doubt about the health care charges without actually denying it. that is a confession right there. the most important story is one that casts doubt. 3169 the criteria for selection, for example, a report indicating some factors or factors other than smoking may be involved. one indication that a virus may cause human cancer, whether or not that cancer is associated with smoking. they knew internally the dangers of cigarettes and they deceived the public and public health. 1961. this is interesting. 1961 they do a survey, philip morris, dr. wakeham, who ends up going up the chain of command and heading research, he does the research in 1961 november 19 -- collects it all. he says, "carcinogens are found in practically every class of compounds in smoke. and present technology does not permit selective filtration of particulates of smoke." 1961. but when they submit to the surgeon general in 1963, right before the 1964 report, when they -- the surgeon general says, cooperate with us, tell us, do any of these things cause cancer? look what they say. "none of the chemical substances listed therein to our knowledge has been found by scientific research to be harmful to the health of a smoker in the 3170 amounts reported in smoke." that is not true. that was a lie. they knew about it two years before. and it says, it is not [sic] possible of course to modify the chemical composition of cigarette smoke by use of filtration. i'm sorry, it says, "it is possible of course to modify the chemical composition of cigarette smoke by use of filtration," when they know ahead of time it is not. they had a duty to disclose, not a duty to -- and they concealed. why did they do that? because they know that ninety percent or more of regular smokers start as teenagers, so they have to start looking at teenagers. this is the crop. so high school students. in 1959 56 percent of them, of high school students, and when you break it down by juniors and seniors, if you look at that, in 1959 62 percent of juniors and seniors were smokers. by 1958 it was 64 percent. so think of those numbers, think of those numbers. this is, again, dr. wakeham. this is the applesauce guy. "there is a back log of youth who have refrained from taking up smoking in 3171 face of the report. a substantial number of these can be expected to join with this year's crop of prospects to produce a healthy increase in the number of new smokers." that is all they cared about. this is another philip morris document. "there are three groups where smoker percentages and marlboro shares need to be checked, college students living on campus, young people 14 to 17 age group and men in the military service. young people 14 to 17 to get a reading on the smoker percentage and marlboro share among teenagers not covered in the benchmark study. we recommend interviewing young people at summer recreation centers, beaches, public pools, lakes, et cetera." they knew it. and these are just more documents on how important, how important historically to the tobacco industry, to philip morris young people were. because without the young crops you cannot bear fruit. 1972 document, "some thoughts about new brands of cigarettes for youth market. realistically if our company is to survive and 3172 prosper over the long term we must get our share of the youth market." not one word there about warning people. all they cared about was profits. so here's a study that shows, 1984, that by age 12 9 percent, almost ten percent of smokers of people 12 years of age were smoking, and by 18 it is almost seventy percent. and by 24 it is almost 95 percent. that is how important the youth market is to the industry and to philip morris, because without them they do not get profits. manipulating nicotine and smoke in ph to keep smokers hooked and profits up. "happily for the tobacco industry nicotine is both habituating and unique..." move toward reducing or elimination of nicotine of our products then we shall eventually liquidate our business. listen, they know that what people smoke -- why people smoke is not for the enjoyment or for the taste. it is for the nicotine. people get addicted to the nicotine. people do not stand outside in the rain under cover trying to smoke a cigarette because they enjoy the taste or 3173 they are socializing. they do it because they are addicted. and they now knew it. and they knew it back then. the industry knew it. philip morris knew it. all they were selling was a dose of nicotine. video tech: fifteen used. mr. alvarez: so let us talk about her testimony because i want to put it in context. this is a question that was asked by the court. "between the ages of 14 and 25 did you believe that congestion was the only risk factor associated with smoking and therefore the only need for filtered cigarettes? "answer: yes." and "question: why did you not think about quitting smoking when you first encountered the health warning labels on cigarettes in colombia? "answer: because i was already addicted and i really did not pay very much attention to it. "question: did you believe the labels? did you believe that smoking caused cancer back then? "answer: no." so let us start when she gets here, okay. 1974 she arrives from colombia to miami. she 3174 arrives during the height of the conspiracy. when it is at its most feverish pitch she gets here. that is when she gets here. so here's the testimony: "so in colombia television did not have colombian sponsors for the programs that were shown on colombian television? "answer: yes, they had some that were from colombia and they also had some that were from the united states as well. "question: just to be clear, ms. merino, when you arrived here in the united states in 1974 and until 1985, you never saw any marlboro ads in spanish in magazines, newspapers or billboards? "answer: on billboards, no. in magazines, yes." and these are the types of -- there were many. listen, there is thousands and thousands and thousands and thousands of newspaper, magazine publications. you know, you heard from dr. proctor the amount, the tremendous amounts of money, the hundreds of millions of dollars they were spending a year on advertisement. you had to have been living in the everglades not to 3175 see it, not have electricity, not have a television, not have a right to anything. mr. reilly: your honor, i have to object to this demonstrative. may we approach? the court: sure. (the following discussion was held at sidebar:) mr. reilly: alex put up a collage of exhibits of ads and he represented that they were all after she arrived here in 1974, yet not one of them of them has a warning on it by law as of 1971. so i object to the demonstrative. it is misleading. mr. alvarez: so, judge, the testimony is that -- this is demonstrative -- the exhibits are in there, the exhibits are in evidence. this is a demonstrative to show the types of ads that were there. that is all i was saying, that there were ads out there selling their products. that is all. i was not addressing the issue of the warnings. the court: overruled. but you can address it in your closing. (sidebar discussion was concluded, and the following proceedings were held in open court:) 3176 1 mr. alvarez: may i proceed? 2 the court: please. 3 mr. alvarez: so there were thousands and 4 thousands and thousands of ads, thousands of 5 ads. 6 and when she arrived in 1974 it was at the 7 height, getting to the peak of the conspiracy. 8 mr. reilly: what was that? 9 mr. alvarez: philip morris -- let me talk 10 about philip morris leads the conspiracy. this 11 is the testimony. by 1974 -- they may have 12 started off -- philip morris may have started 13 off as a small company, may have started off as 14 a small company, but by 1974 they were one of 15 the largest. and they had the biggest, best 16 selling cigarette in the world, which was 17 marlboro, okay. 18 and you heard testimony from dr. proctor 19 that by 1974 philip morris was one of the most 20 prominent member of and the leader of the 21 conspiracy. throughout the 1970s and into the 22 next decades philip morris contributed the most 23 amount of money to the council for tobacco 24 research and the tobacco institute compared to 25 the other co-conspiracy. they were number one. 3177 philip morris contributed several hundred million dollars during that time period. philip morris headed the committee of counsel. those were the lawyers that made up from each of the tobacco companies, the committee of counsel were the lawyers. they were the architects of the conspiracy. philip morris headed the committee of counsel, the governing body of the conspiracy from 1970 until it was disbanded. so 1974, here's a perfect opportunity, 1974 she arrives in this country, they had an opportunity, they had an opportunity to reveal the truth and save lives and save her suffering. they had an opportunity in 1974. and what did they do? they chose the wrong thing. they chose to conceal the truth and make profits. that was their decision to make. and they chose wrongly. and people like her suffered for it. and that is why we are here today. 1977. "we provide a product that is an essential commodity in a habitual act. you put a hungry rat in a cage. put a lever in the cage. the rat will push the lever. smoking the cigarette is the lever push." 3178 they associate people in these rat experiments, they are saying, hey, they are just like rats. keep giving them nicotine and they will keep smoking. without the chemical compound the cigarette market would collapse. philip morris would collapse and we would all lose our jobs and our consulting fees. 1977, she is already here. that is all they cared about. bury the adverse results of philip morris. ship all documents to cologne. if important letters or documents have to be sent, please send to home. i will act on them and destroy them. this is philip morris executives. 1977. "we have gone to great pains to eliminate any written contact with inbifo." inbifo was that laboratory, that scientific laboratory that they had where they wanted to do experiments there that they did not want to do here. they did not want the government to find out that they were doing these experiments here. "perhaps we should consider a dummy mailing address in koln for the receipt of samples." 3179 1978. the ctr began as an organization called the tobacco research council. it was set up as an industry shield in 1954. bill shinn feels that special projects are the best way that moneys are spent on these projects ctr as acted as a front. the surgeon general's media event was preempted by an institute first strike news conference. any time, any time that there was news out there about smoking and health what would the tobacco industry do? what would philip morris do? they would attack. they would attack the surgeon general, the department of health, anyone that came out with information that was contrary to their profits, they attacked. yet, yet now it is everybody knew. but back then when she was living here they were not telling people that. a completely 180 inconsistent position than today. but listen -- from 1974 to 1999 let us listen to some of the representatives from the tobacco companies and what they were saying. (video clip was played and taken down to the best of the reporter's ability as follows:) 3180 voice: i'm concerned that people make claims, including those against our products, without adequate knowledge. there has not been the sort of research really that would permit anyone to say that. i certainly would not be in the business if i thought cigarettes were harmful to people. i think it is important that there be a lot of us around who are trying to keep the research honest and open. voice: none of the things which have been found in tobacco smoke are at concentrations which can be considered harmful. voice: but the components themselves can be considered harmful, can they not? voice: anything can be considered harmful. applesauce is harmful if you get too much of it. voice: and to this question, it must be answered, insofar as the correlation between lung cancer and cigarette smoking are concerned, no one knows, it may, it may not. voice: the case is still open. the jury has not come in. voice: it may not be harmful. you are not convinced. 3181 voice: it may be or it may not be. we do not know. voice: we believe our product is not injurious to health. voice: as far as you are concerned, is the surgeon general simply wrong in concluding that cigarette smoking causes lung cancer? voice: i would use the term "misguided." voice: if he is misguided then i take it that your opinion is he is wrong. voice: i was simply trying to be polite about it. voice: okay. but not being polite about it in your opinion he is wrong. voice: dead wrong. voice: smoking does not cause cancer, yes or no? voice: it is not known whether cigarettes cause cancer. it has not been causally established. voice: mr. campbell, you were also deposed and you said, quote, to my knowledge it has not been proven that cigarette smoking causes cancer. this is a rather passive and puzzling approach, especially in light of the consensus, 3182 not by some, but all of the scientific community. will you ever be convinced, and what evidence are you waiting for? voice: yes, i may be convinced. we do not know what causes cancer in general right now so i think that we may find out what causes cancer and we may find out some relationship which has yet to be proven. (video clip concluded.) mr. alvarez: that is the president of philip morris in 1994. so this is what they were telling the american public when she was here, when she was here. so if you have to decide did she believe them, did she believe the information, did she believe them, listen to what her testimony is. "and what were they saying? "that it had not been proven." this is testimony that she gave in this trial. "and did you believe -- at that time did you believe the tobacco companies or did you believe the doctors? "i believed the tobacco companies. 3183 "in other words, at some point did you change your mind about that and start to believe that maybe smoking was bad for you? "answer: yes. "and when was that? "towards the end of the '80s, beginning of the '90s. "so you would have been in your 40s at that time: "answer: yes. "i want to ask you some questions about statements that you may have seen on television. did you ever see the tobacco representatives on television talking about smoking and health? "answer: yes. "and what were they saying? "that it had not been proven that cigarettes were harmful to your health." her words in this courtroom to you. and they wanted you, the tobacco industry wanted people like her to believe that. that is why they were saying that, that is why they were spending hundreds of millions of dollars on the tirc, the ctr, the ti, that is why they were doing that, that is why they were attacking the 3184 surgeon general. (video clip was played and taken down to the best of the reporter's ability as follows:) voice: throughout your tenure with american it was not only american's position, but your position that cigarettes were not injurious to health; is that accurate? voice: through my tenure? voice: yes. voice: yes, that is so. voice: as far as you are concerned, a person is justified on relying on that statement. voice: yes. (video clip was played and taken down to the best of the reporter's ability as follows:) mr. alvarez: that is their words, justifiable in relying on our statements. filters and low-tar cigarettes were a fraud. you heard from dr. proctor. filters are actually worse for you. they actually made you smoke more, made you change your smoking habits, your compensation, you end up smoking deeper into your lungs and getting more carcinogens in your lungs and in your mouth. it is worse for you. 3185 and in 19 -- here it is, in 1982 when she switched to low-tar cigarettes look what the public was doing. it is coming up in the height. she gets it right at the height, in 1982, when she switched to vantage. vantage, so let me tell you something interesting about vantage, because their own internal records talk to you about who is going to buy a vantage cigarette, who is going to buy it. they knew. they marketed it. they studied it. they wanted people who were a little bit concerned about their health to smoke vantage. "many of the vantage group also gives special attention and focus to the filter, which satisfied some important psychological needs. vantage smokers believe that the filter itself is strong enough to catch these impurities. these ideas make them think the end product is a milder and more 'healthier' [sic] smoke." and this is a doral diet. and she also smoked doral. "a terrific taste, and 7 milligrams less 'tar' than other brands. that adds up to 140 milligrams less tars -- for me 980 milligrams less tar a week on my doral diet." 3186 they touted these as healthier. they touted these as better. they touted them as safer, when all the time they knew it was not. and this is her testimony, "and you liked the vantage cigarettes better than you liked the marlboros, right? "it was not that i liked them more. they were less harmful for your health, that is what they said that they were. "question: so what caused you to purchase the dorals? "the doral lights and the marlboro lights because they had low levels of nicotine." "next question: what about the filter made you think you would smoke less cigarettes. "answer: it had a special filter which was not so addicting even though i was already addicted to cigarettes and so i thought i could quit the addiction. well, not quit but just reduce it. "so you thought that filter made the cigarette less addicting; is that correct? "answer: yes." and it continues on. "i accept the part that i changed over to the vantage cigarette to 3187 see if i could reduce somewhat because it was less harmful for your health. i did not change from marlboro to vantage because of the taste. i changed from marlboro to vantage because of the health aspect." video tech: thirty used. mr. alvarez: that is exactly what they wanted people to believe. she believed exactly what they wanted her to believe. she continued to smoke. that is reliance. that is detrimental reliance and that is why they are responsible. and we know now in 2001 when the monograph 13 came out that the whole filter thing was a fraud. the government finally recognized it. "advertisements and promotional efforts were successful in getting smokers to use filtered and low-yield cigarette brands. internal tobacco company documents demonstrate that the cigarette manufacturers recognized the inherent deception of advertising that offered cigarettes as light or ultra lights or as having the lowest tar and nicotine yields." they even fooled the government until 2001. addiction versus free choice. this is internal company documents. "cigarette smoking 3188 is more addictive than using heroin, hooking two-thirds of the people who ever smoke." "the lawyers remind us, i'm told, that the entire matter of addiction is the most potent weapon a prosecuting attorney can have in a lung cancer/cigarette case. we cannot defend continued smoking as a free choice if the person was addicted." their words. and nicorette gum, do you think when nicorette gum came out they would say, okay, good, we will help people, we will be behind this, you know, we will get people to smoke less, you know? what do they do? they attack dow. they attack dow. think about this for a second. i'm going to play this in a second. but i want you to put this in context. this is 1976, she is pregnant with her first child. she is pregnant with her first child, okay. she is smoking. do you really think that if she thought it was harmful to her or her baby she would be smoking in 1976 if she really believed it? play it. (video clip was played and taken down to the 3189 best of the reporter's ability as follows:) (music.) mr. alvarez: is that a smile of a woman who thinks that she is holding a cigarette in her left hand and touching the fetus of her baby with her right that she is harming herself or her child or her unborn child? you think that really that is what she believes? because that is what you want you to believe. but look at the evidence. so on these two questions the answer has to be overwhelmingly yes. because if you do not answer yes to one of these questions we do not get to punitive damages. and punitive damages is what this case screams for. now, the next question is about state the percentage of fault that was a legal cause of carmenza merino's oral cancer that you charge to philip morris and carmenza. let me tell you something. if two people come into the same union together and whatever happens between the two is 50/50 because of equal fault. but when one side does not know all the information then it cannot be 50/50. it cannot be 50/50. and i'm going to suggest a 3190 percentage to you; you can accept it, reject it. it is up to you. but what i suggest is 90 percent philip morris and ten percent for ms. merino. so punitive damages. this is the last question, and i think the most important question, the most important question. the most important question is: "under the circumstances of this case, state whether you find by clear and convincing evidence that punitive damages are warranted against philip morris usa inc." this is really the question of the case. should they be punished for what they did to this woman? that is the question. but you gotta get to the end to answer it. look how reprehensible their conduct is. starting from 1974 when they have a chance to avoid what happened to this lady, when she came here, they had an opportunity to change history for this lady. video tech: ten- minute warning. mr. alvarez: "long-term scientific programs should be carefully planned such that the results obtained should not be able to harm the industry." that is all they care about. do not 3191 harm the industry. do not do studies that is going to come back bad for us. "subjects to be avoided. attempt to relate human disease to smoking." why not? is not that what you are supposed to be spending money on? they tell me, they say, hey, listen, we did the green monster. well, the green monster only had a handful of articles or studies that showed an association. and what happened to those authors? they were not renewed. "if, however, the results with nicotine are similar to those we have gotten with morphine and caffeine, we want to bury it." you have to punish corporations who do things like that, who bury things, who lie to people, who are deceitful to people, who harm people intentionally. they know their conduct does that. you cannot let it stand. "today's teenager is tomorrow's regular customers." that is all they cared about. "the smoking patterns of a teenager are particularly important to philip morris. success of marlboro red during its most rapid growth period was because it became the brand of 3192 choice among teenagers who then stuck with it as they grew older." they had a plan. these were smart people. they had a plan. they executed the plan. they had the money. they had the smarts. they had all the power in the world. and they went and they harmed this woman. and that is why we are here today, for justice, to make things right. and that is your job. your job is listen to evidence and do justice. and they came in front of congress and they lied to the american people. they not only lied to her, they lied to all of america. and you have got to punish that. that cannot stand. mr. reilly: objection, your honor. the court: overruled. mr. alvarez: so to answer this question, the answer is, under the circumstances of this case state whether you find by clear and convincing evidence that punitive damages are warranted against philip morris usa inc., the answer is yes. and make that check mark the biggest check mark, the biggest check mark of all eight of the check marks. okay. so now you have to decide what is fair 3193 compensation in this case for this woman. and this is the question, and this is actually question number seven. it says, "what is the total amount of damages sustained by carmenza merino as a result of her oral cancer for her pain, suffering, disability, physical impairment, disfigurement, mental anguish, inconvenience and the loss of capacity for the enjoyment of life sustained in the past and to be sustained in the future?" look, there is no book that we pull out and you say, these are her losses, this is what it is. it is up to you to decide what is fair and reasonable. but you know what she suffered. and i'm not going to overstate it or overplay it because you were witnesses to it. you saw her testify for almost a -- couple days. you saw how she struggled to even speak. you heard how she struggles to even eat. she is deformed, distorted, mangled and manipulated -- mutilated. and they did it to her. and they have to be held responsible for it. she is lost the character of her voice. she has not been with a man since she was divorced in the early 2000s. her loss is enormous. every 3194 time she looks in the mirror, every time somebody looks at her face, every time she speaks a word, she is reminded. so it is up to you. i'm going to suggest a number. and you could agree with that number. you may say, alex, it is too low, we think it should be more or you could say, well, i think it is too much, you could lower it. it is completely up to you within your sound discretion. but we would suggest for this enormous loss that she suffered and will continue to suffer for another 22 years, for another 22 years, 16 million. and the last thing i want to do is thank you. and thank you for having trust in me. thank you, your honor. mr. alvarez: thank you. i want to go over -- there is a lot to talk about. i've got 19 minutes. i wish i could talk to you about every single point and rebut every single point, but i just do not have time for that. so some of the things i want to talk to you about are the instructions on addiction, because it was suggested to you that it has to be involuntary. well, nowhere in the instructions does it say anything about being involuntary. and addiction does not mean that you cannot stop. because their own expert, even their own expert dr. kaplan said it does not mean that. can you put up the instruction, please? there it is, okay. and here it is. it says, "but for addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine, the oral cancer would not have occurred." think about it this way, but for, if she was not addicted, think about -- use your common sense. one of the things you have got to do is use your common sense. you did not check it when you came in here. everybody comes in with your common sense. but just think about this. if 3268 she was not addicted to nicotine, cigarettes containing nicotine would she have smoked a pack and a half to two packs a day for almost 32 years and developed oral cavity cancer? think about that. why do you think she is smoking? she is smoking because she is addicted. she is doing it 40 times a day. most people do not do anything other than breathe 40 times a day. here's the other thing that is very, very important, because mr. reilly left this part out of his legal cause instruction. it says, "in order to be regarded as a legal cause of disease or medical condition, an addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine need not be the only cause." so it can operate in combination with the acts of something else, okay. so it does not have to be the only cause, okay. i want to talk to you a little bit about some of the testimony about dr. califano who talked about -- he did not talk about brand history. what he talked about, what he did say, he says the interval of smoking between 1964 and the late 1970s was a substantially contributed to the oral cavity cancer. and that is undisputed. and you know what is undisputed 3269 about that? it is undisputed that between that time period what was she smoking? she was smoking marlboro cigarettes. so question number 3 is undisputed in the record that she was smoking their product. we have an expert who came in and said during that time period it substantially contributed, that is the language, that is the law, that is the legal cause instruction. i want to talk to you a little bit about some of the comments about dr. saldana. he did not say she had -- that her cancer was hpv, was caused by hpv. nowhere in the path report does he say that. what he says is it is suggestive of hpv. that does not mean that she has hpv. and i want to talk to you a little bit about some of the things that were shown to you, because they try to make it seem like oral cavity cancer and hpv, there is an association with. it is been long known and this and that, but what they missed -- what they did not tell you was that the information that they are relying on is old information. it is not current information. but they try to pass it off as a state of the art when it is not. 3270 and they put up this document, and they showed it to you. and it is 23 years old. it was authored in 1992. and if you look at the sections that they read to you, right, they read these sections, "in addition to the use of tobacco products, viral infection is increasingly implicated in the pathogenesis of oral cancer. oral cancer bears a significant resemblance" -- and it goes on. and it talks about hpv. but look at the studies. look at the years of the studies, 1986, 1984, 1985, 1986, 1987, 1987. these are all -- this is old. this is old. this is 30 years old. but when you look at the current data that we showed you that mr. olin, when he cross-examined their expert, it talks about the following are risk factors for oral cavity and oropharyngeal cancer, tobacco use, alcohol use, tobacco and alcohol use, family history of oral cancer and the following is a risk factor for oropharyngeal cancer, hpv infection. and what is the date of that? april 15th, 2015 [sic]. but it gets better, okay. because when you look at this from the national cancer society 3271 general information about lip and oral cavity cancer, tobacco and alcohol use can affect the risk of lip and oral cancer. what it does not have is hpv. it does not have hpv. and when -- and look at the science. look at the date of that, a little over -- today's what? it is two months old. it is two months old. okay. we are not using 30-year old science. we are using the state of the art science by the doctors who are doing the scientific research now and who knows what the state of the art is now, not stuff that is 30 years old and try to pass it off as now. do you have that slide? check marks. video tech: give me one second. mr. alvarez: so let us look at this, tobacco versus hpv. let us look at the cause. tobacco causes 80 to 99 percent of all oral cancers. hpv is associated with only between 1 and 10 percent of oral cancers. dr. saldana said it is keratinizing tumor. that is consistent with smoking. dr. saldana says it is well-differentiated. that is associated with smoking. only 16 of 118 hpv viruses cause cancer. 3272 dr. saldana says it is hyperplasia, not dysplasia, which is pre-cancerous. dr. saldana says suggestive of hpv, not pathognomonic or diagnostic. dr. saldana says that there is no -- how do you pronounce that word again? mr. olin: koilocytes. mr. alvarez: -- koilocytes in the tumor. that is suggestive with tobacco. more males than females associated with hpv get oral cavity cancer. she is a female. the nci document says hpv is not even a risk factor for oral cancer. nci suggests testing oropharyngeal but not oral cavity cancer for hpv. that is the state of the science and the medicine today, not relying on 30-year old medicine and studies which is out of date. mr. reilly said that she had to hear something from the tobacco companies. that is incorrect. this is a fraud by concealment. they had a responsibility and a duty under the law to tell the public and this woman what they knew. mr. reilly: objection, your honor. that is 3273 a mischaracterization of your instructions. mr. alvarez: that is not. mr. reilly: it requires reliance. the court: come over here. [#deleted sidebar#] the court: it is like giving birth. let us go. mr. alvarez: thank you, your honor. may i proceed? the court: yes, please. mr. alvarez: by the way, if at any time you see that my actions that i get emotional or i 3276 get -- the court: listen, i'll tell them. these are zealous advocates and they do the best they can for their clients. that is the mark of a good lawyer. they are not mad at each other. they are not mad at me. that is what they are supposed to do. mr. alvarez: may i proceed? the court: please. mr. alvarez: the fraud is a fraud of concealment, okay. they concealed material information from mrs. merino. if you find she is a class member you have to accept that finding in this case. and then what we have to prove is that she reasonably relied to her detriment, right. and i showed you the testimony in the record and her actions, and her actions. look at her actions, okay. would she have been smoking while she was pregnant? would she? no. would she have switched to vantage cigarettes? no. mr. reilly put up a slide that said that the statements did not have an impact on you. no, because she believed them. 3277 can you put up the --- yeah. it says, "why did you not think about quitting smoking when you first encountered the health warning labels on cigarettes in colombia? "witness: because i was already addicted and i really did not pay very much attention to it. "question: did you believe the labels? did you believe that smoking caused cancer back then? "no." and go to the next one. yes. "and what were they saying? "that it had not been proven. "and who did you believe at that time? did you believe the tobacco companies, or did you believe the doctors? "answer: i believed the tobacco companies." that is reliance. that is believing. and the detriment is what she suffered. thanks. they talked about the 1985 warning label. it is funny because in the 1985 when the rotating labels that he talked about came on and he showed them to you was the first time, the first 3278 time ever, first time ever that they talked about what? complications with pregnancies. right? low birth weight. complications with -- that was 1985. that was the first time that warning label came out, right? that was four -- nine years after she got pregnant and was smoking. nine years later. so how can they say she did not know [sic]? and she saw the congressional hearing. she said she talk -- here's the other thing, when they want to tell you that people saw something, it is okay to put up the miami he -- the nuevo herald, talk about stuff that came out on spanish-language television, right, about the health effects, but when the heads of the tobacco companies goes before congress and swears to tell the truth and tells the american people that smoking does not cause cancer and it is not addictive, and they think it is not covered by every local news outlet in the united states of america? really? really? he talked about damages, that 16 million dollars is excessive. it is a million dollars a year going forward. but how about the 19 years that she is already suffered? because we are 3279 really talking about 41 years. and if you break that down it is a much smaller number. and you may think 16 million, after listening to some of these arguments and evaluating and thinking about it, you may think that 16 is too low. and it is within your sound discretion to award more. video tech: five minutes. mr. alvarez: i told you this is a case about punitive damages, it is a case about punitive damages. you cannot do this to people, you cannot. you have got to hold them accountable. the law gives us the right to ask it and the law empowers you to do it. thank you.