6 mr. reilly: thank you, your honor. let me introduce the jury to dan gardner. dan, this is the guy that prepared all my slides and so he knows the order that they are in. and i get lost and so he is going to help me out. and as you can see, i've jumped into the 19th century by using the elmo instead of boards, but it is really a function of how much space i have to operate in. so you are saved all the mechanics of hauling boards around. i'm going to start my closing argument the way i started my opening statement, and that is by thanking you guys for your service as jurors. we all know that this has been a sacrifice by all of you, but we all appreciate it, i'm talking on behalf of myself and miranda, but, quite frankly, i'm sure that everyone is included in that thanks. so let me start there. and let me then go into the next thing i said, and that is, out of respect for your 3203 sacrifice i said that miranda and i would use your time, as far as we were concerned, our evidence was concerned, as efficiently as we knew how to do it. and, frankly, i think we did. we put our evidence on in about a day and a half. and we got to the real facts, the real issues and the real evidence in the case. i know i can talk a lot faster. i could talk a lot louder. but that is just not how this is going to happen, so... what i really want to do -- and let me start off by saying, you know what, this is not a case about the general public. this is not a case about what causes most people to get sick, whether it is smoking or something else. this is a case about one person and one person only, right. and you know who that person is. and that person is the plaintiff in this case. so what i want to focus on are the actual questions that judge cueto is going to give you that relate to the plaintiff in this case, ms. merino, and to then focus on the actual evidence that relates to each one of those issues that came in during the course of the trial of the case. 3204 so let us start with the questions that -- can everybody see that? am i standing in the way of somebody? let me head over here. so mr. rosenblum said that the first question is related to class membership, whether or not ms. merino is actually a member of the engle class. and they do. and although they appear a little differently on the verdict form, the three questions are kind of bunched together. so the three questions are about whether her smoking cigarettes was a legal cause of her oral cancer, that is number one. number two, whether she was addicted to american cigarettes containing nicotine. that is number two. and number three is whether or not such addiction, if she was addicted, was a legal cause of why she developed oral cancer. now, let us start with who has the burden of proof on every one of those issues? you know the answer to that. the burden of proof is on the plaintiff. so if any of those issues at the end of all this argument, all this evidence, if any of those issues are unresolved in your mind, 3205 who did not carry their burden of proof? well, you know the answer to it. all right. so let us look at the first question. was smoking cigarettes a legal cause of ms. merino's oral cancer? yes or no. well, the phrase that ought to just jump out at you but probably does not is that one right there, "legal cause." you really have not heard anything about legal cause yet in a discussion by plaintiff counsel in this case. so what does -- what is the burden of the plaintiffs, ms. merino and her lawyers, in terms of establishing that smoking cigarettes was a legal cause of her oral cavity cancer? well, judge cueto when he gives you the instructions is going to read a very complicated instruction about legal cause. it is filled with legal terms. law students study three years in law school to try to figure out what this all means and we ask you guys to come in off the street from your normal jobs and understand it. but i'm going to walk through it and i'm going to point out the really important words so 3206 that you understand the concept of legal cause. what judge cueto is going to instruct you is that smoking cigarettes was a legal cause of oral cancer, it is ms. merino's oral cancer, if it directly and in natural and continuous sequence produced or contributed substantially to producing the oral cancer such that but for smoking cigarettes the oral cancer would not have occurred. that is the key language, "but for smoking cigarettes her oral cancer would not have occurred." what is another way of saying that? if she would never smoked she would not have gotten oral cancer. that is it. that is it. that is what they have to have proved to you. now, how does this issue come up in this case? is this something that philip morris created? heck no. you know where it came from. it came from the pathology report created by dr. saldana, dr. mario saldana way back in 1996. now, you remember who dr. saldana was. he was the treating pathologist. was not involved in ms. merino's care because of a lawsuit, he was not interested in 16 million dollars. what was his interest? his interest was in 3207 determining whether or not ms. merino had oral cavity cancer and if he could determine it, what caused it. that was his task. and you know from the pages of the pathology report how carefully he performed his task. and that is no surprise in light of the fact that you now know, after listening to dr. blaustein, that dr. saldana was a professor of pathology at the university of miami school of medicine. you know how careful he was in performing this task. and you have seen this, this part of the pathology report, section 8, in which he raises and answers the question as best we can know at this time what was wrong with her and what caused it. and he had no 16 million dollar stake in this case. and what did he say? he said, "koilocytic -- koilocytotic atypia suggestive of the human papilloma virus infection." now, did philip morris put that in there? absolutely not. you know who did it. it is interesting -- may i have that back for just a second, pathology report. it was really interesting. why did i bring you dr. blaustein? i told you i would be 3208 economic. i told you i would be efficient. i brought him here for one reason only, really, and that was to let you know what it is that dr. saldana was communicating to the caregivers that were taking care of ms. merino way back in 1996. and why did i bring him? because he is the guy that knew dr. saldana. he is the guy that actually was educated by dr. saldana. he is the guy that when he came here to southern florida when he was over at mount sinai, dr. blaustein would send cases, his most difficult head and neck cancer cases for a second opinion over to dr. saldana. he read countless pathology reports from dr. saldana. and you know that he came here and he said -- this is exactly what he said. i asked him, based on your experience dealing with dr. saldana and reading his pathology reports, what was he saying? he said, "but on top of that he is stating here that there are changes which he has found as a pathologist and where he has a particular interest that shows changes that are suggestive, in his words, but i -- of human papilloma virus. in other words, what he is telling the 3209 clinician,, the oncologist, is that, look, there is cancer here. there is not a question about that, but these findings, in fact, are really -- really saying that in this case from a pathologic interpretation the papilloma virus is etiologic or causative of this woman's cancer." now, who disputed that? the only person who disputed that was their dr. westra. and remember i asked dr. westra, dr. westra, a month ago, six weeks ago you had no idea what was in the mind, that is what you told us a month -- six weeks ago when you gave your deposition, you had no idea what was in the mind of dr. saldana. but today when you came into this courtroom you had this wondrous idea that you had come up with that dr. saldana was trying to communicate that there is nothing wrong here, surgeon, be happy, do not worry. that is why i brought you dr. blaustein. because dr. blaustein came here and told you what? he told you that dr. saldana meant exactly what he said, that because of his observation of koilocytotic atypia suggestive of the human papilloma virus he was telling the caregivers of ms. merino what he thought was the explanation for why she got her oral cavity 3210 cancer. now, we brought you dr. juan felix. miranda put him on the stand. dr. felix is one of the leading authorities in the world on human papilloma virus. it has been his area of study for the last 30 years. yes, it is true, he was involved in the creation of the vaccine that prevents women from getting cervical cancer today. dr. felix came here and explained to you things like -- and we are going to go through each one of the building blocks of why it is that most probably in this case, highly likely in this case, that ms. merino's oral cavity cancer was caused by her exposure to human papilloma virus, and we are going to show you who agrees with every one of those building blocks. because you know who agrees with every one of the building blocks? the world's leading public health organizations that specialize in cancer. the national cancer institute and the international agency for the research of cancer, among others. but we will walk through it. you know, the first position -- the first question that arises is, does the human 3211 papilloma virus cause cancer? well, there was not any dispute as to whether or not the human papilloma virus causes cancer in the human body. everybody that came here, their dr. califano, their dr. westra and of course dr. felix all agreed that, yeah, it causes 99 percent of the cervical cancers, 85 percent of the cancers that occur in the back of your mouth, from the back one-third all the way back to the back of your mouth. and they all agreed, 85 percent of those, and they all agreed that how did that human papilloma virus get in your mouth? it came in through the front of your mouth. it had to pass through the first two-thirds of your mouth to get to the back of your mouth. and nobody disputed that. when dr. felix came here, he explained to you that, yes, the human papilloma virus causes oral cavity cancer. now, that was a big bone of contention between dr. westra, dr. califano, dr. felix. dr. westra said, you know what, it has not been proven to my satisfaction that oral cancer can even be caused by the human papilloma virus. dr. califano said, well, i think it can, but 3212 it would be quite rare, quite rare. but let us see who agreed with dr. felix about that issue of whether or not human papilloma virus causes oral cancer. well, in fact, the national cancer institute says yes. and here's the actual document that says that. this comes from the national cancer institute website general information about oral cancer. risk factors for oral cancer include the following, "being infected with a certain type of human papilloma virus (hpv)." so there is the national cancer institute, the largest cancer organization in this country. now, how about the largest cancer organization in the world? the international agency for the research of cancer. here's their publication from 2012, the iarc monographs on "biological agents: a review of human carcinogens." "there is sufficient evidence in humans for the carcinogenicity," that is the cancer-causingness, "of the human papilloma virus 16 causes cancer in the oral cavity." oral cavity. the international agency for the research of cancer agrees with dr. felix, it 3213 agrees with dr. felix when -- by the way, dr. blaustein also agreed that human papilloma virus causes oral cancer. that was on cross-examination. and you know, maybe, maybe the most embarrassing supporter of this concept that oral cancers are caused by the human papilloma virus was the johns hopkins medical organization where drs. westra and califano both came from. because you remember, i showed them this from the johns hopkins medicine. oral and oropharyngeal cancers. human papilloma virus, hpv infection, "hpv usually causes warts and has been linked to cervical, vaginal and penile cancers. hpv also increases the risk for cancers of the oral cavity and oropharynx." that is their own medical organization. what did dr. westra have to say about that? i disagree with that. i disagree with my own, my own johns hopkins website. and does it make sense? does it make sense that if the human papilloma virus is going to cause 85 percent of the cancers that occur right there that it can cause cancers before it gets there? 3214 well, there you have johns hopkins, national cancer institute and the international agency for the research of cancer which disagree flat out with dr. westra, flat out. why is it so? why is it that hpv causes cancer in those sites? you heard dr. felix explain this to you. dr. felix said, you know what, the tissue, the skin that makes up a woman's cervix, your anus, your penis, the back of your mouth and the front of your mouth is all the same. it is called squamous epithelium. who agrees with that? the national cancer institute, and i'll show you the document here in just a minute, says those tissues are all the same. the national cancer institute agrees with dr. felix. who disagreed? dr. westra. i think that is misspelled. and dr. califano. i told you he could not spell. handsome, yes; good speller, no. all right. this is from the national cancer institute. i do not know if that is big enough for everybody, "in addition to the use of tobacco products, viral infection is increasingly implicated in the pathogenesis of 3215 oral cancer. oral cancer bears significant resemblance to other mucosal epithelial cancers such as cancer of the cervix and anus -- video tech: i'm sorry. mr. reilly: sabotage. sabotage. judge, i need 30 seconds. "...such as cancers of the cervix and anus, both of which have been associated with infection with human papilloma virus." all the same kind of tissues. all right. now, mr. rosenblum spent a great deal of time speaking very quickly about how there was no evidence that the human papilloma virus was in ms. merino. but that is not right. you remember in my opening statement i said you are going to hear in this case that there is such a thing as koilocytes, in this particular instance, koilocytic atypia, and that you are going to learn that that was pathognomonic, that is the term, that is the medical term, pathognomonic for the human papilloma virus. what did pathognomonic mean? it meant that when you see it, it is just like a fingerprint, you do not see my finger, but if you look at the fingerprint you know my finger had to be there. 3216 now, who agreed that koilocytes are pathognomonic for hpv? well, of course dr. felix and dr. saldana did. dr. felix came and testified to it. dr. saldana did by writing his pathology report the way he did. he said, look, i see koilocytic atypia, that suggests to me human papilloma virus. dr. westra -- you do not know how to spell his name -- and dr. califano both said, no, no, that does not tell me anything. here again is the national cancer institute right off their website. "the relationship between hpv infection and oral cancer was first described in 1983 when cytopathic changes of hpv infection," and there this it is right there, "(koilocytosis) similar to those seen in cervical hpv infection were noted in oral lesions." that is the national cancer institute. and that is on their website today. how about the international agency for the research of cancer? "the koilocyte is" -- and they use exactly the language i just told you. "the koilocyte is pathognomonic for hpv." it is the fingerprint. 3217 now, dr. felix said, dr. saldana said hpv. it is true that in 1996 hospitals around here did not do -- did not have a readily available test to establish that there was hpv in the tumor, but dr. saldana, dr. felix, the international agency for cancer and the national cancer institute all tell you right now today hpv -- koilocytic changes are pathognomonic for hpv. does hpv cause oral cancers? oh, my goodness. no. hpv-caused cancers are increasing. who says that? and i'm talking about in the oral cavity, not in general. i'm talking about in the oral cavity. who says that? dr. felix, cancer care ontario, the national cancer institute. dr. westra is still stuck in his misspelled state of it is not proven to me that it ever causes it. and dr. califano says no. again, from the national cancer institute general information about oral cancer. this is off their website today. you cannot go there because you are jurors, but tomorrow you could. "the number of new cases and deaths from oral cancer has slowly decreased over the past 3218 30 years. however, the number of new cases of oral cancer caused by certain types of human papilloma virus infection has increased. one kind of hpv, called hpv 16, is often passed from one person to another during sexual activity." remember dr. westra said, you know what, at hopkins we do not even test for it because there is no reason to test for it. it has not even been proven to occur. you heard dr. blaustein come here and say, you know what, we here at mount sinai, we test every oral cavity cancer for the human papilloma virus today. of course they do because it can have an affect on the treatment that is given to the patient. remember, dr. westra said, oh, there are groups, there are three or four groups around the country, just north america, that are looking at this very issue and they are finding that there is no reason to worry about human papilloma virus in the mouth. here is the first group he said that looked at it, ontario cancer care ontario. this is their report. under the category of oral cancer they said, "insufficient data currently exists 3219 to assess the prognostic benefit of hpv positivity in squamous cell carcinoma of the larynx, hypopharynx, nasopharynx, sinonasal tract and oral cavity." they did not say it does not cause it there. what they wanted to say is that there is evidence in the literature to suggest that the prevalence of hpv in these subsites, that includes the oral cavity, may be higher than originally believed. their meta-analyses, in other words, when they pooled together a bunch of studies "in the oral cavity and the larynx as high as forty percent, forty percent of the oral cavity cancers had the human papilloma virus in them." does that sound to you like there is nothing to worry about, that the ontario group found there was nothing to worry about due to the human papilloma virus? and now the final question was, well -- mr. rosenblum addressed it, he said, well, dr. califano said even if there was hpv, smoking was the major cause of why she developed her oral cavity cancer. when you have an hpv-caused cancer, tobacco does not further increase the risk. smoking does not further increase the 3220 risk. who says so? here's the national cancer institute. "tobacco and alcohol do not appear to further increase the risk in people with oral hpv infection." do not appear to increase the risk. this is not philip morris. this is not philip morris or anybody connected with philip morris. this is the national cancer institute. sorry. you can tell i'm not used to it. if i had a board, i'd have it just right. thank you very much. all right. where does this come from? the national cancer institute. all right. for ms. merino and her lawyers to be right that smoking in her case was the legal cause of why she developed her oral cavity cancer who has to be wrong? dr. saldana had to have been wrong. dr. blaustein has to be wrong. dr. felix has to be wrong. the national cancer institute has to be wrong. the international agency for the research of cancer has to be wrong. and johns hopkins has to be wrong. they all have to be 3221 wrong. dr. califano said flat out, dr. saldana was wrong. but he never saw the pathology. all right. what else was there other than the fact that the fingerprint for hpv was present in her tumor, in the tissue immediately adjacent to her tumor? what else was there? there was ms. merino's age. you remember there was no dispute that if you are going to get an oral cavity cancer from smoking you are going to get it on average at about 65 years of age. how old was ms. merino? if you go back in time you know she said she had that spot in the floor of her mouth for about a year, two years. she would have been 45, exactly the average age at which people develop oral cavity cancer from the human papilloma virus. how long does it take? dr. felix says, you know, a minimum of 10 years on average, here you are, 45 years of age. in addition to that you heard that if you have a smoking-related oral cavity cancer and this was a stage iii, stage iv, a very advanced cancer because it had metastasized to a lymph node, you heard that the outcomes for 3222 folks like that are dismal if it was caused by smoking, dismal. but if it was caused by the human papilloma virus your chances of a successful outcome were much, much higher. and you know that ms. merino survived her cancer and is cancer free 19 years later, cancer free 19 years later. so there it is, ladies and gentlemen. there is the evidence that relates, not statistically to the public at large, but this is what related to ms. merino. so now let us go back to the first question on the verdict form: was smoking cigarettes a legal cause of ms. merino's oral cancer? miranda and i had no burden of proof here. we did not have to prove to you that her cancer most probably was caused by the human papilloma virus, as dr. saldana thought in 1996. the burden of proof is on the plaintiff to prove the opposite, to prove that without smoking she would never have gotten her cancer. and so now i ask you, in light of all of this, in light of everything i just showed you -- you know, i did not make any of this up, philip morris did not generate any of this -- did 3223 they actually prove to your satisfaction, and i mean each and every one of you, that ms. merino's cancer would not have occurred had it not been for -- had she never smoked? did they really prove that to you? well, if the answer to that question is no, then that is your first stop sign in this case, first stop sign. and you do not go any further, as mr. rosenblum said. you do not go any further. now, the judge has got lots more questions so i'm going to go through the rest of the questions in the verdict form. the second question, also a question about class membership, is whether or not ms. merino was addicted to the american cigarettes containing nicotine and, frankly, although on the verdict form you are going to see it as one sentence it is actually two questions, was she addicted and whether or not the addiction was a legal cause of her oral cancer. and, yes, it is true that we each brought an expert here and it is true that lots of family members and a friend of ms. merino, including ms. merino, came and said she was addicted. but this is not -- i 3224 think mr. rosenblum said, you know, you could go to a cafe or a bar or something like that, you can ask your friends, what do you think? are you addicted? and it is true that judge cueto is not going to give you an instruction as to what is the definition or what is the test. that is up to you. but this is a court of law. and does it seem -- it must seem appropriate to the lawyers here anyway that we bring in experts to address the subject and that they apply a serious standard in making that determination, because they did it, we did it. they brought in dr. drobes. dr. drobes is a guy who has done -- i'm not going to take anything away from any of these people. dr. drobes is a guy who has done a lot of research on nicotine, no debate about that. but what he is not is a licensed physician and he is not somebody who is even licensed to do clinical work here in the state of florida as a psychologist. miranda and i brought you dr. eric kaplan. dr. kaplan is a board-certified psychiatrist. he is from up in tampa. yeah, i met him on an airplane. is there something wrong with that? 3225 i do not think so. but he came here and he explained to you exactly what is the gold standard for determining whether someone really is medically addicted. and he explained to you that he went through that same process. and in going through it his determination was that ms. merino did not qualify as having been medically addicted. and he walked you through that process. now, he was asked a great question, whether or not there is an objective test in determining whether or not someone is or is not addicted to nicotine. and of course there is not -- there is not a urine test, there is not a blood test, there is not a brain chemistry test, there is not a ct scan, there is not an x-ray that can be done that will determine whether or not you as a smoker, whether you smoke two cigarettes a day, 20 cigarettes a day, 40 cigarettes a day, whether you are addicted or not. there is none. so if by objective that is the question, then the answer is, of course, no. what dr. kaplan was attempting to communicate was simply that there is some objectivity in the sense that there is a standard 3226 that we apply, and it comes from the american psychiatric association. and he applies it in this case based on the facts that are given to him by ms. merino at the time he interviewed her plus what he read through the depositions, et cetera. you guys will have to decide for yourselves what is the standard to apply and whether or not she meets that standard, she met that standard. but that is not the only question that is being asked here. the other question that is being asked is whether or not if she was addicted her addiction was a legal cause of her oral cancer. what does that require? because again you see this phrase "legal cause." and what that requires in this case is that her -- and, again, it is this operative language right down here, but for the addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine, the oral cancer would not have occurred. that is what they have to prove. they have the burden of proving that but for addiction to cigarettes that ms. merino would not have developed oral cancer, period. you know, you saw a long list of reasons why 3227 ms. merino smoked. these are the things that she told dr. kaplan and which were readily apparent from the depositions that were taken. and even from a question or two that i asked ms. merino when she was on the stand. these are all the reasons, circumstances in which she enjoyed smoking. so what they have to prove to you is that she was an involuntary smoker. ms. merino is somebody who, by her own admission, until the night of her surgery, night before her surgery never tried to quit smoking except on one occasion, right? there were times when she reduced her smoking by a cigarette for an hour or two, but somebody who never tried to quit smoking except on one occasion when she -- her mother was having surgery, she was going to -- she made a promise to god that she would not smoke for good? no, not for good. you heard that her promise was, i'll quit smoking for 30 days. it is like lent. it is like a new year's resolution. i will not do it for 30 days. what are you giving up? it is a sacrifice. you are giving up something you do not ever want to do again. or if your plan is to go back to it at 3228 the end of 30 days, if you are giving up something, it is a sacrifice that you plan on going back to at the end of 30 days. and the answer was she was going back to it at the end of 30 days. to tell if somebody is really serious about quitting smoking, did mrs. merino ever look into a smoking-cessation program? did she ever quit for a whole day aside from that one occasion? did she seek any assistance from anybody else in attempting to quit smoking? doctor, anybody? no. they pointed out the fact that she continued to smoke after she was diagnosed with her cancer. well, i talked to her about that, and here's the exact testimony, question and answer. when it says trial transcript right down here, that means this is exactly what tracey put down during the course of the trial of the case. every word that i say she types down, she takes down, including when i go da, da, like that. i do not know how she types that up, but she gets it down. and then they type it into a booklet form and we have it. so we know exactly what she said. 3229 what i said to her was, in that time frame, that month and a half between when you were diagnosed and when you had your surgery, "there were a lot of things going on in your life between the date of your diagnosis and the date of the surgery, were not there? "correct. "including an illness of your father. "correct. "it was a very stressful time for you. "correct. "and you used cigarettes to help you deal with stress. "correct." that is very common, ladies and gentlemen. her dad was sick. she had been diagnosed with oral cavity cancer. of course it was a very stressful time. was she smoking involuntarily, or was she smoking because she was using cigarettes to help her deal with stress? that is what that boils down to. did she stop? yes. they say that there was a tearful, tearful time, but did she stop smoking at midnight? she stopped smoking at midnight. 3230 they say that an addiction is -- nicotine addiction is a relapsing disease, relapsing. now, i grant, there is no quibble on my part that for the weeks, i do not know how many weeks after her surgery ms. merino was physically incapable of smoking and because of her discomfort, pain from the surgery, i'm sure that that masked whatever withdrawal symptoms, if she had any, she had. i'm not going to debate that. but there came a time, and we are now 19 years later, has ms. merino ever relapsed? has she ever even had a desire for another cigarette? "you have not smoked since? "no. "in fact, you have not had a desire to smoke since your surgery, have you? "no." no. so all right. here we are back to this question. you have to decide whether she was addicted and you also have to decide that if she was addicted was her addiction so strong that it made her an involuntary smoker and that it caused her to get her oral cavity cancer. and that burden of proof is on ms. merino and her 3231 lawyers. involuntary smoking. dr. drobes indicated that even addicted smokers can quit. dr. kaplan indicated even addicted smokers can quit. why is that important? because it just goes to show that involuntary smoking but for addiction would mrs. merino actually developed her oral cavity cancer, or if she had been sufficiently motivated at some point in time could she have stopped if, in fact, her cancer was caused by smoking? i do not think you get to this question because i think the first question is obvious. proof of the first question is obvious. but if you get here you have to ask yourself, have we unanimously determined that the answer to this question is yes? and if you have not been satisfied then this is a second stop sign for you and the answer is no and you do not go on. the third question is: was smoking cigarettes manufactured by defendant philip morris usa a legal cause of ms. merino's oral cancer? now, did anyone come here and say smoking philip morris manufactured cigarettes was -- 3232 again, here's that legal cause requirement. you know what, i do not have that slide, but let me tell you it is going to have that very same requirement, that but for smoking philip morris manufactured cigarettes she would not have gotten her oral cancer. so to even get here you have to have decided that smoking actually caused her oral cancer, which i do not think the evidence supports. but now, did anybody come here and say that smoking philip morris manufactured cigarettes caused her oral cavity cancer? you know, this smoking history is an interesting thing. yes, ms. merino maintains that while she was living in colombia she smoked nothing but marlboro starting at age 16. she contends that she continued to smoke marlboros throughout her remaining years living in colombia until 1974. now, we have put in evidence documents indicating that that would have been very unusual, that, in fact, american cigarettes comprise something less than 3 percent of the total market in colombia. there is no debate about that. but assuming that she did smoke philip morris cigarettes, marlboros, for what period of time 3233 did she smoke them? was it from '64 to 1982? why did she struggle -- we know that by her own testimony from 1982 to 1992, 10 years, she smoked vantage cigarettes manufactured by rj reynolds, they are not here. we know that the first cigarettes that she smoked were lucky strikes, camels and that sort of thing, not made by philip morris. they are not here. we know that when it came time for her to talk about what brands of cigarettes she smoked after vantage, way back in 19 -- i'm sorry, way back in 2008, what she wrote down in answering this interrogatory that said, what brands did you smoke, she said she smoked two packs a day of dorals from 1993 to 1996. "i believe i smoked one and a half to two packs of montclairs from '92 to '93. i smoked one and a half packs of marlboros from '64 to '82. i smoked about two packs of vantages from '82 to '92." she is 14 years old, she is smoking four to five cigarettes of these brands not made by philip morris. and then she smoked meridian, 8 to 15 per day approximately '94 to '95, montegos -- meridans and montegos are not made 3234 by philip morris -- 10 to 15 per day. finally we get to marlboro lights, 10 to 15 per day, and virginia slims, 5 to 10 per day during the early '90s. that was it. that is what she said in 2008, seven years ago. but today when liggett is not here, reynolds is not here, now it is, i smoked mostly marlboro lights after vantage, right? now. seven years ago that was not the story. dr. califano, when he was asked about calculating what cigarettes caused her cancer, the next question that was asked right after the one that mr. alvarez showed you says, "now, does that mean that whatever smoking she had after that time is irrelevant? "no. so we know that, you know, the risk of getting oral cavity cancer is related to smoking, the smoking is cumulative so it is like -- trying to think of a good analogy. it is like eating a whole cheese pizza and getting sick from eating the whole cheese pizza. it was not the last slice that made you sick. it was eating the whole cheese pizza. so it is not the first slice, the last slice, middle slice; it is the totality of the exposure..." 3235 so what you have not been told yet is they have to have proved to you that had -- this is again legal cause. was smoking philip morris manufactured cigarettes a legal cause of why she developed oral cavity cancer? and you are going to get that same instruction that says they have to have proved to your satisfaction that but for smoking philip morris manufactured cigarettes she would not have gotten her oral cavity cancer. if she had never smoked philip morris manufactured cigarettes, did they prove to you that she would not have gotten oral cavity cancer? and that goes way back to assuming that they proved to your satisfaction that it was not human papilloma virus that most probably caused her to get her oral cavity cancer. and i asked dr. califano this: "you did not pay any attention to the brands that she was smoking or when she smoked any particular brand and that sort of thing? "that is correct." that is right. so here's the next opportunity for a stop sign. if you do not universally, unanimously conclude that they have established that it was 3236 smoking philip morris manufactured cigarettes that was a but for reason why she developed oral cavity cancer you have a stop sign. the next questions are really complicated legal language. mr. alvarez read it to you. i hate to read this to you because it is so complicated, but it says, "did carmenza merino reasonably rely to her detriment..." so here's the first language that you have to focus on. did she rely to her detriment? well, what is rely? you got to hear it, you got to see it and then you have got to believe it and you have to act on it. that is everything. see it, hear it, rely on it. and then to her detriment means it has to have had an impact on you getting cancer. "...on philip morris usa's concealment or omission of material facts concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes that would have been necessary to make statements by philip morris incorporated not misleading, and, if so, was such reliance a legal cause of her oral cancer?" again, you have that same requirement that 3237 they establish that first she has to see it or hear it. then she has to act on it. she has to rely on it. and then it has to have been so important that but for having seen it or heard it and relied on it she would not have gotten oral cavity cancer. and the same holds true for the second question. "did ms. merino reasonably rely to her detriment on the concealment or omission of material facts concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes that would have been necessary to make statements made in furtherance of defendant philip morris' agreement to conceal, not misleading, and, if so, was such reliance a legal cause of her oral cancer?" same thing. these are -- these are not did philip morris fail to say a number of things. that is not what this question asks. this question asks: did mrs. merino -- did ms. merino hear something, see something, then rely on it? how can she rely on it? well, it has to cause her to begin smoking, to continue smoking, to continue smoke -- i'm sorry, to become a regular smoker, to continue smoking and 3238 not stop, not stop. did they show you any testimony by ms. merino that said any of that? no. none. in fact, this is a little diagram, a little diagram that i've created to help you understand the concept of legal cause. for something to be a legal cause it has to have a direct connection to ms. merino. she has to have seen it. she has to have heard it. she has to have read it. mr. alvarez: objection, judge, that is improper. the court: overruled. mr. reilly: it has to have had a substantial impact on her. how substantial? that but for whatever it is she would have done the opposite. that is what is necessary in order to be a legal cause. now, both during this trial -- well, here's an instruction that judge cueto is going to give you. "manufacturing, selling and advertising cigarettes are lawful activities. therefore, i instruct you that the defendant," philip morris, "cannot be held liable simply for manufacturing, selling or advertising cigarettes." 3239 ms. merino was in colombia for -- until 1974. was there any evidence on the part of ms. merino that she saw, heard, read any of the things that they complain about? no. as a matter of fact. here's another instruction that judge cueto read to you several times during the course of the trial, but he is going to read it to you again later today. it says, "you heard evidence about the defendant's historical conduct that occurred in the united states prior to ms. merino moving to the united states in 1974. there is no allegation that ms. merino ever saw, heard, read or relied on any of these statements or advertisements or evidence when making decisions whether to smoke or refrain from smoking." my goodness, it cannot be more direct than that, can it? and that is an instruction from judge cueto. mr. alvarez: you know what, judge, can we approach? the court: sure. (the following discussion was held at sidebar:) the court: what is the objection? 3240 mr. alvarez: he did not read the instruction. that is not what the instruction says. he only read half the instruction. the court: you will get up and have a rebuttal. mr. alvarez: no, i understand, but he is saying that this is what you are going to tell them. and if he is going to do an instruction he is got to do the instruction appropriately. you cannot leave things out. it has to do with the engle findings, okay. that is the big difference. it has to do with the engle findings related to conduct. he did not read that part. the court: okay. you can get up and read it in rebuttal. mr. alvarez: i'm objecting to it because it is inappropriate. the court: thank you. go ahead. (sidebar discussion was concluded, and the following proceedings were held in open court:) the court: yes? okay. we need a bathroom break. let us do a bathroom break. i'm out of a bailiff and i'm out of -- i'll tell you what, you want me to walk you over. you can walk over 3241 there. just leave your notes over there. when you are done, just walk knock on the door. (jury exited the courtroom at 2:34 p.m.) the court: you have used about 55 minutes. mr. alvarez: what did you say? the court: mr. reilly has used 55 minutes. mr. alvarez: i've got 57 minutes and 16 seconds, but who is counting. the court: give me a break. mr. alvarez: i'm just messing with you. 55 minutes is fine. (a recess was taken from 2:36 p.m. to 2:41 p.m.) (jury entered the courtroom at 2:42 p.m.) the court: you know, in europe instead of gavels, how they use gavels here, they use bells. so if you are out of order, they are going bing, bing, bing, bing, bing. let us take a seat. everybody better? mr. reilly. mr. reilly: thank you, your honor. you know what, it is been suggested that i show you the whole -- may i have my screen back? video tech: you may. mr. reilly: this is exactly what this 3242 instruction is going to say in its entirety. it says, "engle findings related only to conduct in usa beginning in 1974. the engle findings in this particular case pertain only to philip morris and other tobacco companies' and industry organizations' conduct in the united states when ms. merino arrived from 1974 to 1996." and then it goes on to say exactly what i just showed you. so you can see the whole thing. there you go. does not alter the fact that there is no allegation that ms. merino ever saw, heard, read or relied on any of these statements or advertisements or evidence when making decisions whether to smoke or refrain from smoking. but we go on because ms. merino finally arrives here in the united states in 1974, right? so in the trial transcript she was asked: "well, how did that affect you -- this is a question that mr. alvarez asked ms. merino. he said, "well -- after he asked her whether or not she saw or heard anything sometime in the '80s, "well, how did that affect you when you heard these tobacco companies say that smoking 3243 has not been proven? how did that affect you?" because you see he only went so far in what he showed you up on the screen in her trial testimony. she said, "no, i just continued smoking." and then he said, and this is -- ladies and gentlemen, this is key, this is absolutely key to this legal cause question. "did those statements have an impact on you? "no." that was not a question posed by me. that was a question posed by mr. alvarez of his own client. and that takes me back to she has to have relied to her detriment and that has to be a legal cause of her getting oral cancer. and yet here was her specific answer to the question posed by mr. alvarez. "did those statements have an impact on you? "no." period. that is it. and there is the trial transcript page right there (indicating). matter of fact, i asked her, "you do not recall any message that you heard or read from any cigarette company on the issue of health, 3244 correct? "correct." i asked her, "you have never heard of the tobacco industry research committee. "no. "or the council for tobacco research. "i do not recall. "or the tobacco institute. "if it was after my surgery, no, i do not recall. "no, i'm talking about at any time. "i do not recall." in light of the requirement that there be reliance and it be a legal cause of her oral cancer, in light of those answers, especially the one she gave to her own lawyer, the answer has to be no. and those are two more stop signs on those specific questions. when she comes to the united states, you know, they showed you, and continued to show you here in their closing argument, lots of advertisements and statements by other cigarette companies before ms. -- and other folks, documents before ms. merino even gets here. and yet there is already that instruction from judge 3245 cueto. there is no reliance. so why do they continue to show you that? during the course of this trial judge cueto gave you that instruction i think three times. why do they continue to show you that when you know it did not impact ms. merino? mr. alvarez: objection, judge, attacking the way we are presenting the case. the court: sustained. mr. reilly: well, it is only to make you unhappy. mr. alvarez: objection, judge. the court: overruled. mr. reilly: let me walk you quickly through this timeline. i'm not going to take near the time that i did my opening statement because you have now seen the evidence in this case. you know that ms. merino was born into a very well-educated family. you know that her father was -- i think -- what did she call herself? upper class. and you know that her father was college educated, accountant for a university. you know from the presentation that was just made -- i needed your cue. you know from the presentation that was just 3246 made by miranda that she put in -- we put in evidence, i do not know -- how many exhibits did we put in evidence? ms. soto: in the box? mr. reilly: yeah. ms. soto: over a hundred. mr. reilly: we gave you over a hundred examples of spanish language -- by the way, you notice that everything they showed you was all in english. everything they showed you was all in english. does ms. merino speak english? no. did ms. merino see the movies or the deposition transcripts? did she see any of that during her lifetime? no, none of it. if even those ads had played, and they did not even show you the dates of the ads, they did not even show you ads with the warnings on them that were present when she got here. they did not show you a single ad from colombia, not one, except for what they call a tombstone that somebody gave to a grade school for how to pay for your yearbook. and was there any evidence that ms. merino saw that? zero. zero. so what we put in evidence was information to show you the -- they did not talk about 3247 dr. proctor, the very first witness, you know, a long time ago, dr. proctor who did not know anything about ms. merino, he did not know anything about colombia, nothing at all. and yet he spent a whole day and a half talking about events that the court has just instructed you have no play in this case. what we put in evidence just a little while ago is examples -- mr. alvarez: excuse me, that is not what the instruction said, judge. objection. the court: what the instruction said -- i'm sorry, come sidebar because i'm not quite sure what you are referring. (the following discussion was held at sidebar:) the court: so your statement was they spent a lot of time showing you stuff that -- mr. reilly: was covered by your instruction. the court: and your objection is? mr. rosenblum: the instruction says that there is a purpose for which this evidence is being introduced, and mr. reilly was suggesting with his comments that the evidence that is being 3248 introduced has no purpose. and when he said before when you sustained the objection, the only reason we introduced it was to somehow to anger them or inflame them, when you have told them that there is a proper admissible purpose for which it is being offered. so it is improper for mr. reilly to say that it has nothing to do with this case. the court: i do not know if you want to complete that or i'm going to sustain the objection. although it is really moot right now because he already finished. or you can bring it up on your rebuttal. because i do not know that there is anything i can do at this point. mr. rosenblum: so we move to strike it as being improper. the court: what is it that you want me to -- mr. rosenblum: the last comment that mr. reilly made that -- i can paraphrase. mr. reilly: i'll take care of it. the court: you will take care it of? mr. reilly: i'd like some more time, though, judge. the court: yeah. 3249 (sidebar discussion was concluded, and the following proceedings were held in open court:) the court: couple of minutes. mr. reilly: thank you, your honor. here's the instruction -- an instruction that the judge is going to give you in connection with why that evidence came in. such evidence, everything that happened in colombia before 1974 when she arrives here, is only being introduced to show the culture of american cigarette smoking as it existed and developed before ms. merino even came to the united states. that is the sole reason why it came in evidence in this case, the sole reason. thanks for asking me to do that. mr. alvarez: you are welcome. mr. reilly: why did we put all these documents in? we put them in just to show you colombia was not some backwater that did not receive the information about the health risks of smoking, the science that was advancing in connection with the health risks of smoking. it was not like the people in colombia were not being presented with an opportunity to see it, read it and make decisions about it, make 3250 decisions about whether they would or they would not smoke. we showed you examples of articles that appeared in colombian media, and not just any colombian media. because this was not about -- we did not present this in a way that this was about the colombian public. we chose publications that ms. merino told you under oath in this courtroom were taken in her house, either here in the united states or in colombia. those are the only ones we took these articles out of. she began smoking cigarettes made by somebody else in 1962. in 1964 she began working for avianca airlines. was ms. merino a smart person? yes. did she leave school because she could not manage it? no, absolutely not. absolutely not. within a short period of time she becomes the manager of the national department of avianca airlines. she is not even 19 years old yet. is ms. merino a smart person? absolutely. absolutely. you saw just today, you saw the first scientific roundtable about cigarettes on 3251 colombian television. all of this was in spanish. you have the articles. if you want to read them, if you want to take the time to go through them and see them, they are there for your review. did they put in evidence one single article, once mrs. merino finally gets here in 1974, after she is now 25, 26 years old, did they put in evidence a single article in spanish that had any misinformation in it from any cigarette company, just one? none. everything they showed you was in english, was not it? every television program, every everything was in english. ms. merino made it quite plain she did not watch american television, english television. when she watched tv here in this country it was in spanish univision, because she speaks spanish, she does not speak english. early '70s while she is still living in colombia she works for two different travel agencies. again, she has a major role. she is managing the national department for both of those companies. you know that in 1971 cigarette ads in colombia were moved to 9:30 at 3252 night. that is the same year that cigarette advertising on television in the united states ends. that is what, three years before ms. merino even gets here. 1974, remember i asked ms. merino if she saw the warnings go on the packs of cigarettes in colombia before she ever came to the united states, ever came here. and her answer was, yeah, i saw them. "did you observe that there was a warning on every pack of cigarettes that was sold in colombia? "yes. "and you knew that warning said that smoking was bad or dangerous for your health, right?" and her answer was "yes." "why did you not think about quitting smoking -- this is a question that was asked by her counsel, as i recall -- "when you first encountered the health warning labels on cigarettes in colombia? "because i was already addicted and i really did not pay very much attention to it." i did not pay very much attention to it. when she lands here, what is the situation? 3253 they said they wanted to set the stage. well, let us set the stage for what life is like here in the united states regarding smoking when the plane lands in 1974. there is a warning on every pack. what is it say? warning: surgeon general has determined that cigarette smoking is dangerous for your health. did ms. merino see it? yes. when i asked her about it, because remember the ads, if an ad was in spanish, the warning was in spanish. there is no more advertising on television when the plane lands. has not been for two years here in the united states. she said, i remember the warning but i just do not remember the part about the surgeon general. okay. fine. did you pay any attention to it? no. no. that is all right. you know, you get to decide whether you are going to pay attention to it or not. we showed you articles from here in the united states from the miami herald in spanish, el miami herald, so that you would understand that the same kind of articles that were 3254 appearing in the english language newspaper, the miami herald, were appearing in the el miami herald. she switched to vantage in either the late '70s or maybe 1982. you remember that ms. merino's husband was telling her, you need to cut back, you need to cut down because you are going to hurt your lungs. you are going to make yourself sick. and what did ms. merino say about that? "your husband told you you were smoking too much? "yes. "and he told you frequently to reduce your smoking. "yes. "you ignored your husband when he spoke to you. "yes." yes. but today she would like 16 million dollars. 1985 the warnings change. now they explicitly say smoking causes lung cancer and other illnesses. if you quit smoking it greatly reduces your health risk. in spanish when the 3255 ad is in spanish. did they show you one spanish ad? ms. merino said, i switched to marlboro lights. i showed her ads for lights. she said, i never saw those ads. those ads were in spanish. remember 1985 was about the same time that dr. felix said the human papilloma virus -- and you saw, 1983, human papilloma virus, koilocytes recognized as pathognomonic for the human papilloma virus. "in the mid 1980s you saw the new warnings that went on the packs of cigarettes. "i do not recall very well, but, yes, i could have seen them, but i do not recall them. "you ignored those warnings as well. "correct. yes." '90s her husband continues to tell her to reduce her smoking. that is when she discovered the cold sore. 1994 was the congressional testimony that mr. alvarez just showed you. is that in spanish? was that on univision? that was on c-span. remember i asked dr. proctor, was that ever shown in spanish? 3256 he said, not that i know of. not that i know of. if ms. merino somehow was watching c-span, an all english-language news broadcast, and if she had seen them say anything she would not have understood a word they said. so the next question asks you to assign the percentage of any fault that was a legal cause, a legal cause of ms. merino's oral cancer that you charge to philip morris and ms. merino. in light of all that story, where there is really no connection between ms. merino except she bought, she liked for a period of time, from 1964, according to her, until 1982, or thereabouts, she smoked philip morris manufactured cigarettes, which the judge has just informed you to advertise them, to make them and to sell them is legal and not actionable, what percentage of fault do you assign to philip morris in this case, in light of ms. merino and all the decisions that she made? mr. alvarez said, hey, philip morris continued to make cigarettes with nicotine. yeah, of course. that is like saying bacardi continues to make alcohol -- rum with alcohol. 3257 that is what cigarettes are. that is what they have always been. and that is what smokers go to the store to buy. and you heard the story of philip morris making cigarettes with no nicotine in them, none at all. and you heard what happened. not only did nobody buy them, but the federal trade commission came down and said, take them off the market. those public health organizations said, those are the most dangerous cigarettes ever made. you need to take them off the market. and yet here they are criticizing philip morris for having made the cigarettes that people do want to buy. and as far as was it some secret that there was nicotine in the cigarettes? none. it is right on the pack what the percentage of nicotine is. did ms. merino say, i did not know that there was nicotine in tobacco or in cigarettes that i smoked? no way. ms. merino said that before she ever came to the united states she was calling her smoking an addiction, before she ever came to the united states. when you consider this question, you have got to consider this admission in this case, the 3258 plaintiff, ms. merino, has acknowledged that her acts or omissions relating to the frequency and duration of her efforts to quit smoking were, she says, a partial proximate cause of her oral cancer. she goes on to contend that that is in combination with the acts of philip morris. and the judge is instructing you that you have to assign a percentage of fault to ms. merino. well, i leave this -- first of all, i do not think you ever get here, especially in light of the very first question on this verdict form. but if you do you have to assign a percentage of fault under these circumstances, where ms. merino is a -- by her recollection, she is an 11-year smoker, almost a 12-year smoker before she ever even gets to the united states. what percentage of fault do you assign to somebody who does all the things that i've just gone through? mr. alvarez says, oh, you would only give that person ten percent. i cannot help but think that if you even get this far those numbers have got to be flipped, would have to be under these circumstances. and we are not here about the public in general. we are only here about one person. 3259 and here was the testimony of her brother. i asked him -- or i'm sorry, miranda asked him, "is there some reason why you chose not to ever discuss the topic of smoking with your sister?" and he said, "well, when the ads," these are the anti-smoking ads, "started to come out, my mom, my dad and carmenza smoked, you know. the ads that were coming out about the dangers, and they were running the risk themselves, they were assuming it. because when you attack a theme or problem somebody has, it could be counterproductive." that is what her own brother had to say. here's another instruction you are going to get from judge cueto. this is about advertising. you have seen ads. you just saw some of them a little bit ago. you have heard evidence regarding advertisements for cigarettes in the united states by tobacco companies other than philip morris usa. "plaintiff claims that such advertising was part of a conspiracy to conceal information about the health effects and addictive nature of cigarettes only to the extent that the advertisements did not reveal the danger of smoking." 3260 but ladies and gentlemen, every ad, every ad when ms. merino got here had the surgeon general's warning on it, every one of them. so that brings us to this question of damages. and let me start by saying, the court is going to tell you there is no exact standard for measuring such damage. the amount should be fair and just. again, i do not think you get there, but if you do, that is the judge's only instruction to you about that subject. 16 million dollars? talk about excessive amounts of money, that is an excessive amount of money. that is if her life expectancy is 22 years that is almost a million dollars a year. there is no question -- let me go through the things that are not being claimed here. there is no claim for medical expenses. there is no claim for lost wages. there is no claim for -- there is only a claim for her personal injury. and, in fact, there is no claim for medical conditions that first arose after her '96 treatment for oral cancer. no claim for whatever carotid artery problems she is had or any problems with swallowing she has or the loss of teeth in addition to those removed during her 3261 surgery. there is no claim for any of that. but there is no question that ms. merino has had a change in her life, a change in her appearance as a result of her cancer treatment. fortunately she was cured. fortunately it was cured. i mean, that is huge, right? fortunately she was cured. her surgery has left scars. there is no question about that. she has difficulty speaking. we all experienced that. it is life-altering to some degree. she still goes shopping. she still goes to restaurants. she might not eat in the restaurant. but she still goes on cruises and she still goes on vacation trips. and she still goes to church. and she still goes to social events. she does all those things. but i'm not debating that she is had some change in her life. but let us talk about life-altering sums of money. you know, $100,000 changes people's lives. $250,000 changes people's lives a ton. half a million dollars changes people's lives dramatically. 16 million dollars is an excessive sum, if you got this far. when you just think about that, you know 3262 that what i just said about those sums of money is true, how life changing it would be if somebody received a half a million dollars. how life changing would that be really and truly? now we come to the last question on this verdict form. and it is, "under the circumstances of this case, state whether you find by clear and convincing evidence that punitive damages are warranted." well, there are several things you need to know about this. the first one is, mr. alvarez said, oh, my goodness, this is where you are supposed to go. ladies and gentlemen, you have had so many stop signs before you ever even get to this question. you do not even get to this question if you did not answer questions 4 or 5 yes. do not even get here. unless they have proved to you that she relied to her detriment, you do not even get here. but mr. alvarez blew right past all that. clear and convincing evidence, what is that? remember during voir dire i talked to some of you guys about in your jobs, in your lives do you have to be precise and exact? if there was no evidence -- and whatever it is, whatever it 3263 is -- this is a key instruction: "in deciding whether punitive damages are warranted, you may not seek to punish philip morris for any harms suffered by any individual other than ms. merino, nor may you punish philip morris for conduct that did not produce harms -- that did not produce harms within florida." the clerk: five minutes. mr. reilly: thank you. "you have heard evidence regarding activities by philip morris that plaintiff claims encouraged youths to smoke. you may not consider similar activities of other tobacco companies in determining whether punitive damages may be warranted against philip morris." there is another one, i believe, that is going to say -- oh. on this youth issue. why do they keep showing you youth stuff? when ms. merino got here, she was 25 years old, 25 years old. why are they showing you philip morris observing what percentage of people under the legal age begin smoking when it has to relate to ms. merino and she is 25 years old the day she lands here? when those documents are created she is like in her 30s or 40s. it has to relate 3264 to ms. merino. and the evidence has to be clear and convincing. in contrast to their other burden of proof, "clear and convincing evidence is evidence that is precise, explicit, lacking in confusion and of such weight that it produces a firm belief or conviction, without hesitation, about the matter at issue." that clearly does not exist in this case. and you cannot consider in any way when considering punitive damages the engle findings. all right. so what is the answer to this question? the answer is no. that is clear. one more thing, i did not hear mr. alvarez talk about dr. farone. dr. farone was the guy you saw on videotape who got fired from philip morris because he did not get the promotion that he wanted, and that was 30 something years ago. just remember what he said when i cross-examined him. he said he was proud of the work he did at philip morris, that the people in the r&d department of philip morris were dedicated to making a safer cigarette. filters, vent holes, porous paper, reconstituted tobacco 3265 and expanded tobacco were all good ideas. philip morris does not spike cigarettes with nicotine; the amount of nicotine decreases during manufacturing. he said all those good things about philip morris even though he is now testified, what did he say, a hundred times against the company that fired him because he threatened to sue them because he did not get the promotion that he wanted. all right. ladies and gentlemen, you have been incredibly attentive. i greatly appreciate it. i'm going to sit down now. oh, i have to say one more thing, and that is, it is true that if you were to answer this question yes, mr. alvarez did not tell you, but there will be a whole nother session. there will be another argument by counsel, there will be more evidence, et cetera, because you would have to determine what was the amount of punitive damages to be awarded. all right. now, i greatly appreciate your attention. you have been -- nobody fell asleep during my closing argument. i greatly appreciate that. 3266 they get to get back up again. i do not know whether it is going to be mr. alvarez or mr. rosenblum, but it is going to be one of them, or maybe both of them, and they have another 15, 16, 17 minutes to go. why? because they have the burden of proof, the burden to prove that everything i showed you, and i showed you document for document for document that everything i just showed you is not right. they have the burden of proof to show you that what i just showed you is wrong. thank you very much.