15 mr. molony: thank you, your honor. good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. i'd like to, first of all, join mr. patacca in thanking each and every one of you for the dedication and the attention that you, obviously, have provided to all of us in the last two-plus weeks since we have gotten together. it is -- it is been obvious to all of us how hard you have tried and exerted yourself to pay attention to the evidence and listen intently every step of the way, which sometimes is not -- is not easy, particularly when you have extended video testimony, as we have had in this case. and on behalf of myself, my client, lorillard tobacco company, my partner, jay woods, and my partner, andy carpenter, they all join me in thanking you, as mr. patacca already has, for your service and your dedication to the job that you, obviously, have displayed here during the course of the last couple of weeks. i'd also like to extend my thanks to mr. olson for probably the greatest number of having to get up and flip the light on and off and mr. langley and ms. cook for their dedication and assistance as well. one other thing, before i get on with the real task that i have here today, which is to review the evidence with you, and it is something that any trial lawyer's a little uncomfortable with starting out at closing argument with an apology. i'm going to do that right now. the reason i'm going to do that is i misspoke. 20 when i got up here, as mr. patacca has pointed out to you several times in his opening statement, when i -- excuse me, in his closing statement, in referencing my opening statement, i was referencing things that had been said and done in years gone by in my opening statement. and i pointed how -- out how times have changed, things like that. for example, santa and puppies and ads from decades and decades ago are things that no longer would be done by any of us, by you, by me, by my client and i was referencing things like that. and at the conclusion of my remarks in -- in that regard, i made a mistake. rather than saying what i intended to say, which was i'm not here to defend those things from so long ago, i said, i'm not here to apologize. and so you have heard that and you have seen that blown up into what has been characterized as another frank statement, if you will. what the lawyers say in this proceeding, as you already know, is not evidence. what matters here and what you have pledged to base your decision on in this case is evidence. and so please disregard my mistake, please do not penalize my client because i misspoke more than two weeks ago in that limited regard, that is exactly what it was and no more. so with that explanation, i'd like to leave that subject and move on to the subject that really should matter. and i -- i trust, given your serious way that you have approached this trial, that you share my perspective that what really matters and what will really matter in deciding this case are clearly two things, the issues -- well, the issues that the court frames and the -- and the evidence that we have already seen from the witness stand in one form or fashion or another. so without any further ado, let me proceed. i have a lot of ground to cover because i'm going to go through the evidence, as i did before, i'm going to do my best not to replow old ground, but there is new stuff that we had not talked about in the opening statement and the best way that i thought i could present it to you is visually. and so i have a great number of -- of slides that i'd like to show you and really with an eye toward foc- -- focusing in on the actual evidence, not soaring oratory, the facts, the proof, what is there, what the law truly requires, so that when you do retire and you do reach a decision in this case, it will be based upon the things that you promised and swore, both from the very outset of this case, that would be the only basis upon which your decisions would be based, so. now, with -- with that, i'd like to first put up a 22 slide which depicts -- no, let us leave the lights up, if you do not mind. thank you, mr. olson. okay. what is not on the verdict form. let us get this out of the way right at -- at the -- at the outset. first of all, whether cigarette smoking caused jackie miller's lung cancer. as i told you at the outset, we do not -- we do not dispute that at all in this proceeding. next. whether she was addicted to cigarettes. again, that is not in dispute here either. next. whether cigarettes should be legal. now, again, what is important here is, as you -- as you know -- well know, that at one point in time they were illegal in florida. we touched upon that yesterday with mr. -- mr. roberts, dr. roberts very briefly. and while i know that some of you may wish cigarettes were not legal, part of the oath that we have given in this case is that this case is not to decide that issue. that is not before us in this proceeding. and i trust and i know, given how seriously you have taken your task here and -- and participating as jurors in this case, that you will decide it on the issues that the court does frame and not the ones that it does not. next. okay. now, right here at the outset, i thought it important to spend a minute and summarize the evidence. there is only one dispute here that i need to surface right now, in all this information that is depicted here, and i'll get to it in a minute when i get to my timeline and i walk through the facts and the testimony. there is really no dispute whatsoever in any of what is depicted here based upon the evidence, other than whether kents begins here in 1959, which is, as you will hear more about in a minute, which is what carol gibson testified to in her first deposition, or whether it should be pushed five years back earlier, which is what she testified to in her second deposition. that is the only -- of all this information here, of all these brands and all these time frames, i submit to you there is no dispute whatsoever, other than -- than in that one respect with regard to the kent brand usage. and the -- the significance, or what i would suggest is the significance, that would become more plain as i get to that point in my presentation. now, at the outset of this proceeding, we talked about -- next -- next slide, please -- control, causation and responsibility. and i presented these to you as sort of a shorthand method for thinking about the issue of legal cause, which we are going to be spending a good bit of time on in my remarks here today, because 24 really, as i suggested to you, if you can answer the first two issues here, address these first two issues, then you will know who ultimately is responsible in this proceeding and -- and that should guide your verdict. so let us go to the next slide. control. of course, the issue there is who is -- who is the person who was in control of jackie miller's lifestyle decisions? we have heard an awful lot about it. and at the outset when i did -- when i presented my opening statement, what i told you that i wanted to do and what i've done my best to do in this proceeding is to develop the evidence in a way so that each of you had -- gets to know her, got to know her beyond in a superficial way. because really you need to know the person and how the person lived her life and how from, you know, externally looking at the evidence, how she went about deciding the important things that she decided in her life. and to that end, we spent a great deal of time looking at her and the decisions that she made and the experiences that she had and why she did what she did. and also we -- we spent time in this regard looking at the whole issue of addiction. and mr. patacca's right, i did not put on an addiction expert. and i did that for a very good reason. i did it because the acknowledgments from the two experts who testified in his case on the subject of addiction presented the proof that i needed. and you have sat here long enough, i was not about to put on another one just to duplicate what had -- had already been elicited from the witness stand. so in that regard, let us go to the next slide. what do the experts say about quitting smoking? plaintiff's experts. they say more than that 50 ameri- -- million americans have quit. next. they say that the fact someone is addicted is a barrier -- barrier to the behavioral change, but it does not free them from responsibility for their own behavior. that is dr. burns. being addicted does not prevent a smoker from trying to quit. okay. and, finally, the individual smoker must decide whether or not to continue smoking. none of this is exactly a great revelation. but you look at the evidence here and as we will see again here in a little bit, there is very little evidence that suggests that jackie miller ever even tried or was interested in quitting smoking, but we will -- we will detail that more in a little bit. next slide, please. the same experts say, even if you are addicted, you can still quit smoking. 1.5 million smokers quit every year. and ninety percent -- this may have been -- be a surprise to some of you that have not really spent much time looking at the subject of 3992 quitting smoking, but ninety percent of the people who quit smoking, quit cold turkey. and i -- i'd submit to you that is just common sense, because as you have heard in this case, what really is the key to somebody quitting is whether they are motivated to quit, whether they really want to quit, whether they persist in that motivation, whether they have in their heart of hearts a commitment to quitting. and as a consequence, what could be more plain than if you are going to do it cold turkey? most likely you have made that decision and you have more of a commitment than otherwise. as the evidence indicates here, most of the nicotine is gone from your body within 24 hours of smoking the last cigarette. and, finally, any withdrawal effect from nicotine is gone in 10 to 14 days. so all of the -- all of that evidence is -- is pertinent to your evaluation and ultimate decision as to who is in control first and foremost of jackie miller's smoking. and -- and who -- therefore, ultimately, that is part of the responsibility question. next slide. the -- the evidence here, i think, plainly rec- -- reflects that jackie miller enjoyed smoking cigarettes. let me stop on that for a minute. i have to tell you that i've never seen so many photographs introduced in a trial in my -- my life. and what is interesting to me about them, particularly in this context, is how of all those photographs, as i look at them, there is only one, and you will see them and be able to take them back with you into the jury room, there is only one -- all of them depict ms. miller smoking, almost every one and every one is pretty much in a social setting, whether it be with friends or family and everyone, she seems immensely -- to be immensely enjoying herself, which is wonderful. but the point being, that is, that it seemed that she enjoyed smoking along with all the things that are depicted in the photographs that have been put in front of you. it did not in any -- there was only one picture in there, you will see it, there is one that was from the quonset hut in hawaii, where she seemed, i do not know, tired or whatever and the young children, who knows, but of all those photographs and the videos that you saw from, you know, down in delray beach, all of them, you know, immensely social, enjoying herself and enjoying her smoking at the same time. her sister testified that she liked the taste. and there are a number of questions in that regard 2 and -- and all of them pointed to the conclusion that taste, and you will see more of this, was what she based her decision having to do with what cigarette she smoked on. with the exception of after she moved to delray beach and smoked the carlton 120s to cut back, every cigarette prior to that, it seems, was selected based upon the taste. she smoked to help her relax. she would rather go without smoking than smoke a brand she did not enjoy. and you will see this again. there was one situation at the yacht club in new smyrna beach where she is there with her sister and she is offered a couple of different types of cigarettes, she refuses them. she would rather go without smoking than smoke one that she did not like the taste of. she controlled where she smoked. you will recall ralph gibson, whether it was in his car, on his boat, in their house, with mr. clemmons down in delray -- delray beach, she is out on the -- she is outside because he would not let her smoke in the apartment, all of which are indications that she controlled where and when she smoked. and she never told anyone she wanted to quit, but was unable to do so. that is, obviously, using your common sense. very telling. all these years of smoking, all these interactions with friends, family, you did not hear one person in this case testify that she -- she was interested in quitting smoking. next. okay. this is something that we are going to be spending a good bit of time on because it -- it fronts in a -- in a more specific way the concept of legal cause. and it is in the context of ms. miller's -- excuse me, ms. mrozek's acknowledgment that her mother was negligent in her efforts to quit smoking and that -- that this negligence was a partial legal cause of her death. okay. as you will see, legal cause is a big thing. it is a big thing because it is what you must establish to -- to create liability. and in order for something -- as you will hear, we are going to be going over the definition of legal cause, but very simply, you have to show a -- a direct and sub- -- and significant impact on somebody by your actions, which is -- so -- so it -- it also has to demonstrate that but for that action, then the harm would not have occurred. we are going to be going over that and we are going to be going over that in the context of several of the claims in this case. but this is significant because what it says is that ms. mrozek acknowledges from a legal cause perspective that if her mother had done certain things, 4 and i'll -- i'll go over those in a minute, then as a legal cause she would not have gotten sick. okay. next slide. and here are those acknowledgments from ms. mrozek. she acknowledges, as you can see, that her mother bears some responsibility for smoking the cigarettes that caused her death. she acknowledges or believes that her mother bears some responsibility because she did not make a greater effort to stop smoking sooner. she could have -- she indicates here, she -- she should have tried to quit, tried harder to quit. and, finally, you believe she bears some responsibility because she did not make a greater effort to stop? and, yes, i believe she could have kept trying and she did not. now, next. let us move to the next point here and that, of course, is causation as the golden language indicates. causation in this context means that the plaintiff, and you heard mr. anderson in his opening when he said, i do not have to prove anything, as the defendant, they have to prove everything because the burden is on them. and they have to prove in the civil context by the greater weight of evidence, which is the stronger, more compelling, more credible evidence. in this context, that lorillard did or failed to do something that had a substantial impact on ms. miller's smoking, not just some impact, it must be a substantial impact. and that has to be more than simply showing that we manufactured cigarettes that she smoked over a period of time, became ill and, unfortunately, ultimately died. because, again, cigarettes are a legal product in this country. merely making -- making them, selling them, having someone use them, without proof of more, is not enough in our system to impose liability on anyone. the judge will make that plain in his instructions. and that is already been acknowledged by plaintiff's counsel. you have to -- they have to sustain their burden. and if you conclude, as i suggested in my opening and will continue to suggest, that -- that today, that is reflected by this evidence, is the -- the evidence that is before you that has been tied, connected by proof to jackie miller does nothing more than demonstrate that we made a legal product, she smoked it, unfortunately, she was among those -- the small percentage that dr. burns testified to, that became ill and, unfortunately, died. so we will be -- we will be visiting more on that later. had -- in -- i submit to you it just makes an abundance of sense, you cannot -- if there is an ad that somebody -- we talked about the concept of legal cause. 6 if there is an ad that someone did not see, then plainly that could not be evidence that has any bearing on a claim for liability as to them. i do not know whether you recognize it or not, but in the first four-plus days when you sat here so patiently and listened to those videotapes all those hours, a good bit of the testimony that was advanced by the plaintiff in support of -- of their case had to do with the product newport. and i -- i bring that up to make the point because newport was not a cigarette that was ever smoked by ms. miller. in part, because it is a menthol cigarette and you have heard again and again she would not smoke a menthol. she did not like a menthol cigarette. so in terms of causation, things that she -- like that, statements that had something to do with a product that she never smoked or documents that you saw, one in particular you saw twice from 1978, had -- referencing -- it was paraded in here twice on the issue of youth marketing, that is a serious subject. but in a case where the decedent in 1978 was, what, 48 years old, a youth marketing document that -- you know, anything after 1948, she was not a youth. so plainly, in terms of the issue of causation, while -- while whatever was in there, you know, may have been wrong, whatever, inflammatory, it is got nothing to do with this case and her claim because very plainly it -- it -- it was not connected in any way, shape or form to ms. miller for the reasons that i suggested. next slide. okay. legal cause. here it is again. and that we have put in brackets here the reference in two places to wrongful conduct by my client. that is what they have to prove, that they are -- well, let us walk through this together. this re- -- this requires that lorillard's wrongful conduct, they have to show that lorillard engaged in wrong -- wrongful conduct that is a legal cause of injury. and it is that if it directly and in natural and continuous sequence produces or contributes substantially to producing the injury, so that it can reasonably be said, but for lorillard's wrongful conduct, the injury would not have occurred. okay. i know that is a lot of lawyer jargon, but it is still -- it is pretty straightforward. that is why i bring out the points that i've been bringing out. it has to be -- they have to show that the wrongful conduct had a direct impact on ms. miller and that it -- it contributed substantially to producing the injury. and, finally, and this -- this will prove, i think, to be the most compelling of all aspects of this, at least from our perspective, is the final emphasized language here is that but for lorillard's wrongful 8 conduct. you are going to be hearing this from me again and again. but i might as well bring it out right now. the but for language means you have to have concluded -- in order for lorillard to be, in our view, under this standard, you -- the plaintiff must prove that if it were not for lorillard's cigarettes, then ms. miller would not have smoked, she would have not -- not have become ill, she would not have died. and you think about why that is. if there is something that was -- had a direct and substantial impact on her, then you would think that if you took that away, she would not be injured. okay. that is what the but for language there is about. and we all know, remember the slide i just showed you a couple minutes ago, that she smoked, what, ten brands in the course of her lifetime? some of it was kind of hard to pin down, but as you will see here in a few minutes, she does not smoke a lorillard brand past 1988. all right. and there are a number of other brands that are interspersed here and there along the way. but the point is i think the evidence is very clear that ms. miller would have been a cigarette smoker and would have been a cigarette smoker all her life, even if there had not been a lorillard tobacco company. okay. so it is not anything that was unique to any of lorillard advertisement, lorillard product, anything about lorillard. and i think that as a result of that, as -- as we walk through the verdict form in a few minutes, this is something that will have, i would submit, great significance. back -- the next -- next slide. and here it is again in a different way. you have to have a direct connection, a substantial impact on every issue in order to have legal cause. now, where do we find it? where do we look for it? just where we looked for it the last time, in the evidence, from the witness stand, from the people who came in here and raised their right hand and -- and testified. next slide, please. before i do that, this slide, as i suggested earlier, if you determine who was in control and you determine causation, who was in -- who -- you know, whether or not they satisfied that element, that will tell you who is responsible for it ultimately, the issues in this case. next slide, please. now, you are famil- -- familiar with this and i'm not going to go over all the things by any means that i did last time, but i do want to make a number of points for each of the decades that we have spelled out here. and the first one has to do 10 with initiation. next slide, please. as this slide indicates, no one knows why jackie miller started smoking. we do not know anything about her first cigarette, when she started smoking, how old she was. and -- and her sister testified that she never told her that she smoked because of a particular movie star or athlete. and, likewise, the plaintiff, michelle mrozek, testified that she never discussed with her mother why she smoked cigarettes. next slide, please. now, lou fink, she is a -- a big part of getting -- of this case because she, more than anyone else, knew jackie miller throughout her entire life, which you will doubtless recall, this is the -- this is the lady who in the 1947 time frame would smoke with her on the stoop across from their school. and i asked ms. fink about a lot of different things because she had a lot to share with us. one thing she told us is, as depicted here, that she had no knowledge of her friend, ms. miller, ever seeing or reading an ad. and she had no knowledge that her friend, ms. miller, was ever influenced, even in the slightest, by any advertisement to purchase cigarettes. yes, she remembered the -- the dancing pack from old gold. she testified to that. she also remembered the lucky strike, some advertisement from lucky strike. but she smoked chesterfield. and she said, yeah, i remember that and it did not have an influence on me at all. and, no, i do not know from the time that i was there right with her and smoking with her, two or three times a week, one or two cigarettes a day, there was no mention of any advertising and i do not know anything about that. and really that is the sum and substance of all the testimony in the 1940s about ms. miller smoking and is the only brand testimony that is specific in the 1940s. so that is -- that is all there is to offer on that. now, next slide, please. now, i put a new reference down here on the bottom, 1946, the parmele memo. you will recall that the parmele memo was the very first document that the plaintiff put before you after we finished listening to all those videos. and it was a letter that talked about cigarette smoke and benzpyrene. and what -- it was directed to my client and that is as far as it went. but as you saw yesterday, there was a response and there was action taken. there was, what i would submit, may have been surprising to you, an ongoing effort after the parmele memo by my client to take action to get to the bottom of things that had been raised in that memo. 12 next slide, please. here's the memo itself. next slide. and here are the things that were referenced yesterday when my partner, mr. woods, was intro- -- introducing evidence that should be still pretty fresh in your recollection. there was work done on the evaluation of cigarette smoke, that it was commissioned by lorillard at the ohio state university in the 1940s. and perhaps even more compelling than that is the -- is -- are the documents in the '50s and '60s reflecting joint efforts by lorillard, along with dr. ernst wynd- -- wynder and dr. dietrich hoffmann, who you saw a lot about. these were the gentlemen who were at the forefront of the effort on -- from the public health community side to get to the bottom of what the true -- the truth is having to do with cigarette smoking. and here they are arm-and-arm with lorillard working with them, as the evidence depicted yesterday, in the '50s and 1960s. you also saw references to submissions to the surgeon general's advisory committee, which included that big green book they called the green monster, which was commissioned by the -- the cigarette manufacturers and paid for. and what -- what they did was, if you will recall, is gather up 6,000 or so of all the studies that had been conducted up to that time and gave them to the committee in an effort to assist them in their undertaking as the surgeon general's advisory committee. and as you saw, there was an expression of appreciation and gratitude, both, individually to lorillard and to the industry as a whole by the surgeon general himself in 1964. have reference here to the tobacco working group, which is -- was referenced at some length during the testimony of dr. robinson at the outset of the case. and that was an example -- that is the national cancer institute and tobacco working group that worked together in the late '60s and early '70s in an effort to get to the bottom of how can you make a safer cigarette? it was a joint effort. and lorillard participated in that -- in that effort as well. finally, work that was done with the national academy of sciences, institute of medicine that involves the sharing of ingredient information more recently, in the year 2000. next slide. now, i put this in here because it depicts some of the -- the principal folks that are involved in this case and the experiences that they had that influenced the decisions that were made. and the most notable, obviously, is ms. miller there in the center and harold read and lou read. 14 lou read, of course, now is louise fink. and harold read is her husband at the time, who, as you recall, had the misfortune of a smoking-related illness. we will be talking more about him in a little while. one of the -- okay. the -- let us move along here. next slide. 1950s. i already told you about the smoking brand testimony in the '40s. the -- the first mention of cigarette smoking in -- in a brand specific way is this first entry here in 1950, '51, is helen schumacher who you will recall testified. she is the lady that worked at the new smyrna beach city hall with ms. miller. and she -- she referenced that she gave, as a christmas gift, at the request of ms. miller, two cartons of chesterfield cigarettes, which are brands that are not made by my client. that is the only testimony of a brand between 1951 and 1959 except for the testimony of carol gibson. and i want to spend a minute here because i want to go through that because when i sit down, i will not have an opportunity to address you again. and i do not know what mr. patacca will say once i sit down, so i have to address what i'm going to address while i'm here and while i have the floor. let me just make something very plain here. lorillard does not in any way, shape or form challenge the fact that ms. miller smoked our brand from 1959 until the late '70s. there is no dispute about that at all. the kent brand specifically is what i'm referring to. and we also do not dispute that she smoked max sometime in the '80s. we do not know for how long really, but we know that by the time she moved to delray beach in, say, '88, '89, she was no longer smoking our brand. okay. so we are not in any way, shape or form -- and that is a lot of years. we are not running from that at all. i admit that straight up. the only thing that i take a little bit of issue with, and he has not conceded it yet, so i want to bring it up to you so that you can understand where i'm coming from and why and it is based on the evidence. as you will recall, ms. miller's sister, carol gibson, testified here at some length. she testified about, first of all, the fact she had an initial deposition, i think it was december 16th, 2009. and we asked her all the usual stuff, you know, everything you know about -- particularly with a family member, a -- a sister of the decedent, you try and be very careful to get all the facts. and we did. and she testified in that deposition that her sister -- she had first recollection of her sister 16 smoking the kent brand was in 19- -- when -- was when she went to see her in hawaii in 1959 or 1960, which made sense, because in those days ms. -- ms. gibson would have been 15 or 16 years of age, still pretty darn young. and she said that, when pressed on it, she -- she -- in her first deposition, she said, well, maybe it might have been earlier. but then she caught her -- but then she said, no, all i can really say -- all i really remember is 1959, 1960, that time frame. and the only reason i bring it up is because the -- the second deposition that she gave some nine months later, after her words, obsessing about her first testimony, her first deposition, after spending numerous hours going over it, she then filled out the errata sheet and did not change that testimony, did not change her testimony as it relates to when she remembers her sister smoking the kent brand. and then nine months later, she is on a telephone call with mr. anderson and says, well, i -- i've -- i've remembered some other things or words to that effect. and the following week he is on a plane to atlanta to go visit her. and she testified that part of her motivation for visiting with him was in an effort to help her niece, michelle mrozek, prevail in this case. and as a result of that meeting, another deposition was taken and she expanded her testimony from 1959 back into this time frame when she was ten years of age. okay. and what she did to support that was she brought in a picture. can we pull that picture up, please? she brought in three pictures to be more specific. and on direct she testified that the two pictures below, because they were in a mobile home, those were in st. petersburg when the mobile home was down there in 1959, absolutely consistent with the time frame i'm talking about. but then she said with this photograph here, this was 1954. and that puzzled me, i -- i must tell you. it puzzled me, i'm sitting there looking at these photos, all the furniture, the drapes and everything, granted there is a baby in the two below and, obviously, that is the plaintiff and she was not born until 1959. but what about this -- ultimately, i had to ask her, you said this photograph here is from 1954. and the reason is there is a pack of kent sitting right here. okay. and i asked her, you brought two stacks of photographs to your deposition, that photograph was not in there. she acknowledged it was not. she said it was not hers. she did not know where it came from. then i asked her, well, then, what distinguishing 18 characteristics -- on what basis did you testify that that photo was from 1954? you will recall what she said. she said, it was an assumption. that is all it was. and i'll submit to you that is an assumption -- that is an illustration of someone, i would submit, who is, in fact, by that time, trying to extend her assistance in this cause in a way that should not be credible. okay. this -- this -- this is a search for the truth. it is not a search for assumptions. now, why does that matter? why does that matter that if we acknowledge the smoking in -- from 1959 on? well, very simply because the plaintiff is trying to say that the advertisements of the greatest health protection for the kent brand influenced jackie miller and it is -- it is very convenient for them, if she happened to start smoking that brand at the very limited time those advertisements ran. in 1954, in 1955 are the only times those -- those ads ran. and as you will see, rather than being the success during '54 and '55, that -- that plaintiff suggests that it was as a result of the advertisement, the -- take it down, please. next slide. that rather than being the big success, the sales of the kent cigarette did not go up during the time frame that those ads ran. they went down. there was a reduction in sales, in the volume for the kent brand in 1955 during the time frame that those ads ran. it was not until much later when, in 1957, you have heard about it, the reader's digest article ran. and reader's digest, not lorillard tobacco company, published an article which -- which concluded that the kent filter was more effective than the filters on other brands. and that is what prompted a spike, not the suggestion that an ineffective ad, which apparently few people paid attention to, was a success or had an impact on people in the marketplace. but what is significant here, even if you indulge that testimony, and, obviously, i would suggest that for all those reasons and there is -- there is more, that the second deposition of carol gibson should not be taken as credible. in fact, she -- on the witness stand, when trying to still support that testimony, you will recall at the end of her examination, she was asked whether she understood that she was supposed to make substantive changes. and she said, no, i -- i did not realize that. and then i came back up to -- to the -- the lector and reminded her and showed her where, in fact, she was asked that specific question and she had to admit she did, in fact, know that at the time. 20 that said, moving on. no. back up, please. the evidence here from ms. mrozek is that she recognizes, as depicted here, that her mother never switched. she does not have any knowledge of her mother ever switching brands because of an ad, ever. and, likewise, ms. gibson, to your knowledge, she never purchased cigarettes because of an ad? to my knowledge, i never heard her say she was purchasing a cigarette because of the advertisement. and to your understanding, and this is the point i made earlier, your sister bought the cigarettes that she liked? answer: my understanding is that she bought the cigarettes that she liked. now, let us go to the slide that makes the point on the -- the sales. one more. next. this is a slide that makes my point for me and makes it graphically. as i've -- as the testimony was brought -- was provided by ms. leung, that greatest health protection that you are -- you have been hearing about, those ads ran here in '54 and '55. they stopped. that is when the -- the -- the constraints -- the restrictions were imposed on cigarette advertising. you will hear more about that as we go forward. but the point is, here in 1955 when that ad's running, when mr. patacca suggests that that was such a big thing, that that ad had such an influence, what does it -- what happens? it goes from a 1.0 market share to a .7 and it stays here at .8. then it does not begin to go up, until, guess what, 1957. 1957. years after that ad ran for the last time. this is evidence. this is not surmise. okay. this is what is common sense, i would submit, will tell you what happened here. and that is that when that ad ran and for no other reason, the endorsement that was provided by publication, which was the most widely read publication in the united states in those days and a publication, which you will recall from all of those things you saw yesterday, had repeatedly written articles warning folks about the risks of smoking. they come out and say that, in fact, this particular filter, if you are going to smoke a filter, should be the one that you smoke. and it had that effect. and i must tell you, is that ever since -- you see that 8.3 going down to 8.2 and 8.0, it has continued downward to a point. whereas, you recall from kristy leung's testimony, they do not even support kent as a -- as a brand where they would be running ads anymore. it is a very small fraction of lorillard's business. notwithstanding what it did back when and for the obvious reason that it was -- it was tallied by someone unconnected with 22 lorillard tobacco company. next slide, please. the suggestion about health and concern about health in the cigarettes go, we asked ms. gibson whether she -- her sister had ever said anything about choosing a filtered cigarette because she felt they were healthier. she never said they were healthier. likewise, your sister never told you she chose one because they are healthier, right? she never told me that. okay. would not you think if that were a fact that why she was choosing that brand, that she might have told her sister that at some point in time? and the evidence clearly is that she never did. okay. moving on. next slide. now, the -- we are about through here with the decade of the '50s and i'll try and pick up the pace here a little bit. but i wanted to -- to deal with the issue of carol gibson's testimony before i got through this. one other thing before i leave ms. gibson, and i do not mean to pick on her, but i think it illustrates a point. one other thing -- and -- and she was only, as i said, ten years old at the time. remember her testimony that her sister moved out in -- -- when she was in -- when ms. gibson was in the second grade? that is roughly 1949. she did not move back into the home until august of 1954. ms. miller was up in memphis, tennessee, or elsewhere. she was not in the home until the summer, late summer 1954. she got married, as you will recall. she eloped in december of 1954. so the sum and substance of the entire time -- the entire time that ms. miller lived with carol gibson was between august '54 and december 1954 in the entire decade of the 1950s. that is what the testimony says. also one other point on that and to illustrate what i would submit is a failure of memory. billie carter dawson came in here on videotape and testified, i was at the -- in folkston, georgia, for the wedding. i was there. she was an adult at the time, young adult, but she was an adult nonetheless. carol gibson is asked about that very subject and is emphatic, no, she was not there. well, she was a ten-year-old. and contradicting someone who came in here, you had the opportunity to -- to observe, and i dare say, would have an all likelihood far better recollection of the facts. all of which points to -- to the -- to the fact that in terms of these childhood recollections from ms. gibson with a stated purpose that she is acknowledged behind her testimony, all i'm saying is 1959 or thereabouts is when the evidence depicts that ms. miller started smoking the kent brand. 24 one more thing, the frank statement. again, there is no testimony here -- you can call it up. there is no testimony here that ms. miller -- this was published one day in 1954. there is no testimony here linking, connecting this -- this statement to jackie miller. there is no one that came in here, we asked everyone, obviously, no one ever said she saw and heard about it or had any familiarity with it at all. next slide, please. finally, regulation of cigarettes in the '50s. the cigarette advertising guides come out, lorillard meets with the ftc. and beginning in 1958, and this is important, lorillard, beginning in 1958, pre-clears its advertisements with the federal trade commission. so you are not seeing -- there are not any santas and puppy dogs or greatest health protection. there is none of that because everything beginning in 1958 and thereafter is proved by the federal trade commission before it is utilized. next slide, please. we are in the '60s. the first entry here that i'd like to discuss is 1962. that is where mr. ralph gibson, who testified here the other day and who testified about his smoking history and how he knew the risks of smoking back in the 1950s, quit because of that awareness and then chose to resume in 1959, smoking a filter. let us pull up his -- his acknowledgment. now, what does he say? you knew about the health risks of smoking since 1950? yes. and this was an electrical engineer. this was not a doctor. this was not anyone with any specialized training. he said: you also saw things in ads and on the news in '62 that further illustrated to you that cigarettes were hazardous or potentially hazardous to your health, correct? yes. so in '62 you decided to quit smoking because you believed it was the only way to protect yourself from the health risks that accompany smoking? you concluded it was not safe to continue smoking at that time even if you were smoking filtered cigarettes? and this fellow had resumed smoking for a number of years, he smoked filtered cigarettes. and this is before the surgeon general's report, this is before labels on any packs and this is just an ordinary, you know, walking around, nice guy who came in here and testified and shared his experience during that same time frame. and he is roughly -- he is in the same -- 4019 about the same age as -- as ms. miller was. now, next slide. now, next thing of great significance in the '60s, obviously, is the surgeon general's general report on smoking and health is released. next slide. publication. notoriety. you have seen it. it is here. here's -- but some examples, all of which i think you have already seen. the one that is -- was prominent there at the top is the honolulu star bulletin. next slide. and we have got some callouts here and this is from the front page of the newspaper in honolulu where ms. miller and her husband, robert or bob, was then living, as you can see and as you have heard. this article points out that cigarette smoking far outweighs all other causes of lung cancer in men and the data for women point in the same direction. point being there was a great amount of notoriety given to this, not only in -- here in the states, but even as far as hawaii where ms. -- ms. miller was then living. next slide. okay. now, just to point out the friends, her friends, ms. miller's friends. now, i excerpted a couple of them. helen schumacher, a nonsmoker, you know, what does she acknowledge? she acknowledges here that while she did not always read the paper thoroughly, she knew in 1964 when the surgeon general announced that cigarette smoking was dangerous, she remembers that. next slide. louise fink and carol gibson on the same issue. ms. fink acknowledged, as you can see, that that message about the surgeon general's report was something she heard in new smyrna. obviously, she is the same age and living there at the -- at -- where ms. miller lived most of her life. she acknowledges and that was communicated generally in new smyrna, like everywhere else. finally at the bottom here, carol gibson. of course, ms. gibson, as you -- as you will recall, not only acknowledges that, but then she uses that knowledge and information as -- as further impetus to do something else with her sister and her sister's smoking at that point in time. next slide, please. the other thing that happened in the '60s, quite obviously, from a governmental standpoint, is the warning label in 1966. let us call that up quickly. which, obviously, we have heard a lot about cigarette smoking may be hazardous to your health. and that, of course, was on every -- on every pack of cigarettes beginning at that time. and some variation of that has been on there ever since. 2 now, the -- the other thing of great significance to this case in the 1960s, i would suggest, is that, first of all, unfortunately, ms. miller's father dies at the age of 52 in 1960. and he is a cigarette smoker. next slide, please. and ms. gibson, when the -- as -- has testified, as you heard, that after she started seeing the warnings on the packs and just a few years earlier having lost her father, who was a smoker, to lung cancer, we asked her whether she has started associating her father's passing with his smoking? and she did. she nonetheless continued smoking. and we asked her and she acknowledged that she told her sister that she believed that her father's lung cancer was due to his smoking in the 1960s. and as you have heard, she went on to testify that -- words to the effect, it has not been proved. but there is something which, you know, if credited, that testimony from ms. gibson reflects that -- that her sister had the same right to make her decision as to whether to continue smoking, just as she did at the time. ms. gibson acknowledged the connection, believed the connection, chose to continue smoking. that was her choice to make and anything that flowed from that would be, obviously, her responsibility as well. likewise, you know, this is a free country. ms. miller could do as she pleased in that regard. and she made that decision at that time and she was entitled to do so, but there are other things going on as well that i would submit have a bearing on whether or not, you know, you would credit that testimony or that decision and -- and very simply it is this. as you will recall, the plaintiff, michelle mrozek, in the same time frame this is happening in the late 1960s, is telling her aunt, carol gibson, when ms. -- ms. mrozek is roughly ten years old, she tells her, my lungs are pink and yours are black. okay. next slide. and here it is. do you recall an exchange with the plaintiff back at the time where she said, in essence, your lungs are pink and yours are black? she says: exactly. it is sort of an out-of-mouth-of-babes moment that had an impact on you that you remember more than 40 years later, right? and she says: exactly. and you -- when you heard it, your reaction was you thought she is right. okay. what do you think the likelihood is that if she is telling her aunt, who would come down periodically to visit, these things, what do you think the likelihood is that as a ten year old, the plaintiff in this case did not say the very same thing to her mother within 4 years of her father passing? okay. and close proximity in time to accompany the warning labels going on the pack. i dare say it is very unlikely that she did not tell, but that would be an assumption and i'm not crediting -- i'm not suggesting you assume anything. but by the same token, you do not check your common sense at the door, you know. here's a ten year old saying these things to her aunt at the same time her mother's smoking in the same household with her. one other thing. next slide. and this is just an aside here. and -- and -- because mr. reasoner sums it up, i think, pretty -- pretty aptly at -- at the very point in time that we are talking about here with the surgeon general's report. he says, and i quote, in this kind of country, it comes down to you, whether you like it or not. no one is going to forbid an adult to smoke. it is now quite clear that no one is going to tell him it is good for him either. just like michelle mrozek was telling her aunt that her smoking at that time was not good for her. okay. next slide. one other -- a couple of things here. late 1960s, same time frame these conversations are occurring, what is the proof? the proof is that bob miller quit smoking himself at that point in time. so not only do you have these conversations occurring both with mother and -- and -- well, excuse me, with plaintiff and aunt, you -- and you have the first husband quitting smoking himself as well. also you have the final entry here that i wanted to mention and i -- before i move on, jackie miller refuses sale of marlboro when she runs out of kent. this is another situation described from the stand by ms. miller -- excuse me, by ms. gibson where she testified, and we have a slide on that, that her sister ran out of cigarettes occasionally. ms. gibson at the time was smoking salem, which is a menthol cigarettes -- cigarette, she turned it down. another gentleman who was there that evening offered her a marlboro and she turned that down. next. and it went on. she disliked marlboros and she -- when she was offered one, she turned it down. and so rather than smoking something she did not like, she chose not to smoke on that particular occasion. it is -- it is an example of control. it is an example of why she smoked and -- and what prompted her to smoke. this is not somebody that was smoking to get -- certainly not in this exchange, it was for taste. it was what -- she would not smoking if she did not like it. so that -- that is what that point, i would submit, 6 illustrates from that exchange then. one -- one further slide and i'm moving on. 1960s, regulation of cigarettes, we have the cigarette advertising code, the federal cigarette labeling and advertising act, again '66, warning label and the public health smoking act. all of which are, as you will see in each general -- each decade as we roll further, the regulations imposed limiting smoking, limiting and increasing requirements and constraints on cigarette smoking become more pronounced each year. and, of course, lorillard each step of the way is in compliance with those, as the evidence has already depicted. next slide. we are now in the '70s. one -- thank you. we are now in the '70s and the -- let me see. the first entry here there is a significance because it comes right on the heels of this time when she is suggesting that her -- when carol gibson is suggesting her sister told her that she did not believe it. well, the -- what some might call an equivocal sort of cautionary statement on the packs in 1966 becomes much more strident in 1970, in november. let us pull that up, please. when the warning label becomes -- no longer says caution, then no longer says maybe, it says, as you can see, warning: the surgeon general has determined that cigarette smoking is dangerous to your health. so there that is on every pack of cigarettes that ms. miller smoked and anyone else smoked, obviously, from that point on until they changed again in 1985. interestingly about this warning label -- let us go back, the next slide. the only offspring of ms. miller who did not become a regular smoker was her son, robert, who testified here. and as this testimony reflects, and i -- i want to share it with you because i think it is significant. if i understood mr. patacca's remarks earlier, i think he was acknowledging that maybe she knew the risks of smoking in the '80s somewhere, something to that effect. her son, robert, who was a nonsmoker testified that he knew the risks of smoking in 1973 when he was 13, he knew it was bad for his health, he knew about the surgeon general -- he knew -- as you can see here, he learned that smoking can lead to cancer from the surgeon general's warnings when he was 15 or 16. and he -- he also acknowledges that he already was aware that smoking was hazardous to his health before he saw the warnings. and he, too, for most of his young life, lived with his mother and he knew those things from a variety of sources. in all likelihood, from the packs of cigarettes that she had of her own as well. next slide. now, the -- the next entry here that is of significance that i'd like to share with you 8 for a minute here is in '74 when jackie miller's close friend, louise fink's husband, harold read, dies from lung cancer due to smoking. this is a significant effect because any one of us who lost a friend or had a dear friend whose spouse died, particularly at a young age, particularly when you think back to the photos like i showed you earlier of them on the beach doing things together and he is in the picture and louise is in the picture and ms. miller's in the picture, you know. here in 1974, ms. miller is -- is -- louise fink testified, she believes that she was at the funeral. they were close friends, in the same town. she does not recall, given the number of people who were present, specifically if she was there. next slide. and there you have it. we do not know the -- the specific date. well, i think this may be back from the '50s, but at any rate, close-knit group, did a lot of things together. you heard the testimony. and this should have been a significant event in terms of alerting ms. miller if she wanted to quit smoking. but i keep coming back to that because, you know, i would submit to you -- and whether she looked at the photographs, she looked at the action or the lack of action, i would submit to you, you know -- i did not touch upon it this time, but you will recall there was a -- a quit in 1956 when -- and -- when she was living in gainesville. and the next time there is any evidence of a quit is 30 years thereafter. i would submit to you that that -- and that -- with the fact that there is never any suggestion that she -- in conversation with anyone that she wanted to quit, i think that our record here is pretty clear that ms. miller never really wanted very much to quit smoking. she may have wanted to cut back on her smoking, but in terms of quitting, as you will see as we finish this timeline, there is very little, other than what i've described in that regard. now, next slide. 1977, billie carter dawson, the lady who she lived with in memphis, tennessee, and lived with her in 1954 and new smyrna beach, quit smoking. she told us about it from the stand. she quit smoking because her mother-in-law had emphysema. again, something that ordinarily would -- would put someone on notice if you wanted to do something about your situation and your own behavior, if you were concerned about it, if you wanted to do something about it. and billie dawson quits there, as the others will soon follow suit. late '70s, we see for the first time jackie miller starts smoking the max cigarettes that there have been some reference to. and there was testimony here that in between the kent and the max that perhaps she smoked 10 mores and mistys, both of which are not brands -- are brands that are not made by the lorillard tobacco company. but the important thing here is that she did not switch to max out of a health concern. next slide. max was introduced in 1975, as you know. it is no longer even on the market. the suggestion that lorillard was really good at marketing, remember the -- the bar graph for max? it looked like a flat line from the start. it never went anywhere. it no longer is on the market and had a very short life. the smoke fewer ads that were referred to before by plaintiff's counsel in his opening are referenced here in the time frame that they were utilized as depicted here. the testimony here is very clear that ms. miller liked long, slender cigarettes generally. she was -- she was buying cigarettes for the plaintiff, her daughter, michelle, at this time. and as we have already seen, there is no testimony at all from anyone that she bought cigarettes because of an ad. and every single max cigarette that she purchased, of course, had the surgeon general's warning on it. next, please. next slide. okay. rounding out the '70s, the regulations, again, are depicted here, cigarettes ads are removed from the tv, cigarette general -- surgeon general's warnings are required in all advertisements and the ftc requires tar and nicotine disclosure on the facts. next slide. so now we are in the '80s. first part of the '80s i'd like to spend time on is the reference to -- well, the -- dr. darby and louise fink. as you recall, dr. darby is the personal physician who read the so-called riot act to ms. fink in the early 1980s. let us go to that slide, please. and she relates here how the doctor came to the hospital and motivated her to quit smoking by pointing out and telling her, you damn well better quit now or you are not going to see your grandchildren. this is a lady who was smoking in the '40s and who had been friends with ms. miller throughout all the years. and she, like billie dawson, uses this encouragement from her physician to make a decision, exert the effort, quit smoking. and i thought it particularly telling because this is the same physician at that time, it seems, from a variety of witnesses that ms. miller was seeing as her own personal physician. now, you know, you have got to ask yourself, what is the likelihood that dr. darby was telling louise fink these things and not telling jackie swann miller? next slide. this is something that we have not really talked about, but i thought it would be an 12 appropriate time to talk about it right here. because dr. burns, who is plaintiff's expert, came in here and testified about, among other things, risk reduction. and if i heard him correctly, mr. patacca was saying that she knew the risks of smoking in the 1980s. well, obviously, i would submit the evidence shows it was long -- much earlier than that, but if -- you know, if you look at this, he testified that if someone quit smoking for five years of nonsmoking, your risk -- just five years, your risk would be reduced sixty percent. 60 percent. if she had quit in 1980 when her dear friend, louise fink, quit, then what is that, almost 15 years, give or take, that is eighty percent, eighty percent. and that is from plaintiff's own risk reduction expert. that is his testimony. now, who is responsible for that? who is responsible for that choice? you know, and it is -- it is here for your own consideration. and -- and not -- you know, when you see -- you know, you are -- you are just thankful when you see louise fink, she made that choice and she was here with us all these years later to testify, i would submit, because she did, in fact, make that decision herself. now, joan hall. next slide. joan hall, as you can see here, we are talking about louise fink, this is the lady that had the double elopement with. she quit -- quit smoking in 1981. she is the third of her friends to quit back in that time frame. what does that tell you? what does that tell you? i would submit what it -- what it begins to suggest is that ms. miller was not motivated to quit smoking, that like all those pictures where she is enjoying herself, which she had every right to do, she was enjoying herself and enjoying her smoking while doing so. and there is -- and there is one other aspect to that. there is one other aspect to that. there is no doubt in my mind -- and certainly there is no doubt in my mind that ms. mrozek and her siblings very much loved their mother throughout their lives, very much cared about her. likewise, ms. -- ms. gibson, although i've had take -- taken issue with some of her testimony, i have absolutely no question that she was close with her sister, loved her and misses her. okay. likewise, ralph gibson, he only knew her the last ten years of her life. they were married -- they were married in '87, they met in '84. okay. so he knew her from '84 to '94. and you remember the testimony, he sat on the -- out in the -- the fog's rolling in on -- on lake lanier 14 up in georgia, he is sitting out on the boat and jackie miller's making the coffee and they are sitting there together and she is smoking a cigarette. this is an ardent anti-smoker, ardent. and, you know, i asked him about that. and wait a minute, you are -- you are there with her, nobody's around, you feel this way about smoking and you do not say anything to her? and he said, i believe it was her choice and -- and her right, as an adult, to choose whether she wanted to smoke. and i do not doubt that that is absolutely the truth. and, likewise, a similar explanation is all that i can come up with to explain why no one in the family at any time, including the plaintiff, and i asked her about it, none of them ever suggested to ms. miller that -- that she quit smoking. okay. not once. and the only explanation given that we absolutely are sure that they cared about her is that they all came to the conclusion, they must have, that she wanted to smoke, she made the decision to smoke and that they were going to indulge that adult decision. i cannot think of any other way to credibly put together the facts that have come in on the motivation for the things that have happened -- that did happen to ms. miller in her life as it relates to her smoking. and that is the only way that i think it makes any sense. and i think that like mr. -- mr. gibson said, she certainly was entitled to have made that decision and this is a free country. you have the right to make decisions that puts yourself at risk. and she did. and they apparently concluded that she did because they never said anything. let us move on. rotating warnings on the pack, you know those, 1985, smoking causes lung cancer. and following up on dr. burns' testimony, the second warning here, quitting now greatly reduces serious risks to your health. you just saw that. eighty percentage of reduction of risk, even if it is for as short a period as five years. next. again, in the '80s, with her friends, all these people who loved her, who she enjoyed spending time with, did -- you know, her -- her life was intertwined with these folks and should be. but the only explanation -- and -- and -- and you look how happy she appears to be while smoking. and think back to the -- think back to the -- and this is in the '80s, the delray beach clip when she is doing a video chip for her -- for her daughter who was still then -- malia was still in germany, and, you know, very matter of fact, you know, this is where i smoke cigarettes out here and look at the ocean in the morning. 16 all right. that is not someone -- that is not something, if you are trying to distance yourself from that with your children, i would submit to you, that is not something you would make so prominent. she was very casual about it, which she had every right to be. but i think if you look at that, it is -- it -- you know, pictures, you know, says a thousand words. that film, in that respect, i would suggest, makes very plain her attitude about that subject. and there is nothing wrong with that. it may not be, you know, prudent, you know, as a long-term health decision, but she had the right to make that decision. and -- and she seems to be very happy in each and every photograph. i mean, this -- you know, this is not anything different than all the others that you have seen and i'm confident that you are well aware of that. next slide. okay. another insight i would suggest to ms. miller's attitude about smoking comes from the fact that her daughter, michelle, in 1986 and we talked about this in the opening, quit smoking for several months in 1986 after she had married her husband, ed. and she related, as you may recall, that she quit, using a book on negative reinforcement, that is what she used to -- as a method for quitting for several months. she had been smoking in '86 roughly 11 years. and at the conclusion of this time, you know, that was the assistance she used, you can see right here, for -- to quit for several months. that is right, was her response. and then she was asked: you never gave that book to your mother, right? she said: correct. instead you gave it to your father-in-law? now, do not you think -- this is exactly what i was saying earlier. if it were not a recognition or a belief by people who loved her that she wanted to continue smoking, do not you think that book would have gone to her, rather than her father-in-law, or she would have gotten another copy of it or something? but there is no indication here that anything of that sort occurred. next slide, please. and after that, what happens, after she is quit for several months, i know we talked about this in the opening, she asked her mother for a cigarette. and knowing that she is quit for several months, and without resistance, without comment, without anything, ms. miller gives her a cigarette. and she acknowledges here, this is michelle mrozek: was that the cigarette that returned you to smoking, the one that your mother gave you without resistance? the answer is: yes. 18 so, again, if you are a person who wants to quit smoking, who believes that this is something that you want to put out of your life, i would submit to you, number one, you would never give it without -- to -- to begin with, to your eldest child, that -- that product, as occurred here, in 1975. more than that, in 1986 when that child has quit for a period of time and comes to you and you know that person that -- that person that you love has quit and asks for a cigarette, you would not just hand one over if this person's mindset were as has been depicted, i would submit, by the plaintiff in this case. next slide. now, i'd like to talk briefly about the wedding in '87, that -- up in georgia. and, obviously, we have talked about that a good bit in the testimony. this was the wedding up in atlanta that you have seen pictures and heard about where ms. miller quit for two weeks and her only indication was showers, parties, you name it, she had not smoked. and then at the end of the event, we see a picture of her opposite her daughter, michelle, both of them are sharing cigarettes, apparently from the same pack at the same table. and we are asking carol gibson about this and she acknowledges that during the time frame that she was up there, they did a variety of things, you never observed her smoking? i did not. and then she told you in that time frame that she had quit? she obviously had. next slide. goes on. you did not have con- -- but you did have contact with her the night before? this is from ralph gibson. and this is the rehearsal dinner. and he points out and acknowledges that she went the whole evening in this house where they did not allow smoking and his sister-in-law was not smoking. the point being, again, you know, she is at the wedding, she is having a good time. and i asked mr. gibson about it because he -- this is a fellow, like we have said and like you know, is an ardent antismoker. and what is he do at -- at his wedding reception? he and his wife, carol, allow people to smoke there. and when i asked him about it, he said, well, because i have friends who smoke, who make the adult decision. they are entitled to do it, it is part of their enjoyment. you know, basically, he may not like it, but they do and he understands that. and that, obviously, from the footage that you have seen of that wedding, it seemed apparent that back in a social setting, back with family, whom she loved, some 20 of whom smoked with her, that was only impetus that ms. miller needed to resume smoking at that time. and, again, i would submit that is not really reflective of someone who has a -- a strong commitment or motivation to want to -- to want to remain quit. because, i mean, there was not -- the testimony was there was not anything that indicates that she was in any distress or having withdrawal or anything of the sort during that two-week period. next -- next document. now, finishing out the '80s. '88, ms. miller moves to delray beach and it is significant there because at that time frame, '88, '89, somewhere in there, she stopped smoking lorillard cigarettes forever. that is it. thereafter, every cigarette that she smokes, for whatever reason, is a brand that is made by a company other than lorillard. next slide, please. okay. and here there is a confirmation of that very fact from ms. mrozek, indicating that carltons, misty, capri, benson & hedges, all those are brands that her mother smoked from the late '80s until her death and that none of those cigarettes were made by the lorillard tobacco company. next slide, please. regulations again. more and greater regulation from the government in terms of what we were required to do at that time, including providing a list of ingredients to the government. that is some 25 years ago. next slide. now, in the final four years of ms. miller's life, in my timeline, which i'm close to getting to the end of, malia torgensen quits smoking. she, like so many others that are close to jackie miller, became motivated in her case just like ms. gibson. she was motivated by the impending marriage to curt torgensen. and quit roughly a year before her marriage. and she said it was hard, but she was motivated. and she followed it through and has not smoked since. as you can see here, she was married in 1991. ms. miller moves back from delray beach in 1992, buys the first home that she is owned, you know -- you know, since -- since she had her first marriage. and, unfortunately, her health, which you have heard from a variety of people from the witness stand, beginning with her son, robert, referencing a smoker's cough in the '70s and then through testimony of -- of tricia miller and -- and carol gibson and ralph gibson, her health in the 1980s, obviously, she had experienced a number of problems during that time. from shortness of breath, smoker's cough, bronchitis, emphysema, she is testified about all of those things, you have heard the evidence, you have heard 22 from -- from her family in terms of the experiences and -- and difficulties that she had in that regard in the years that precede this time frame. including the testimony from carol gibson and ralph gibson to the effect that she could not walk more than a city block in the latter part of the 18- -- 1980s and early '90s because of difficulties with her shortness of breath. now, diagnosis is, you know, in november '94 and a very short period of time that she lives, unfortunately. but before she passed, i wanted to take just a minute and touch upon the testimony that you heard yesterday from mr. cuchetti. mr. cuchetti, as you heard from tricia miller earlier, is a longtime friend of hers, and as you saw in the videos, he was the fellow -- one of the fellows who was the singer selected by ms. miller at malia torgensen's wedding on the boat. and ms. miller ran into him at a store, the two of them went over together the first time and saw jackie miller after she was diagnosed. and the testimony was to the effect that he went over there, as a volunteer, to sing to her. he knew her, he went there without pay to comfort her and entertain her and he did just that. in the course of going there, he learned that -- of this song that was her favorite song and, ultimately, she asked him to sing that for her at her wedding. and the only reason that i brought that up is because, you know, if you are looking for insight into what makes a person tick, okay, what makes them go, what they are about, one of the things is music. and in particular, music that you might select when you are -- when it is your last opportunity to say anything about yourself. and, you know, this was her favorite song, the ly- -- the lyrics are poignant because, as you will recall, they are about someone looking back on their life right at the end. and this is the song that she selected and he performed for her in a -- at her funeral, after having sung for her privately a couple of times. and the only -- the reason i brought that up, obviously, is it seemed to me absolutely one hundred percent consistent to the picture that the evidence presents here about how ms. miller lived her life and why she lived it the way she did. she -- you know, she indicated, i believe, through that selection, that as the words say, she had no regrets. she lived her life her way. she made the decisions about her life that she wanted to make about her life and that is the reason i would submit, perhaps, that she selected it. so the -- what i'd like to do now that i'm finished with my -- and i apologize for length of it, 24 but it is a lot of time that we went through, my timeline, i'd like to turn very quickly to the verdict form in this case. the clerk: 30 minutes. mr. molony: how much? the clerk: 30 minutes. mr. molony: 30 minutes. okay. i'll move quickly. here's the verdict form. you will get a chance to see it. there is three questions here. the first page of it that we are going to be talking about, each of them requires a determination on the issue of legal cause. both with regard to negligence, defect and unreasonably dangerous cigarettes question. and the third question, obviously, requires proof of legal cause as well. we have touched upon that and i'm going to spend -- kind of move through this quickly because i'm running out of time. as you know, the -- next slide -- this is what you have to -- plaintiff has to establish in order for there to be a legal cause. direct connection, a substantial impact. next slide, first question on the verdict form is as you see. you will get a chance to review it in the jury room quite obviously. it makes the -- it imposes the requirement of the finding of legal cause there. keep going please. and the instructions that you will be provided by the court, again, requires direct and substantial -- direct connection, substantial impact. you see the language there and you see the but for language as well. next slide. and here you have the acknowledgment from ms. mrozek that her mother was negligent in her efforts to quit smoking and that was a partial legal cause of her death. next slide. the -- in -- in this particular -- and let me address these two very quickly. the negligence issue, there has been no proof here that connects any alleged wrongful conduct by lorillard tobacco company with ms. miller. they have not connected the dots on the issue of negligence. you have the findings. the findings say, and you will have them with you, and you have already heard it, notwithstanding the above findings, which are binding on you in the court, the liability of lorillard to the estate of jacqueline miller must still be proved by the plaintiff in accord with the instructions i will give you hereafter on each specific claim. so negligence and design -- let us go back one. no. go back to the -- to the negligence question, please. ms. vought: which one? 4046 mr. molony: all right. negligence question, please. okay. they have to prove that something lorillard did or failed to do constituted negligence and it was a legal cause of ms. miller's death. i submit to you there has been no evidence of anything that lorillard did or failed to do that provides a direct connection and a substantial impact on ms. miller. i do not know of what the -- what the alleged negligence is. i dare say, i do not think anyone knows what that -- that -- mr. patacca: object, your honor. that is improper. the court: just wait just one second. just wait. the first part is in -- part of your comment is not correct. mr. molony: okay. the -- the court: the part -- you wish me to be specific? the part about them having to prove negligence. mr. molony: no, what i'm -- what they have to do is connect -- they have to find negligence and the plaintiff has to prove a connection between that negligence and the decedent. that is what they have not done. they have not connected the dots. likewise, second half of the test on legal cause but for. the evidence is clear that -- just look at what her smoking history was. is there anyone here who thinks she would not have smoked if there were not lorillard tobacco products for her to purchase? there is not any -- i -- i would submit to you, if you apply your common sense, it is plain, all you need to do is look at what she smoked from '88 thereafter, she smoked other brands. there was not anything particularly magic about anything lorillard did. next. were the defective and unreasonably dangerous cigarettes placed on the market by lorillard a legal cause? again, here's the legal cause concept. what they have to do is make a connection through proof between something that is defective and unreasonably dangerous about these cigarettes. it cannot be the fact that they caused illness because all tobacco does that. it cannot be because they have nicotine in it because it becomes naturally in the cigarette. it has to be something specific to the lorillard cigarettes and -- and that -- that had an impact that they have proven and shown in order to satisfy this requirement here. and -- and on the -- on the requirement of legal cause, plus not only that, we have the issue of but for. and, again, in a -- it is plain, that ms. miller would have smoked other brands, as she did, even if the 2 lorillard cigarettes were not in the picture. next slide, please. here's the definition of what a defective product is. and, again, the highlighted language goes back to what i've been talking about, you know, as we have gone through here today and in my opening. next slide. verdict form. was lorillard's tobacco company concealment or omission of material information about the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes, or both, a legal cause of jacqueline swann miller's death? these two questions are the same. these two questions both require legal cause. these two questions both require connecting the dots with proof that something that was withheld or concealed from her had an impact on her. that is the obligation there. otherwise, the findings would impose liability and we would not need to be here in the first instance. they have a proof obligation on both of these. and i submit to you, they plainly have not met it. likewise, again, the -- the issue of the but for. that is consistent throughout all this and demonstrates why it is that there was not anything significant or -- or particular to lorillard or its behavior that had any impact on ms. miller. next slide. defines material facts. you have an opportunity to read this in the jury room. next slide. importantly, on the -- on the issue of concealment, testimony of their evidence of reliance. every single witness that came to the stand we posed these questions to about the tobacco industry research committee, about comments from the council for tobacco research, anything. did anyone have a conversation with ms. miller about the information she might have received, any information she might have received from lorillard tobacco company? we did not have any conversations about that. consistent. there is no evidence in that regard. next slide. same here. frank statement, no mess- -- no conversation about that. hill & knowlton, no conversation about that. and, finally, i'm -- well, it says, i'm asking: did you ever have a conversation with her where she said information was kept from me about smoking by a tobacco company, whether it is lorillard or any of the other manufacturers? i do not recall a conversation like that. next slide, please. allocation of responsibility of fault. i've already told you -- we have gone through control, causation, and even more importantly than that, i -- i've described for you my -- my suggestion as to 4 why ms. miller did what she did in this regard with respect to her smoking. and why that her loved ones not say anything to about it -- to her about it. and that plainly suggests that my view is that she did not want to quit smoking. she may have wanted to quit -- cut back for a time, but, plainly, she not only did not want to quit smoking, her children and loved ones accepted that decision and respected that decision from her. and so, you know, from my perspective, the person who is in control should receive all of the responsibility there. if you disagree with that in any respect, obviously, it is ultimately your decision and not mine. but i would submit to you that this is a lady that was smart, independent, was not led around, she made up her own mind and -- and chartered her own path through life, including on the issue of smoking. next slide, please. the verdict form talks about damages. and you will see three questions like this right here. one for each of her three children. ms. michelle mrozek, who is the plaintiff, her son, robert, and her daughter, malia. and i'll just read one of them. what is the total amount of any damages sustained by michelle mrozek for the loss of parental companionship, instruction and guidance and michelle mrozek's pain and suffering as a result of jacqueline swann miller's injury and death? that is a tough subject. how -- how do you value -- you cannot -- how do value if you think that there is liability here? how do you value the loss of a parent regardless of age? it is a tough thing. it is a tough thing to talk about. it is a tough thing, in particular, for a defense lawyer like myself, when, you know, your contention is that nothing -- you know, that there should not be compensation here because the family apparently accepted her decision not to -- not to try to quit smoking, to have acquiesced in her decision and not ever said anything to her about it, which was their right to do so, to respect that decision. but that said, i would not be doing my job if i did not make a suggestion to you in this regard. you have heard about the mortality tables, they reflect 19.9 years. and that is presuming a healthy person. there is testimony that ms. miller, apart from her breathing problems, she also -- her sister testified that she had skin cancer and there was also bleeding ulcers that ms. miller testified about. both of which might, in your judgment, impact the mortality with respect to the life expectancy of ms. miller and whether that is -- whether 20 years is -- is appropriate under the circumstances. again, that is entirely up to 6 you. but as a suggestion, what i would like to suggest is that for each year, if you conclude that my client was liable, that you consider awarding damages to each of the three of them for each year that you think that ms. miller would, otherwise, have lived in the amount of $10,000 per person. so, roughly, in the event that you conclude that we are responsible, notwithstanding the things that i've suggested, then i would sug- -- would suggest that to you as a consideration of another possible way of dealing with the valuation of a very difficult subject. next slide. you -- you will be able to read this in the jury room. next slide, please. and, again, we have three of these and this -- and this is understandable given the description that i've given in terms of the apparent acceptance by the family of her decision not to try and quit smoking. this is from michelle mrozek. next slide. here's robert acknowledging that they never encouraged her -- his mother to quit smoking. next slide. here's malia torgensen saying predictably the same thing. next slide. the clerk: ten minutes. mr. molony: thank you. punitive damages. now, punitive damages is a different type of subject. compensatory damages, which is what we were just talking about, is for the purpose of fully compensating someone if you determine that there is liability for a loss. that is what compensatory damages are about. that is what i was talking about in terms of the loss of parental guidance, companionship and so forth that we just reviewed. punitive damages are something different. the purpose of punitive damages is -- is, as the name suggests, is to punish. and it is additional money that -- if you were to decide to award punitive damages, it would be additional money that would go to the plaintiffs. some people have the misconception that they -- punitive damages go somewhere else. they do not. they go to the -- the persons who are bringing the claim, if you collectively were to decide that they were owed. and they are determined not in this proceeding. they would be determined in a second proceeding or later proceeding in this case. the -- the only issue you will see on your verdict form is whether or not there is an entitlement, not an amount having to do with the punitive damages issue in this case. and if the -- the issue of punitive damages is you can only consider with regard to punitive damages harm 8 that -- conduct that resulted in harm directly to the plaintiff or to her mother, jackie miller. cannot be harm to anyone else, which is logical, because, basically, if there is -- if -- if the purpose of punitive damages is to punish and to persuade, and it is from future inapp- -- inappropriate conduct, then it can only be as it relates to the person who was the injured party in your case. now, the ads that have been featured prominently here for the reasons i've already ex- -- explained, number one, ms. miller did not purchase any cigarettes based upon ads. number two, those ad campaigns, with the exception -- and it is not an ad, every ad campaign for kent failed. every ad campaign for max failed. so the only success that my client ever had with regard to its kent product was through the good fortune of having come up with something that was embraced by the reader's digest folks. the findings -- well, here the standard is different as well. it is greater weight of the evidence as far as everything in the case up to the point of punitive -- punitive damages timing. the standard here is clear and convincing evidence. and what that means, that is defined as evidence that is precise, explicit, lacking in confusion and of such weight that it produces a firm belief or conviction without hesitation about the matter at issue as it relates in this case to jackie miller. i suggest if you look closely at the evidence in this case, there is no conduct that satisfies that standard that relates to my client. i dare say and i thought about this, was thinking about this last night, and the more i thought about it, the more i considered the -- jackie miller's smoking history and the fact that there was never any suggestion from any family members or loved ones that she quit and the fact that she gave very few indications of ever wanting to quit smoking, that the most compelling evidence on any particular subject in this case is that it does not appear that jackie miller ever really wanted to quit smoking. and i think that is the strongest evidence that is in this record. and i think that plainly that there is no evidence here, for all the reasons that i've expressed already, that reaches the standard of clear and convincing evidence. and, therefore, i would encourage you that based upon the record that is in front of you, that there is no basis for determining that there is an entitlement to punitive damages being awarded against my client in this case. in conclusion, you-all know that jackie miller, by all accounts, lived life on her own terms. she was an 10 independent, intelligent, capable woman who was described by her children as a person who -- i think robert put it as along the lines of live and let live or words to that effect. tricia miller testified about how when they would have a problem or an issue, she would take it to her mother-in-law and she would tell them the good and the bad and whatever problem was -- it was that was confronting them and then she let them make their own decision. she would let them decide for themselves in what direction they would ta- -- go in their life. and i think that is illustrative of the type of person she was, both in dealing with them and in dealing with her own life. she saw, i would submit, and the -- the family saw smoking as an adult choice and one that she had a right to make. all the pictures show, i would submit, that she enjoyed smoking and never really gave any strong indication that she had a motivation to quit smoking. and as the experts for the plaintiff came in here and said, at all times, in every year she smoked, she had the ability to quit smoking if she were properly motivated to do so. and the evidence is to the effect that she was not. the fact that came from her dear friend, louise fink, she said i never really saw anything that indicated that jackie wanted to quit and that is in her testimony. the clerk: ten minutes. mr. molony: ladies and gentlemen, you have been very attentive. i appreciate that attention. i appreciate you spending this time with me and -- and paying such close attention to the facts and the evidence that is in this case. i have every confidence that when you collectively get together and decide it, it will be based on the laws as the court provides, it will be based on the evidence that has come in from the witness stand and that you will utilize your common sense in sorting through that in deciding what is -- what is the truth in this case and whether or not there is entitlement to recovery by the plaintiff in this cause. again, on behalf of the lorillard tobacco company and my partners, i thank you very much for your time away from your family and your work and for your -- your assistance in -- in -- in helping the parties bring this case to a conclusion. thank you.