2 mr. patacca: -- counsel, and members of the jury. let me start with thanking each and every one of you for giving us three weeks. without all of the time and the attention that you have given us out of your lives, none of us in this room could be at this point here today. we need the jury system. we need jurors who are judges of the facts to consider important matters between the parties. let me just say on behalf of everyone in this courtroom, this is a very important case for both sides. we know you have paid extremely close attention. we have noticed. you have been very prompt every day. you have stayed without any complaints. and we do thank you for that. and i'd like to ask you to give us a little indulgence this morning as we finish with our closing arguments so that we can give you an idea of what we think came into evidence, how you should view the evidence and render a verdict in this case, and then the case will be yours this afternoon. so, again, thank you on behalf of the plaintiff and my partners, evan yegelwel and bruce anderson, but also our assistant, ms. white, who you have seen in here this morning, mr. keller and ms. chaney, who is also helping me, because no one could get this case here without that help, so i thank them. and i know lorillard equally thanks you for being here, and i'll let mr. molony address that. but on behalf of all of us here in the court system, we do really appreciate your service. so let me wrap up and get going this morning, if you do not mind. we kind of started this case unofficially in voir dire when we were picking jurors in this case, but mr. anderson kicked it off for us officially -- i think it was on valentine's day. perhaps you might have been here on the 14th. and we submitted to you we thought the evidence was going to show that in this case between these parties what was going to be important is for you to ask three questions throughout the case: what did they know, when did they know it, and what did they do with what they knew? and mr. anderson did not just say this would be important for just what lorillard knew and when and what did they do, but with jackie miller, too. those three questions, i would submit, could guide you as you considered all the evidence in the past two weeks and will hopefully guide you in the 3 closing argument when you evaluate the parties here. as mr. anderson told you, also, what we would like to have you consider and what we thought would be appropriate throughout all the evidence in this case is to compare and measure. compare what jackie miller knew with what lorillard knew. compare when jackie miller knew what she learned with what lorillard knew and when they knew it. compare what jackie miller did with the information when she learned it with what lorillard did with the information when they learned it. from the very beginning of this case, and unofficially even when we were talking in voir dire, you remember a lot of the questions we even got to every juror is not withstanding whatever you have done in your personal life, your experiences, your viewpoints, can you set aside all of that, listen to only the evidence that came in through the stand or videos and the instructions that judge soud will be reading you at the end, the law that you must follow? can you set that aside and compare individual responsibility with corporate responsibility? and if i recall, i believe we had that conversation with almost everybody who is on this jury here and certainly scores of others who were on the prospective jury. that was one of the most important parts, because we needed jurors to come in with the scales balanced; nobody had a step ahead and nobody was behind. and every juror -- 150 people were summoned in courtroom a -- all raised their hand -- now, we did not talk to maybe the last 30, but everybody raised their hand under oath and said, i can do that. i can evaluate this case fairly. and when we talked about who could really put aside previous notions, we got to nine, nine people who swore under oath to judge arnold, a circuit court judge in the state of florida here in duval county, and brought that with them to judge soud and said, i will set aside any personal beliefs i have about smokers, about smoking, about companies, about the issues. i promise i will not listen to the radio on tobacco, i will not read newspaper accounts. i'm going to put that all aside, and i swear under oath, just like every witness who came into this court with a hand on the bible, i swear or affirm that i can do that. and that is why, from 150 people who were summoned over basically a month ago, we have nine. all of you indicated you could put that aside and measure and compare jackie's fault and consider it 5 with lorillard tobacco's fault, compare responsibilities. you know, we came into court from the very beginning, and again back in voir dire when we were asking the questions, and said, guess what? you will never hear us say that jackie miller was not partially at fault. she was. right out of the gate, right up front. she was partially at fault. because at some point she probably knew that smoking became dangerous. at some point, even though she was addicted and had a disease that undermined her ability to quit, at some point she should have tried harder. and i'll talk to you a little bit more about that this morning, and i would submit that that was probably in the '80s, as you heard testimony about friends who were quitting around that time, family members. the defense wanted you to believe -- to hear everything that everybody else knew and impute it to her. well, at some point the message probably got through, but it had to get through the disease. but nonetheless, mr. anderson told you you will not hear us say that jackie miller was not partially at fault for her injuries. what did not you hear? you never heard lorillard say, well, we are partially at fault, too, and let us just compare and measure. with lorillard it has been either/or. she was at fault, not us. i expect you are going to hear this morning enjoyment. it is either enjoyment or addiction. either she was at fault or nobody was at fault. we told you up front we are partially at fault, we accept that responsibility, and we would ask you to use the oath that you gave us to say, i will fairly judge this case on the evidence and compare and measure the fault of both of them. ms. chaney, can you put up p number 2? i expect his honor is going to instruct you as to the findings as he did initially early on. there are certain findings that in this courtroom are binding on all of us; his honor, the parties, and, yes, the nine members of the jury who swore to follow the law. this is the law. one of the findings that everyone is bound by is that smoking cigarettes causes lung cancer, small cell carcinoma, the very cancer that jackie miller got and died from in 1994. no dispute. no one's allowed to dispute it. that is the law. if someone were to dispute it, it would be no different than driving down bay street in front of the courthouse and running the red light. jso would 7 have pulled them over. so if anybody would ever suggest, and they will not, that you could ignore that finding, that would be running the red light. that would be ignoring the law. it would be ignoring the oath, your duty. p number 3, please. that nicotine in cigarettes is addictive. no question. the finding was made. the judge is bound, we are bound, lorillard is bound, and you are bound. and, really, there was no question, as we will talk about the testimony you heard. p number 4. lorillard was found negligent. i expect his honor is going to discuss with you what negligence means, but negligence is the failure to use reasonable care. but lorillard was negligent. the judge is bound by that, we are bound by that, lorillard is bound by that, and you, the nine members of our jury, under your oath, will be bound by that, and we know you will. and that is why we say, as you go forward, you need to measure their fault with jackie's fault. compare and measure what did they know, when did they know it, what did they do with what they knew, and compare it to her with those very same three questions. p5, please. lorillard placed cigarettes on the market that were defective and unreasonably dangerous. their cigarettes were defective and they were unreasonably dangerous. everyone in this courtroom is bound by that. jackie miller smoked lorillard tobacco cigarettes that were defective and unreasonably dangerous. and you cannot run the red light and ignore that fact. p number 6. lorillard concealed or omitted material information that otherwise -- not otherwise known or available, knowing that the material was false or misleading or failed to disclose a material fact concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes or both. there cannot be any dispute. members of the jury, expect when his honor reads you the law in this case -- eventually you will have a copy of this, so you will see these very findings typed down for you. and i know you -- because you have all been excellent about taking notes. keep doing so, but i want you to know you will have these when you go back to the jury room. they concealed and omitted material information. and his honor is going to instruct you 9 as to what material means, but i would submit material information is information a person would want to know so that they can take precautions, so they can protect themselves; important information, material information. jurors understand material because we all bring into this courtroom common sense. we all deal with material information. if you want to buy a house, some things are material and some are not. in that context, you know what is important to you in making a decision to buy a house. when a person buys a product, they know in the context or hope to know what might be important to them. and where we get into trouble is when you have no idea what is in the product and they conceal it and omit it, when they knew it. material. not otherwise known. what did they know? when did they know it? what did they do with the information? you heard a lot of testimony from dr. robinson, you may recall, the corporate representative, and i'll talk more about him. but can it be seriously argued in this courtroom in 2011, even knowing what people know in 2011, that jackie miller had the same information available to her that all the scientists in greensboro, north carolina, at lorillard knew? can it honestly be debated that she was aware of all the information that they had in that private library, the library that they did not even share with one of their witnesses they brought to you yesterday? she did not know. she could not have known. we will talk a little bit more about that this morning. p number 7, please. lorillard agreed to conceal or omit the information regarding the health effects of cigarettes or their addictive nature with the intention that smokers and the public would rely on the information to their detriment. no running red lights. the court, the parties and this jury is bound by that. lorillard was found to have agreed with others to conceal and omit the information about the dangers or the health effects of cigarettes and the addictive nature of the cigarettes with the intention -- intent that people rely. and i would submit as i talk to you this morning that is exactly what happened. what happened was what they intended to happen. withhold, omit, people will buy. people will rely. interesting we had at the beginning of this 11 case opening statements by mr. anderson and mr. molony. and -- i'm okay with the lights. thank you. mr. molony -- and you go by your memory. this, again, just the attorneys telling you what they thought you would hear in the evidence. but he made the statement in front of this jury in this courtroom, and he warned you. he said, you are going to hear things from documents and things we said over the decades that we would never say today, things that we would never say today. he called them wrong-headed. he called them absurd. he suggested they were out of context. but i would submit, as we talked earlier this morning, that right there by lorillard is an admission that, what we did over the past 50 years was wrong. you would never do that today. it is reprehensible. it is negligent. it disregards the safety of others. it is consciously indifferent. it shows a lack of care. never do it. and then he mentioned, and i'm sure you heard it, but i'm not apologizing for it, that is why we are here today. in 2011, 65 years after the 1954 frank statement, their declaration of independence, if you will, where the tobacco companies signed on and said, we stand together or we will surely fall apart, that started what we believe and ask you to consider is a conspiracy in the industry to omit and conceal. back in december of 1953, you heard from dr. robinson, it was christmas, the holidays. it was a time when most people are putting business aside, the holidays, the end of the year. you gather family, you give thanks for a great year, you come together and you relax. what you have heard was that lorillard and the other tobacco companies from which it agreed, they gathered in new york at the plaza hotel during the christmas holidays. they gathered because there was a cancer scare. and i'm not talking about the cancer scare where the mice studies were being given out to the public. surely that was going on. the cancer scare was that the information was going to the public and they were concerned that the people were going to stop smoking; people were going to stop buying their cigarettes; people would stop handing over their money to get a cigarette and continue to smoke it. that was the scare that was going on in 1953. instead of going home with their families and thanking themselves for what a great year it is been like every other american does during the holidays, they gathered together their top executives and 13 their pr company, not one scientist, and said, what are we going to do about it? and they signed the frank statement. we are going to issue a statement to america in over 400 newspapers that will be widely circulated over tens and hundreds of thousands and tell the american public, we are interested in your health. we are not aware of anything in anything in our cigarettes that is harmful. and if we find it, we will remove it. and we will set forth research to make sure we know what is in the cigarettes. they took on that duty. they declared that to the american public. they signed the document together. that is what they did. and i'll talk to you in a minute about dr. burns, how he views what they did over the past 50 years. things you would never do today. things you would never say today. things that are reprehensible when you are talking about, as dr. roberts, their historian, the greatest health issue of the twentieth century. when they signed that document and published it in the paper and said, we do not know of anything in our cigarettes that is harmful, you learned in these past two weeks that was not true. they have always known. there was scientific literature already associating with lung cancer, with death and cancer. they knew about the nicotine properties even back then. they knew that people compensated when they switched types of cigarettes. some people would smoke more to get more nicotine and tar. they knew that and yet represented to the american public, we are not aware, but if we are or if we become aware, we are going to fix it. that was their frank statement. and two weeks ago you heard their next frank statement: we would never say it, but i'm not apologizing for it. cannot get more frank than that. so over the past 50 and 60 years, what have they done? lorillard has marketed cigarettes, marketed it to the public, marketed it to consumers. they have spent millions, and in fact you heard from ms. leung over a billion dollars in the history of lorillard marketing these doses of nicotine. now, you could not devise a better marketing plan than lorillard had. i mean, they really -- as you have seen it, they epitomize how you get a consumer to take the product, how do you get them hooked, and how do you keep them on the products. it was masterful. i think you heard in some of the testimony that was going on with dr. robinson -- you may recall 15 dr. robinson's powerpoint 8. we do not need the lights off. you will remember he was the first witness you heard from. he was their corporate representative. we told you we were going to bring witnesses. we made him sit down under oath, their representative, and tell us about research and development over the years. and a jury in north florida heard that testimony in this courtroom. you heard from him and the other corporate representative, kristy leung. number 14, please. she was their marketing person who we made, under oath, sit down and speak to a jury about the marketing over the past 50 years. and what you heard was, how did lorillard go from just being a small company back in the 1700s to enter into the modern era of mass-produced cigarettes? and you may recall some of the ads that were played and discussed with ms. leung. thank you. they were on billboards. they were on the radio. they had women dress up like a cigarette pack with long legs and dance across a stage. they had placards in stores. they had stickers in windows. they even had planes flying over neighborhoods with loudspeakers, you may recall, talking about their product. no detail was too small. no method was insignificant. if you were a human being in the united states in the '40s, '50s and beyond, you heard tobacco messages. that is what the evidence has shown. and lorillard knew exactly how to do that. when the '50s came around and this new device called the television showed up, they knew, we have got to get on that, too. and they started sponsoring tv perhaps. dick van dyke, for instance, the web that you have heard about. commercials. they were in your face 24/7, although back then tv was not even on 24/7. there were about three main channels. tv went off the air at the end of the day. it was on for a brief part of the day, not like today where you can find any channel anytime or you can go to an internet. there was none of that. people either sat next to a radio or they looked at the tv for those limited hours and they were captive, and if a commercial came on, they had your attention. on the radio they had frank sinatra. you heard about him, too. they actually had frank sinatra selling some of their -- some of their cigarettes. 17 they used w.c. fields. you saw his picture. he was very famous in his day. eddie cantor. they used athletes. they used caricatures of people that we will show you, youthful people. they even decided and determined after the cancer scare steered them to the plaza hotel in 1953, we need to take advantage and exploit this health scare. we must assure our smokers. we are going to assure them that it is all right to smoke. we are going to assure them, just like the frank statement, we are here to protect you. we are going to give them reassurance to keep lighting up and keep buying them. kent cigarette, the greatest health protection in cigarette history. if you had heard those words from an attorney standing before you three weeks ago, you would say, that guy is making up something that we would never say today. and, yet, they boldly put it on tv. they boldly put it in print. they claimed the micronite filter, which was from atomic energy plants, hospital rooms, the purest filter, outlasted its competition. they had the gall to say it was the greatest health protection in cigarette history. because they knew people were starting to become health-conscious about cigarette smoking. and mr. anderson kind of talked with you about that in opening. it is absurd in 2011 to talk about a health-conscious smoker, but that is what was going on in the '50s, and you-all saw that. that is what was going on in the '60s and into the '70s. we went from a nation that smoked almost entirely filterless cigarettes in the '40s to the '50s they started making filters, including the micronite filter, the greatest health protection in cigarette history. and later, as we are going to talk about, you heard lorillard even devised a system, well, if we make a cigarette longer, we can tell those health-conscious smokers, you will smoke less because they take longer, the max cigarette. they knew how to exploit. and kristy leung, their corporate representative, had -- well, she did what she could. she really sat here and tried to debate whether or not they advertised their cigarette as being a health cigarette or safe cigarette. so we had to bring you evidence. ms. chaney, number 165, please. the documents i'm putting up will be in evidence. and if you could -- this was in 1964, much later than even the '50s scare, so we continued -- kent had been out since the early '50s. 19 september 15th, 1964, mr. yellen and mr. cramer, the president and chief executive officer of lorillard. and he is saying, you want to know from me, how did we get here? what are we doing here? where are we going from here? what did we know? when did we know it? what are we going to do about it? three questions. lauren, would you highlight the lower paragraph? let me start with kent. as all of us are aware -- this is internally -- we will market the kent as a safer cigarette for the smoker who is concerned about smoking and health. and in 1956, when an innocent third party, reader's digest, published or created an awareness to the consumer that kent was the, quote, safest, unquote, of all popular filter cigarettes -- let me stop there. reader's digest you heard a little bit about. they come out with a study, their study, saying this is the safest cigarette. and what does lorillard do with it? they exploited the advantage. lorillard exploited this advantage so that within a short period of two years the kent volume grew from less than four billion cigarettes to 38 billion annually, even though they knew that kent cigarettes provided absolutely no better protection than any other filtered cigarette, even though they knew that filtered cigarettes, period, provided no better protection than non-filtered. ms. leung tried to explain to you how, we have always been a responsible marketer. but what she did not want to admit was a document that came from the ftc. i believe it is number 184, ms. chaney. i'm sorry. wrong one. 733. all right. in 1955, the federal trade commission wrote to lorillard. let us go to the second page, please. and can you blow that up? and they were concerned that lorillard was making health claims with their cigarettes. this was in '55. basically saying, the smoke of kent cigarettes does not contain significantly less nicotine or tar than smoke from other filter-tip cigarettes, and insofar as the claim, quote, unquote, "cleans the smoke" is concerned, contains substantial quantities of both nicotine and tars. they are telling them, despite your great filter, despite your claims, it is not reducing it. this named test results indicate that the smoke from kent cigarettes does not contain significantly 21 less nicotine than any other popular brand or non-filter. they conclude, we question the propriety of the themes that were referenced. thank you, lauren. the reason i brought that up is that, again, in 1964, the document we just saw where they are now going to exploit it, they are going to get back to the health claims, even though they were told in '55 by the ftc, you do not have any basis to say it. why were they doing it in 1964? the surgeon general came out. the next scare was coming out. people were going to be hearing that cigarette may be hazardous to your health. so what did they do? you heard the testimony. they started giving kent cigarettes out in those four-pack samples that kristy leung told you about. in december before the surgeon general, december of '93 [sic], put out the samples. it is going amazingly well. the people want them. they are anticipating the public health officials who are going to say smoking is hazardous or may be hazardous, and now they are going to exploit. let us go back to our roots. kent cigarettes, the greatest health protection in cigarettes. let us talk to people about filters. and you saw in the '64 document sales skyrocketed in two years, four billion to 38 billion. so, as i was saying, the marketing by lorillard was fantastic and impressive. and it can hardly be argued that not any american was affected during the '50s and the '40s and even into the '60s and beyond by tobacco advertising and information. the people they agreed with to get together, hang together or hang separately, get together and omit important information, create doubt and controversy. what did the ftc say about all the advertising that had been going on? now 184, please. this is in 1967. this is after the surgeon general's report comes out in '64. it is now after '66. the law changed. we now have to put the warning. they have to put the "may cause" language on the packets. let us go to the next, page, lauren, that is highlighted, and highlight it, please. and you saw this in the courtroom. you will have this in evidence. but this was basically a recitation of what had been going on over the past 20, 30 years. and it spoke volumes. cigarette advertising reaches virtually all americans who can either read or understand the spoken word. pretty big group. 23 cigarettes are advertised on the network in spot television, on the radio, in magazines and newspapers, in outdoor media, and by means of many types of point of sale advertising aids. so pervasive is cigarette advertising that it is virtually impossible for americans of almost any age to avoid cigarette advertising. and they go on and talk about exactly where you see it. and there cannot be any doubt or dispute in this courtroom that lorillard knew it was out in the public. frankly, kristy leung did not want to admit it, but at times like this when they will not tell you what you need to hear, i think it is important -- let us take a look at what they are saying when patting themselves on the back, when they are bragging. and so what we have done is given you the annual reports for each of the years in the '50s and '60s, when they are patting themselves on their backs to their shareholders and saying, here's what we are doing for you, shareholder. here's how we are being good stewards of your money, how we are growing sales, and here's how we are doing it. you will have those annual reports in evidence, but i'd like to at least give you a little sample. p-8, please. i'm sorry. number 8, i'm sorry. not p-8, number 8. here we are in the 1952 report, before the scare really comes out, but they are starting to make the kent cigarette. let us go to our advertising page. amazing what someone will tell you when it is time to brag. is not that really human nature? is not that common sense? when you are not worried about what you are saying on a video screen in front of a jury and watching every single word and trying to deny that the kids are seeing your ads or that your ads are effective, when you are patting yourself on the back, telling the people you work for, your shareholders, you say amazing things, things that you would never say today. and kristy leung proved it. she would not say it today. they are not apologizing. so let us see. probably no consumer product is more sensitive to advertising than cigarettes; none. according to them, no consumer product. they are asked for by specific brand names millions of times a day at the counters of 1.3 million retailers who hand over the smoker's choice. brand loyalty is principally established by the force of advertising. 25 there was no one more brand-loyal for almost 30 years than jackie miller. you could not hear from jackie miller in this courtroom, but you heard people who knew her and you heard what actions she took. and there can be really no question that jackie miller heard messages by the things she did and said. she maintained brand loyalty, and i'll talk a little more about that, but she switched from filterless to filter when the health scare came out and they started using that to their advantage, when they started exploiting things, and never went back to filterless. she makes a comment to her sister in the late '60s that is essentially parroting some of the themes that the greatest health cigarette is ever promoting, that these are better for you. how would she know that unless that is what she saw? she makes comments later about the max cigarette, that, these are longer, they are -- it takes me longer to smoke them. is not it interesting that jackie miller just happened to switch from filterless, those chesterfields and old golds which were filterless, and you will see that stipulation, to filtered. and the filter brand she goes to is kent, the one that is the most touted in america. how does that just happen? no consumer product is more susceptible to advertising than cigarettes. that is how it happens. you talk about the greatest health protection in cigarette history, and is it any shock to you that some people will actually be a health-conscious smoker, as that term would be used in the '50s, and go to your product? that is what you intended; that is what happened. is it just coincidence that jackie miller, when she switched away from kent, decided, i'm going to go to a women's brand, max cigarettes that they created? it was targeted to women. it was longer so you would smoke less. is it any coincidence that when she smoked and switched to max that she went to a women's brand? how do you know it is a women's brands unless you have seen the ads that it is being promoted to women? that is what they intended to happen. that is what did happen. again, you cannot hear from jackie miller to tell you why she did what she did, but you can infer. you can take reasonable inferences from the evidence you have heard and the actions she did to 3958 1 say, yes, jackie miller must have been impacted by their specific advertising and of their group, the whole agreement of all advertising. she was a health-conscious smoker as that term was used back then. she switched to filters. later she switched to the longer cigarettes. she told her sister, this one is better for you. she is parroting the very language that they are selling to the public. and most importantly, when her sister confronted her -- you may recall in the end of the '60s, carol gibson, who talked to you, said, i think our dad died about seven years ago, six or seven years ago, from lung cancer from smoking. and what did jackie tell her? you heard her. i do not believe that. she said, but the warnings are on the pack. she said, i do not believe that. i do not think that is been proven. where in the past two weeks have you heard that? every document that tobacco has issued, all the news pieces that we even showed, for instance, yesterday with mr. -- mr. roberts, who did not want to show you them, the tobacco industry who spoke for them said, the case is still open. it is still not proven. is it really any coincidence that she is uttering the words that they have been the mouthpiece for? that is what they intended and that is what happened. the advertising was so pervasive by this company and the industry, no one who could read or speak could have missed it. no one. so pervasive. it would be like the paint in this wall -- on the wall. it is like how do you miss the paint in the walls? i do not notice it, but it is everywhere. we talked a little about it on voir dire, but you go by the evidence here. how do you know when you are directly being impacted by an ad? the best ads are the ones that make you think it is your idea, the ones that make you buy and you do not even remember, why was it that i wanted that product? let us talk about how jackie started, because we know from the evidence she started as a teenager. and that is important. how did we get to teen smoking in the 1940s? well, we can only look at -- at what they did and start inferring, because jackie's not here to talk to us about it. i'll give you a couple examples. 1356. if you were athletic, smoking was for you. if you are a young girl, smoking's for you. not only 3 smoking, but old gold cigarettes, the very brand that jackie smoked in the '40s. now, did you hear any witness say she saw that ad? no. but when you look at how they are patting themselves on the back, how many homes are we reaching in all our advertising, you have got to ask yourselves, is not that what they intended? is not that what occurred? what did they know, when did they know it, and what were they doing with it? let us go to 363, please. santa claus, puppies and cartons of cigarettes. who is that appealing to? jackie miller, although she did not ask for old golds at christmas, thought why not get cartons of cigarettes for christmas, and asked her friend at the town hall. that is what the cigarette industry intended. it is now a holiday thing. so if you are a woman, you are athletic or you are a young girl, smoking's for you. if you like holidays, we have got you covered there too. which population really worries about santa claus and little puppies? we have got you covered. jackie fit in. she fit exactly the consumer they wanted. and for them to say that, we did not intend, or did not know -- frankly, to have disregarded the fact that teens in the 1940s like jackie miller were buying their cigarettes is preposterous. how about 366? sorry. too quick for me. you had it right. i'm sorry. old golds, right on father's day. so now if you enjoy family holidays, family functions, cigarettes are for you. not only that, it is perfectly acceptable for kids to be handing up cigarettes to their parents. perhaps that was one of those we would never say that today, but we are not apologizing for it, but that is what was going on. can it honestly be said that we are not expecting kids to say, how do i please dad, back in the '40s? you know, times were different. dad would come home. family would be waiting. you know, hard day at work. dad sits back. what have we got for you? the dog is waiting for you. the kids are waiting for you. i wonder where jackie miller got the idea that it is all right to smoke with family or share cigarettes with her daughter or ask for cigarettes from her family members. i just wonder where she got that idea from. that is what they intended. that is what 5 happened. and they cannot sit here and be surprised. so you could be a young girl, you could be athletic, you could like holidays and puppies and santa claus, you could be a family person, you could be a child. they have got something for you. and that is when she was smoking cigarettes as a teenager. how about 365, please? old gold again. you can be a student. you can be the guy they look up to or you can be the girl that wants to be noticed. you heard that from one of her friends, did not you? we all wanted to be noticed. interesting when kristy leung was trying to explain away that document. remember what she said about him? that boy -- i mean, guy. that is how she said it. why? because he does look young. school-age kid? i've got a product for you. now, did they say specifically high school? no. but were they telling the message that you should not be? no. and for them to throw that out in the marketplace and jackie miller in her teens is a high school smoker and then try to claim, we did not intend it, that is reckless disregard for the consequences to smokers and teenagers. you heard from dr. werner. teens do not have the ability to make an informed choice about a drug like nicotine, period. why do not we show 31 after this one here. we have -- we have got new smyrna beach high school. p-31. we heard a lot about new smyrna beach high school, across the street where they smoke. any surprise that after the last ad we saw that kids from this high school, including jackie miller, used old gold cigarettes across the street? you have got the boys who want to be cool, you have got the girls who want to be noticed, and you have got jackie who is right there with them, and you have got them smoking old gold cigarettes. that is what they intended, that is what happened, and now they cannot be surprised that you will hold them accountable. so how did they do it? p-28. well, i'd ask you to consider that lorillard tobacco company made a deal with a 16-year-old girl, a 16-year-old girl, to smoke their cigarettes, to become a brand-loyal customer. p-29, please. they knew through their research you need marketing. no consumer product is more sensitive to advertising. and you saw the testimony from 7 ms. leung. when we put money into ads, that product flourished. it happened with old gold, it happened with kent, and eventually it happened with newport. when they took money away from the ads and when they walked away from the health assurance of kent, the sales started going down. so they needed to market, and they knew nicotine was addictive. they knew more than anybody on the street -- they knew more than dr. burns they told you. if we knew what they knew, we would not have said what we did. there was a time when he advised his patients that, you should probably switch to a filter cigarette. but they knew. they are the expert. they are the ones with research and development and hundreds of people working on staff. they are the ones who want to put the product out. if we get you as a youth, we have got you for life. so how do they do it? they create doubt and controversy. even though you are going to hear and did hear all the health claims that were aware in the '50s, '60s on that dr. roberts told you about. tobacco was the master of creating doubt and controversy. no, no, it is not been proven. there is only a causal link. they always had a different word for it, create doubt and controversy, reassure the smoker who is smoking. reassure the nicotine addict who needs to rationalize what they are doing. what did they do? they did not admit that cigarettes caused disease until 2000, the year 2000. you heard a lot about cigarette warnings, and they wanted to parade those in front of you. every time you see a cigarette warning on the screen or hear it talked about, remember, they did not agree with any of them until 2000, except one. remember mr. spears, when we were reading his deposition, he did admit that cigarettes have carbon monoxide in them. but up until 1997 when he testified, he did not believe there was a problem with cigarettes. he did not believe it was proven. he did not believe any of the warnings on the packs. and nor did his predecessors, mr. tisch or mr. orlowsky. so every time they talk about their warning labels and how everybody else knew, ask yourself, what did you know, when did you know it, and what did you do about it? because the evidence is clear they have never done anything for the smoker's benefit and the public's benefit until they have been required to. 9 before they were required to slap a label on their cigarette pack, they had the option to warn people before. did not do it. you saw it this morning with mr. woods. the list of ingredients they put on their website march of 2010. you heard their testimony before. until the '80s when they were required to disclose those ingredients, they did not do it. they did not do it until they were forced to do it. so for them to come into the courtroom and wrap the warnings around them like the american flag and point to the smoker and say, it is all your fault, either/or, well, that defies your common sense. it is time to compare and measure responsibilities and faults and say, no, lorillard, you needed to stand up and agree that you were partially at fault, and we are going to evaluate what you knew, when you knew it, and what you did about it, or looking at it the other way, what you did not do about it, and hold you equally responsible. pardon me a minute. nicotine we learned about. nicotine is a drug which, incidentally, you heard from dr. robinson, even though they admitted in 2000 that cigarettes were addictive, they did not admit until about a month before his deposition that nicotine is a drug, when the fda wanted to regulate them. they never moved until they were forced to. and instead, doubt and controversy. they always had an answer for the public and they always had a criticism of the surgeon general. always. what did they do? what did they do with the information? criticize. doubt and controversy. and why? to reassure smokers who had a disease of addiction, an addiction that you heard from dr. werner, the only expert in this case to talk to you about addiction in this courtroom, to say that addiction, that disease undermines your ability to motivate to quit. it starts to remove free choice. jackie miller, she said, was addicted. jackie miller had her motivation undermined by this disease. her free choice was affected. not that it cannot be quit, you cannot quit, but it was affected. if they had someone to say that is not true, they would have brought them to you. if they had an expert to say, no, i disagree, jackie miller's free choice was not affected; no, i disagree, jackie miller, her motivation was not undermined; do not you think you would have heard that? they had no problem parading an expert in here at over half a million dollars to tell you a little 11 bit about the history of tobacco and the awareness, and, yet, when we come to the main issue in the case, whether someone's addicted and can quit, there was silence. the silence was deafening. the only evidence you have is from dr. werner, the evidence that you have sworn you are going to follow. she was addicted; it was a disease; nicotine was a drug; it undermined her motivation to be able to quit; it removed her free will; it caused her to continue to smoke. that is the evidence you heard from the only board-certified psychiatrist that walked into court to talk about addiction. now, you heard from dr. burns, who told you that from the frank statement on, the tobacco industry, including lorillard, acted irresponsibly, plain and simple. he said, no, it was not true that there was -- that it was not proven. they said the opposite. no, it is not true that nicotine's addictive. they keep saying the opposite. every time we issued a surgeon general report, he told you, every time, they always had an answer. and it was never applause. it was always criticism. it was always filled with scandalous remarks about how the surgeon general is misleading the american public, how it is a scare tactic. so when they ask you to consider what jackie miller knew and when she knew it and what she did with it, please compare what they were doing with the information. how can they expect you to hold jackie miller to a standard that they refuse to live by? when their executives walked in in 1997 for their depo, and 1993, and said, i do not believe it is addictive, i do not believe it causes harm, how can they honestly say to you that she was acting unreasonably, that she should know more than the experts? dr. spears had been there for over 30 years and ascended to the throne at lorillard. well, to give you a little break, we came in and said, yeah, she is still, though, partially at fault. we did that. and yet they are still going to sit there with dr. spears from the throne and say she knew more, she should have done more, she should be solely responsible. i would submit you should reject that all-or-nothing approach. just like dr. werner told you, it is not just all or nothing. it is not just enjoyment or addiction or choice and addiction. they work together. the disease of addiction is not -- is not negligence. it is not even fault. but 13 she was trying to overcome it. enjoyment. dr. werner told you there is no way an untrained person can look at an addict and say, when they are using it, ah, that is enjoyment. presumably they would get on the stand or get up here and tell you that in that last week of her life jackie miller, lying in her bed, asking her daughter-in-law to take that smoke and puff it in her face, she was enjoying it. the last thing she is doing and thinking about is enjoying a cigarette. you know differently. she was feeding an addiction. the brain, the receptors, they were hungry. she was not worried about food on that deathbed at that point. she was worried about nicotine. and that is what she got. they knew it, they intended it, and that is what happened. i'm coming to the end of where i need to be finishing up with you on my first part, so i'm going to move quickly. in this case we are going to ask you to hold lorillard tobacco company also liable to jackie miller for her death, also responsible, and we are going to ask you to compare and measure the fault about who knew what, when, and what they did with it. and we are going to trust you to do that. but we are going to ask you to, at the end of this case on the verdict form, hold them responsible and actually speak loudly in this courtroom through a verdict and say that their negligence from the engle findings was a legal cause of her death, it substantially contributed to her lung cancer, in combination with hers. and his honor is going to tell you about what a term called concurring cause did. if their negligence acted even with hers or another's, it is still a legal cause. they are responsible for her lung cancer and death. we are going to ask you to find that their product defect, those unreasonably dangerous cigarettes, were also a legal cause of her death. we are going to ask you to find and hold them responsible for concealing information and agreeing and conspiring to withhold information and say, yes, that too played a part in her lung cancer and death. it was a legal cause. and then we are going to ask you to evaluate the loss that you have heard about in this courtroom, the loss to michelle mrozek, malia torgensen, robert miller, for the loss of their mother who died at least statistically -- if you believe the centers for disease control, died 19.9 years too young because of the lung cancer. 15 and we are going to ask you to evaluate what those damages are for the loss of the companionship of a mother, the loss of guidance from a mother and protection. and i would submit that you could consider that using your common sense because jurors really are the experts on human experiences. but consider this. dr. tisch took the -- or mr. tisch took the stand when we read his deposition, at the time top executive at lorillard. and we asked him, did you contribute to the tobacco institute? yes, we did. they spoke for us. how much did you contribute to the tobacco institute? and he told you three to four million dollars every year. every year. and i would submit to you when you are considering what has been lost, what was valued, what is gone forever, that you at least consider what they value. the tobacco industry and ctr was kind of like a brainchild, if you will, of the industry. it was their child that they put out there, and they nurtured it with information and they certainly nurtured it with 3- to $4 million out of their pocket, lorillard alone, every year. and what did they get? protection. comfort. a valued relationship. i'd ask you to consider the loss to mrs. mrozek and ms. torgensen and their brother, mr. miller, to be equal to what lorillard thought that value of the ti was to them. but we are going to leave that to your discretion. at the end of this case, we are going to ask you, also, what is the last question, to consider whether what we call punitive damages are warranted. now, those are not just to compensate what was lost. these are determined to be for punishment and to deter conduct in the future. and you are going to have to prove -- we are going to have to show that to you, and have, by clear and convincing evidence, very specific evidence that you heard, that what they did they intended to do, that they were reckless with jackie miller as a teen; that what they did, they had -- they were indifferent to whether she would pick up the cigarette or any other teen; that during her life when they were promoting their kent cigarettes that they were so grossly negligent that they disregarded her health in telling her this is the greatest health protection in cigarette history. we are going to ask you to find and hold them liable for punitive damages to punish them. 17 i think when you are considering the questions we have been asking, i think in the punitive damages on that last question, i'd ask you to consider it in these terms. p-20. lorillard had the means. they had choices. they made decisions. 21, p-21. they had the motive to disregard the health consequences of people like ms. miller. p-22. jackie miller provided the opportunity. and that is why they are liable for punitive damages. in closing, i think you heard at the beginning of this case that those engle findings by themselves mean nothing for the defense, that they mean nothing more, nothing less. and that is true. six findings thrown up on a board, on maybe a screen by themselves, mean absolutely nothing. but when you bring them into a court of law, when you give nine jurors in this community who have taken an oath to evaluate all the evidence and fairly judge the case and you bring them before a judge who wears a robe, with flags, and says, you will consider only the evidence and use only the law i give you, and you hear from witnesses over two weeks and the evidence that you have heard, when those six findings are applied to a jury like yourselves to understand them and to apply them, then they are not just nothing. they do not just mean nothing. they are more than what they are once you apply them to this case. when you look at those six findings, and like all the evidence you have had in this case, and you consider jackie miller, what she knew, when she knew it, what she did with the information, you compare to lorillard what they knew, when they knew it, and what they did and did not do with it, we trust you will hold them accountable in this courtroom and say so with your verdict. thank you. thank you, your honor. mr. patacca: counsel. and, again, members of the jury, this is now my final opportunity to address points that were made during this mr. molony's closing on behalf of lorillard tobacco company. my purpose is not to reiterate everything i said in my first closing, that would be improper. it is to address what he brought up, but i think there are many things i do need to address. i tried to organize them quickly in the break but, nonetheless, some of them may come in bullet-point format, i'll apologize in advance. first of all, i thought it seemed rather peculiar, and perhaps when you review the evidence, that lorillard tobacco company came in today and put documents up talking about cooperation and discussed their cooperation in closing and patted themselves on the back for how they worked with the tobacco working group and the surgeon general and they flip open a book and read an acknowledgment saying, see, we were thanked for attending the party, when the very first person that they were talking about who cooperated was the gentleman you heard from on the stand, mr. alexander spears, iii, ph.d., who testified before you from this stand on april 15, 1997, under oath. the very same gentleman who had been with them for decades who was a chemist, ph.d., and adamantly refused to believe that in 1997 smoking caused any related illness. period. and they want to pat themselves on the back and parade you, the jury, and supposedly, i guess, show you that they are doing good work by sending mr. spears into the henhouse and cooperate and try to cure and make a less hazardous cigarette when he does not even believe it is hazardous. that is allowing the fox into the henhouse, or worse, reading the acknowledgment, "thanks for coming to the party," and then after the party is over you go out and you talk behind the hostess's back. the surgeon general, he is misleading the public, the surgeon general, scare tactics. no. 55 please. cooperation. here we are in 1988, this is not even back on the '64, this is not even '72 where we showed you the news report where they were talking behind the hostess's back, so to speak. 1988, the 21 ones who are cooperating, quote/unquote, with the surgeon general, with public health in the public interest come out with a press release, the ti, tobacco institute, which speaks for the industry, paid behind by them, comes out and says, "claims that cigarettes are addictive, irresponsible, and scare tactics." the court: you want me to turn the mic off and you will talk louder? mr. patacca: yes, sir. if you do not mind. thank you, your honor. the court: just keep your voice up. mr. patacca: yes, sir. the court: you do not have to stand by the mic, just keep your voice up. mr. patacca: yes, sir. highlight just the bottom for me, ms. chaney. this is in 1988 after the rotating warnings, remember we talked about wrapping ourselves in the warnings and holding everyone else accountable, holding everyone else responsible for what the rotating warnings say, when the gentleman who supposedly knows the most about lorillard and health issues, the one who is the cooperator, '88 they are saying the claim that there is a physical dependence to smoking is simply a desperate attempt to find some way to differentiate smoking from other habits. i would submit to you and your common sense that if you invited such a person to your party and you were kind enough to thank them in the letter and say, "thanks for coming to the party," and you heard that after the party they were sitting out back telling everybody what a terrible party it was and how you dropped the ball on all the hors d'oeuvres and you did not invite the right people, and you were sending the wrong message and it was a complete waste of everybody's time, a, with a friend like that, you would never have a friend again; and, b, you would not invite him to the party again. so before you come into this courtroom in north florida down from greensboro, north carolina and pat yourself on the back and tell what a wonderful you did with surgeon general and the tobacco working group, first of all, send somebody who knows what he is talking about. send somebody who believes in the message. mr. anderson started this case is that, would not it have been different. what if? what if they did not always talk against the message? what if they actually joined the message? what if they 23 came out with the surgeon general every time and said, we applaud the efforts of the surgeon general? we know the surgeon general's heart is in the right place. we are going to work and do more with the surgeon general. what if lorillard actually said to people like jackie miller on their packs before the warnings and said, we encourage you to smoke less? what if they said, it is dangerous, before even the warnings came out and they meant it? not the warning they put on because they had to, because of all the regulations. you saw regulations up on this timeline by mr. molony, the whole closing, regulation, regulation, regulation. and we know they did nothing without being regulated. and, that, that is like catching your child with his hand in the jar and saying, what are you doing? i said, do not eat the cookie before dinner. he says, oh, no, you are right, i'm not going to eat the cookie. and you know darn well he is going to eat the cookie. and now he is kind of looking at you in disbelief like, why would you punish me? i said i was not going to eat the cookie. you know darn well if you had not caught him, he was going to eat the cookie. for them to come to the courtroom and parade that they cooperated with the surgeon general and the public health officials like dr. burns, a man who devoted his entire life to smoking and health for the public benefit, before they say all those comments like scare tactics, irresponsible, surgeon general is the public enemy on this issue because you are misleading, before they call that cooperation, they should think about jurors like yourself who evaluate that and use their common sense. you took your child to that first day at school and you said to your child, this teacher deserves all your respect. listen to her, she is going to give you good information, respect her, like mom and dad do. and then while you step back and the kids are milling around listening to the teacher who is doing her best to teach a roomful of kids with everything she is got, the parent's sitting back there with all new parents and say, you know, i think she is biased. she does not know what she is talking about. my kid should not even be listening. if that were the type of cooperation you found in the everyday experience, you would call it what it was, disruptive, ridiculous, irresponsible. that discussion does not happen between you and the teacher across the room with the child. if you 25 have a disagreement, you do it in private. there is a time and a place. no different in the tobacco controversy that they created in this united states america. the greatest health issue affecting this country in the 20th century, and instead of joining with the message, truly cooperating, they spoke across the room to the teacher, the surgeon general, said, you are biased, scare tactics. and the smokers do not know who to believe. and then they are surprised when one of them actually hears the message and says, i do not believe it is been proven. use your common sense. that is what is going on in this courtroom in 2011. you were told that at the end of the day all lorillard did was sell a legal product, and you cannot hold them responsible for just selling a legal product. i think mr. molony started his opening two weeks ago and said, i think, i'm going to predict that you are going to find this was a typical customer/manufacturer relationship. typical, just a legal product. and as he suggested in his opening when he was talking about many things, he said, but you know, members of the jury, there is more work to be done here, you would not be here otherwise. instead, you are probably asking yourself, why are we here? well, before you learned any of the evidence, before you came into court, you might not have known, but because you sat for two weeks of testimony and all the exhibits you do know, because if lorillard is saying that the typical customer/manufacturer relationship is where the manufacturer acts negligently, if the typical manufacturer sells a defective and dangerous product to the customer, and if the typical manufacturer also hides, omits, and conceals data that people would want to know to defend themselves, to arm themselves, to protect themselves, and if the typical manufacturer agreed with others to conspire to say, we will not release the information for the mighty buck. if that were the typical manufacturing relationship, you would turn your head and shake it and say, no way. you learned through two weeks of testimony this was not a typical manufacturer/customer relationship. in fact, i would suggest to you, you know more in two weeks about both sides of the story where we measure and compare than a distinguished professor of history who took the stand. in two weeks you saw more internal documents than he even knew 4074 1 existed. they brought you that man to tell you the story of tobacco, and he had to concede to mr. anderson, if i were doing my normal work where i publish a book where i would hope to get a pulitzer, i would look at secondary sources and primary sources. i'd go to archives. i'd look in libraries. what did he do in this case? did he go to the archives? did he go to their library? he did not even know they had a library. did he even show you the news accounts that actually showed tobacco cooperating on national news, blaming the host and the hostess? no. i submit to you if dr. roberts wanted to write the book today or write the peer-reviewed article, it would be rejected because it was one sided. he did not look at all the evidence and, frankly, he was biased. he had 500,000 good reasons over the last eight to nine years why he might only look at one aspect of the story. and, frankly, he did not even come to them as an expert in tobacco. he was not an expert, he conceded, on anything with regard to the smoking controversy. he became an expert on that portion of history when he came to them. now, had they wanted him to tell you about the history of boxing or john wayne, he could have come in and said, i know that already, i'm ready to testify, tell me what i need to know about the specifics of the case. but he did not. they manufactured an expert in dr. roberts, plain and simple. unlike dr. burns, you heard he is made a lot of money, but over 25 years. but he did not develop his expertise to come into a courtroom, he was doing it before the surgeon general was really even ready. he was with every surgeon general's report. he went out of medical school and joined the clearinghouse for tobacco and health. he was doing it for real, and then he said, this is such a great issue, i'm getting involved, and that is what -- that is what he is. that is who we brought you. a real expert, nonmanufactured. who else did we bring you? they want to talk about what they believe ms. miller was thinking, that she must not had motivation, she must have enjoyed it, she must have not wanted to quit. we lawyers are not the evidence. that is assumption. that is advocacy for your client. if they really wanted to hear that ms. miller was not motivated, they should have brought that expert to you on addiction to come in and say they already got what they needed out of dr. burns and dr. werner, well, 3 you consider that, you evaluate that talk. they should have brought you an expert to say, i'd like you to assume ms. miller's addicted. tell us about how she might still enjoy it. you have heard absolutely no evidence in this courtroom other than from the university of florida college of medicine, dr. tonia werner, who treats people, inpatient, who teaches other psychiatrists, who does both forensic work for the state, on both the criminal side for the prosecutors and the defense, on the civil side for civil commitments and cases like this, and this is one of the few she is done of tobacco. she walked in the courtroom and gave it to you all. now, if she were manufactured, she could come in and say, no, no, no, even if you are addicted, you can never quit. and she did not do that. she was candid. yeah, you still can quit, but it is harder. every day's a struggle. there is a cycle. she gave it to you all. they could have brought you an expert if they really wanted you to surmise and assume and guess what jackie miller must have been thinking or whether or not she really wanted to quit. the elephant in the room that is not been talked about is the disease. and just like they do not want you -- they want you to say, look, it is a legal product, you cannot find liability for selling a legal product. you cannot find liability because she had a disease. there has to be conduct, unreasonable conduct. and just as they say you cannot find them liable just because they sold a legal product, you cannot hold her liable just because she purchased a cigarette. it is not that easy in this courtroom. you have to prove unreasonable conduct. what did she know, when did she know it, what did she do with it? what did they know, when did they know it? what did they do with it? that is why we compare, that is why we measure, that is why they both contributed substantially to jackie miller's smoking and her lung cancer and her death. it is not either/or. they would like you to think it was that simple. in fact, when they read the instructions that you are going to hear from the court, they kept forgetting to mention the concurring cause as we say. i expect his honor will read for you and continue on past where mr. molony did, for instance, under negligence, "in order to be regarded as a legal cause of injury, negligence need not be the only cause. negligence may be a 5 legal cause of injury even though it operates in combination with the act of another if the negligence contributes substantially to producing the loss." even if she has fault it can act in combination with their fault. even though she was addicted and that was working against her, that can work in combination with their fault. and, frankly, members of the jury, if they had an expert who wanted to come in and say it played absolutely no role, they could have brought that person in here to provide you testimony under oath, again, so we all hear the same evidence at the same time, no independent research, and so both sides get to ask questions on the stand, that is the fair way to do it. so if they wanted an expert to tell you, we absolutely had no contribution, not even an iota, they could have brought that you and they did not. that was their choice. that is the evidence you now have before you. uncontroverted by the only board-certified psychiatrist who walked into this courtroom, who evaluated this case to say she was addicted. it undermined her motivation. it affected her free will. it caused her to smoke more. it substantially contributed to her disease and her death. there is absolutely no evidence from a qualified medical person otherwise. well, what did they want to talk about? lay witnesses, as we call them as lawyers, nonmedical personnel. we called her friends. and let me remind you, we called them. we knew what they were going to say. let us talk about some of the witnesses. i mean, no witness is perfect in their memory, no person is perfect in their memory, but we brought you everything they had to say over 50 years because you were entitled to know as much as we could find out from louise fink, ms. schumacher, ms. hall, ms. dawson. do not you think if michelle mrozek and her aunt carol really wanted to make this look good, we would not bring you people that kind of give it both ways? does that make sense? they want you to use the testimony of the people who took the stand like the friends or even ralph, who say just because they knew what they knew must prove what jackie knew. and just because they saw ms. miller smoking, that she must have enjoyed it. dr. werner already talked about that. in true addiction, which there is no dispute about, true addiction, nobody disputes that. in true 7 addiction, a layperson cannot tell the difference between enjoyment and the perception of enjoyment because the addiction works on dopamine. and i'd like to talk about what that enjoyment is. i mean, for them to say she is constantly smoking in pictures, that proves she must have enjoyed it, or that she failed to stop, that must prove it. what that proves is she was addicted, there was no dispute about that. if she smoked one pack a day that was 20 cigarettes a day, two packs would be 40. at some point you heard it was three packs a day, 60. i would submit to you to consider that at certain times in her life over decades there is nothing in the human experience -- i know that dr. werner gave you examples of dopamine, there is absolutely nothing in the human experience that anybody would ever do 40 and 60 times a day for pleasure because at that point the novelty wears off, and i mean nothing. if she smoked each cigarette approximately ten minutes each, and we were to take the average of 30 cigarettes, that is 300 minutes a day she is spending with a cigarette in her hand, smelling her fingers up, smelling the house up, taking up in her mouth, 300 minutes, five hours of her day. that is a full-time job. that is a substantial portion of her life, and there was nothing more telling than when she was diagnosed with cancer, enjoyment? she wanted to smoke. the disease was so tight and so strong in her she did not even want hospice to be called in. do you remember why? she was afraid they would take the cigarettes away. this is a woman who is facing the end, she is not looking at what is enjoyable or not. she is facing, what do i need? if they wanted any evidence for you to consider in that jury room later this afternoon, that she truly enjoyed it, that she was not ever motivated, and that it was not affected by her addiction, they could have brought you that very expert and they did not, and that was their choice. now, we also brought you dr. robicsek, the board-certified cardiothoracic surgeon. that gentleman has been performing surgery since the '50s, the first heart transplant. literally had someone's life in his hands in the '70s. 35,000 procedures later, came in here to talk about it. and their first question or their biggest comment to him was, did not you know we all agree that smoking causes cancer in jackie miller? you must have been thinking, why is he here? and now you know. you did not hear mr. molony ever say it, 9 yeah, we agree the lorillard cigarettes caused it. instead he wants to talk about there is some gaps in the '50s that we do not really know what she is smoking, and there is cigarettes at the end, the misty's and the capris and the virginia slims, they will say in big general terms that smoking cigarettes cause cancer, but they are hoping you are going to say, well, maybe they did not prove lorillard cigarettes did. they are very careful with their words, they could have just conceded that to dr. robicsek. i had to ask him that question, did you have an opinion within a reasonable degree of medical certainty whether the lorillard products that she was smoking in the '50s, '60s, '70s and into the '80s substantially contributed to causing her lung cancer and death. and he said, absolutely, yes. not even touched on cross-examination. that is the evidence you have in this case. now, what was important -- also important was that in the last five, six years they want to talk about risk reduction if you quit earlier, what might have been. let us go back, let us read minds, let us look back. dr. robicsek told you this is one of the worst cancers in the world to get in the body. small cell carcinoma takes its victims very quickly, year, year and a half regardless. there was nothing that jackie did or did not do in the last five years, for sure, no questions asked, that made a difference. she had smoked enough over the course of her life that she was going to get the lung cancer and die. was just waiting to go. so i do not know, honestly, what the significance of the misty's and the capris and such at the end were. it certainly did not make a difference in the outcome. but it is interesting to kind of see that once again jackie is gravitating to the long skinny cigarettes that you heard about, the capris and misty's, virginia slims. she is still sticking around with the women's marketed cigarettes. certainly a woman who is aware of the marketing. but, again, they never actually said to you what is not in dispute that was on the screen in the opening, lorillard cigarettes caused the cancer. never looked you in the eye and told you that, did they? i talked about memories so we will go to carol gibson. and, again, no witness's memory is perfect. no human's memory is perfect. and carol gibson tried to do the best she could recall. and the best criticism, as well, the first time we 11 asked her questions for six hours she did not remember exactly when the kent started. and she said probably around '59. she actually said when they put it on the board and when they asked her, did not you say this? she actually said, it was probably earlier but i just do not know. and then they want to criticize her for after thinking about it, like many people do after they have been grilled, and they start looking back over the years to say, you know what, i remember even earlier when i was younger and criticize her for saying, i'm willing to get deposed again for hours and ask away. and she told you she -- she gave you her best. and their best criticism is, well, she does not remember anything because apparently her memory and billie carter dawson's memory of the wedding is not the same. you may recall, and i picked up on it, too, because, frankly, we have heard all testimony in the videos before you heard it, we know what they are going to say, but they asked her, billie carter dawson, do you think she went to your sister's wedding when she eloped to georgia or not? and she said, no, she was not there. and i imagine some of you caught it and thought, wait a minute, billie carter dawson said in her video she was at that get-away. and you must have been thinking, what is going on? that is certainly frailties of memories and inconsistencies. but let us remember who else testified in this case. i do not know where billie carter came up with it, i do not know. i'm not sure she came up with anything, but that is what she remembers. but joan hall, the bride who actually went to georgia testified and what did she tell you? the four of us went up to georgia to get married. jackie miller was coming with me to be my witness. and when we were there we got married. she did not say anything about a party going up. in fact, she said, we got married and we came to jacksonville for a dinner and one-night honeymoon and went home. now, does it make a hill-of-beans difference who went to the wedding in georgia? i would hope not. i do not know. but i just suggest to you that before we get overly critical of witness's testimony over a span of decades on topics that they probably never thought they would ever be asked again, have some understanding and common sense that not everything's going to be perfect. and if we thought that everything had to be perfect, we would have never brought you some of those witnesses. but since we are talking about forgiving and 13 misstatements and mistakes, mr. molony started off telling you how he made a mistake two weeks ago when he did not mean to say, i'm not apologizing, that was a mistake. now, mr. molony's a fine attorney, fine, well-prepared presentation in opening and closing. i'll accept him at his word, of course, that if he made a mistake, he made a mistake because he meant to say he is not defending them. well, i disagree there. he is defending them. now, when we talk about all the things in the past that you would never say today, that stuff, that was wrong, plain and simple. but we do not need mr. molony to speak for them. we had kristi leung to speak for them. so when they had the person who could truly come in and speak to it, they had her, we had her. now, you have to go by your memory. i'll go by my notes, but it is kristi leung, their marketing director, was asked, "and it would be morally reprehensible as a company to take a product that is addictive and cause -- causes disease and target children with such a product, would not it?" and her answer, "my company believes that smoking is a choice that only adults should be able to -- only adults are mature enough to make. and, therefore, we do not target our advertising and marketing efforts to children." now, on its face it sounds like a fine answer, but if you were going to apologize for the past, the person from lorillard could have said it. and more importantly, when you hear kristi leung's testimony, when you heard it, evaluate like you would any other witness, because his honor's going to tell you, consider what their demeanor, their frankness, but also what interest did they have? they want to talk about carol gibson hoping, you know, her niece does well. think about what interest lorillard's own employees have this in case. why did not she want to admit that, yeah, there were times when our advertising was over the top and we did target teens and ms. miller was a teen when she was smoking. would not it have been more credible to say, mistakes were made, things were done that we would not have done now, we would never do that. that was the time to say it. instead, she said, "no, we do not even -- we do not even study teens." and then it came out in the examination, "well, actually, you do study some teens because we found out in new jersey, you are saying the base of all your students then or your smokers then, this 15 is later, is the high school students. so whether you are targeting or not, you are studying it, and you know it is going on." and she says, "well, that is inconsistent with everything i've seen." so there was another opportunity, a choice to be made to fess up and say, mistakes were made, documents show that perhaps my research was not as thorough. and then, amazingly, on redirect examination she said, you know what, i found a few other documents, when he asked her questions. yeah, there were other documents of youth smoking, that she was never going to volunteer until he asked her again. another choice to not come clean and say things were done that should not be done today, and we acknowledge them up front. it was always a teasing out, a pulling out, oh, if you have got a document that proves it, okay, i'll admit it. but if you do not and you do not have me with my hand in the cookie jar, i'm not going to admit it. consider that in kristi leung. kristi leung who is been there about ten years, when people in her department have been there 30 years and probably could speak to this. so i guess they had their opportunity, if you will, to speak to you and say mistakes were made and things were done improperly from the corporate representative, not the attorneys. so there'd be no misunderstanding that they did not and they do not and they will not and that is because they just do not get it. that is why we brought up the fact that there are documents continuing on over the decades. yes, mrs. miller's not a teen as she gets older, but it shows the intent is still there later. so when you tell us under oath and say to this jury, we did not mean it back then and do not even agree it occurred, the jury is allowed and it is fair to consider, wait a second, perhaps you are not giving us everything we need to know about what was going on in the '40s with ms. miller if you are still doing and still studying -- despite all the evidence, you are still doing it now. that is why that was important. that is why it is important. they just do not get it. it is a continuing course of conduct by this company that just does not get it. until it is regulated, they do not stop. they made a point of how we prevetted all our ads to the ftc in '58. everything went to the ftc. of course, i showed you the document from 1955. they got -- their hand was in the cookie jar, and the ftc and said, you are making claims that are not 17 true with respect to your filters. so do not pat yourself on the back and come in here in front of a jury and say, well, look, we are just -- we are working on the rules. when you are not looking, when you were not looking, i got caught, but now we are working on the rules. do not worry, i'm not going to eat the cookie before dinner, dad. that is what is going on here. now you know. you know, going back it is -- now you know, like i said, what dr. robinson [sic] does not even know, he did not even look at half the stuff. really, when you think about dr. robinson, i mean, the reason we asked him questions was not because we -- we disagree that there was not a lot of information in the news, there was. but he did not research both sides of the story. and because of that, he had no idea what is going on in this courtroom because what dr. robinson basically did was indict their company. he basically came in to tell you, well, everybody's always known or at least been aware, and as the decades went on they became more aware, and there was a great percentage that believed and there really was no doubt and there really was no controversy, and what he did not know was people like dr. spears in '97 are still saying, i do not know what you are talking about, it is not true, people who were making policy decisions, the president, until 2000. you heard that mr. orlowsky in 2000 made a policy change to say, we will now admit smoking causes disease. it was not because the medicine had changed from 1997 to 2000. so ask yourself what changed? policy. their admission about disease and smoking is based on policy. it is based on the almighty dollar that they collected from customers. when their fingers were all over the cookie jar in 2000 and the gig was up, they finally said, we admit it, yes, there is a process going on here. robinson did not know what you knew about these gentlemen's testimony, that they were still denying into '93 and '97. everything he said indicted them, that they were being reckless with what everybody else must have known, that they were indifferent to what the rest of the country must have been aware of. consider that when we talk about what is clear and convincing. do you have to hesitate to think that everything he said, everything he said about awareness, about this greatest medical and social -- public health problem in this country was, everything he said went completely against what they were still trying to say later. clearly, 19 convincingly, without hesitation. i'm going to speed up. now, again, we were talking about all the friends that we heard about in ms. miller's life. timeline came up several times. here's what i need to say about that. in 1974 harold reid died. they want you to infer that jackie must have known he died from lung cancer and smoking. we do not know that, but they want you then to take the next leap to say, well, she must have known he died from lung cancer from smoking, that it should have caused her to quit and that is why she is at fault, but it would have been such a monumental item in her life, her friend -- long friend, admittedly from high school, that he died and somehow that jump must have changed or should have changed her behavior. now, what they forgot on their timeline is harold's wife did not even quit then. i mean, they obviously remembered she did not quit then but they forgot to square this. she did not even quit for another six years. faced with the death of her own husband supposedly because there was a link to cancer and smoking, we will accept that, she was so shocked she kept on smoking. perhaps that shows she was addicted. i do not know. that is not the issue before you, jackie miller was. but to infer that jackie should have known and should have stopped then, that is an assumption. now, other friends of hers quit. billie carter dawson quit in '77. like i said, ms. reid, ms. fink quits in '81 -- or '80, rather. what they are showing you is that in that community of friends apparently it was not as well known as dr. roberts would have you believe. you heard their testimony, i'll rely on your memory, that each and every one of them, some had heard about the surgeon general's report, some had not, some were better aware than others. and each was working through their own smoking issues. it took the doctor, dr. darby, you heard about it, he had to come into ms. reid or ms. fink's hospital room. it was not enough her husband died, but he had come into the hospital room smoking and, basically, in the hospital said, you want to see your grandchildren, you got to stop. and then it finally hit her. apparently that was all it took. you want to see your grandchildren, live that long, you better do it now. now, dr. burns explained that to you. remember when faced with a life-and-death crisis a lot of people, even addicts, will stop and apparently she did. but to say that harold, her 21 husband, died and that is enough to cause jackie to smoke or stop smoking or should have, ignore the very person she is been living with, sharing her life with, went on another six years. and there is been no evidence. they want to speculate with dr. darby must have told jackie. we do not know. but the point is lorillard has known for decades, although they did not admit until 2000, that millions of people will get smoking-related diseases. they also know that a certain percentage maybe even millions do not get diseases. they have known that millions of people will become addicted. but they also know some will not. and of those millions that become addicted, some can quit and some will not. and the ninety percent you hear about quitting, it takes on average seven times to quit. but the point i raise is who is lorillard to know which smoker will get a disease and who will not? who is lorillard to know which smoker will become addicted and who will not? and which smoker may be able to break the vicious cycle of addiction and who will not? they simply cannot. and that is why a reasonably prudent person or company would have to give material information to people to help them arm themselves, because they cannot know, just like the smokers cannot know. but they were in a better position to know. they want you to make jackie miller an epidemiologist. you heard that term, a statistician on health. they want you to take all the information she heard about who died when and what it might have been from, including her dad who she did not believe, that she should have put together all the statistics to go, aha, smoking causes cancer, i'm a smoker, it must be that i'm going to die of cancer. and yet they were the very ones who criticized the host of the party for giving epidemiological evidence. they are the experts, not her, and they want to hold her to a higher standard. what did they know, when did they know it, and what did they do with the information? the other little fact on that timeline that was not talked about that i'd ask you to consider is this agreement, this conspiracy, the whole industry, what they know. what they really know is, not only does it kill you, but they need to replace you. cannot have a viable business model if all your smokers die. so what they did not mention, although you saw it on the timeline, in 1974 harold dies. fortunately, for some manufacturer, michelle mrozek one year later steps in and starts smoking. in 23 1977 billie carter dawson stops smoking. fortunately, for some manufacturer, malia torgensen stepped in. what nobody's acknowledging about this whole conspiracy is not only will the product -- when you use it as intended, it will kill you, but what they need is a replacement smoker to take their place on the timeline, and they do not have any problem with who is stepping in the timeline. they do not having any problem raving and applauding the fact that two minors stepped into the timeline, just like jackie miller and their mother did decades before. the risk reduction again. dr. burns did talk about risk reduction. so did dr. robicsek. the sad truth is your lungs never go back to normal. you can reduce the relative risk. they said it was a relative risk, meaning if you compared yourself to maybe your virtual twin who would keep smoking at the same rate, you have reduced your percentage vis-a-vis the person that continues. but you never, even after 20 years, ever become a never smoke ever again. dr. robicsek told you, when he goes into lungs, they are permanently damaged. dr. burns explained it, the dna is permanently changed. now -- so you can reduce your risk, no doubt. but essentially they want you to kind of guess what would happened to jackie miller, but they proved it themselves when they used dr. burns' testimony and said, look, if she would have quit just ten years earlier, '84, she would have reduced her risk of a smoking-related disease by sixty percent. sounds pretty impressive. when they said she should have stopped 15 years earlier, eighty percent, that would have been basically around '80, '79, '80. sounds like a pretty impressive reduction, except what you heard and they touted in the closing was, jackie miller already had a smoking-related disease. smoking cough they were talking about in the '80s, copd and the emphysema, she already had it. now, it is not the same as lung cancer. and perhaps she could have reduced her risk of cancer, and that is why mr. anderson told you and we did that we accept that jackie miller should have done more in the '80s. she did try to quit. now, whether acupuncture's the way to go, who knows, but she tried. she tried again at her sister's wedding. there was an attempt. for them to suggest that jackie miller giving her daughter a cigarette after she quit somehow was evident that maybe jackie enjoyed it, made choices, 25 really flies in the face of any parent/child relationship. does not that really speak to the addiction, that it becomes such a part of you or part of her, rather, that you do not even think twice about what you have just done? giving your child another cigarette. did she really enjoy it? did she really want to suck michelle back in by giving her a cigarette? or did she really -- she did not even think about it? the cycle has taken hold, she is not even understanding, she is rationalizing. that is for you to decide. but i would suggest it is not an all-or-nothing proposition like everything lorillard has proposed to you. everything is either/or with them, all or nothing, and it is just not. the evidence supports that it is not. there is measurement and comparisons that need to be made. there is shared responsibility. there is shared fault. we acknowledge that. they still have not. and that is why they need to be punished. that is why they need to be deterred, because of this conduct, this indifference, this continuing course. this position that they take with this jury because of what happened to ms. miller, in the face of it, not only screams to be compensated, but it screams to be punished and deterred, to speak out. it screams out that your verdict needs to be heard in greensboro, north carolina. not only that you have taken away from three children, but you will not do this again. until they have been regulated, they have never changed their course of conduct. they need to change the course of conduct. that is why punitive damages are going to be warranted here, i would submit to you. i will say this about the questions they asked every witness, did you ever hear jackie miller say she heard anything about -- from tirc and even the frank statement? they never asked them, did you ever hear jackie miller say lorillard told her she should cut back? did you ever hear her say she saw an ad from them saying we want you to smoke less? no. they made choices, too. they made choices throughout jackie's life and her smoking but, you know, this company has been in business for -- since 1760. they were 180 years old or so when she was a teenager choosing to smoke. they have a life that started before jackie, during jackie, and after jackie, not so with jackie and her children. and, honestly, to suggest that in one side of your mouth that jackie miller was a wonderful mom who 4101 1 did everything she could for her children, who was equally loved, and then on the other side to suggest that at most you should fully compensate her children for $10,000 a year each, they are bartering with you. because what they are suggesting is you should give each -- and compensate each child less per year than what they paid their expert to come in here for. the 500,000-dollar man. eight years, $500,000. call it ten years, 500,000 in ten years, and they would suggest to you that the bond, the relationship, the companionship, the protection, which nobody has disputed, even them, should be equated to 10,000 a year per child is simply ludicrous. we are going to leave it to you, members of the jury. consider the $500,000 they have paid him for ten years. considering they pay 3 to 4 million for the ti. some of you may think those numbers are too much. some of you may think numbers like that in a relationship that we have heard about are too little, and that is why we trust your judgment. but jackie miller, no question, was a woman who went beside herself for others. was there a better story than that wedding, after everything she did, to have to worry about two more people with a birthday cake and that little girl and the corsage. does it speak volumes that the man that she divorced stayed in her life to the very end? the court: you have three minutes. mr. patacca: thank you, your honor. members of the jury, you have been sworn in and you are the judges of the facts, just like as his honor is the judge of the law, you are the judges of the fact. and i would submit today in this courtroom in 2011 you are the most important officials in the state of florida to these parties, the most important today for us. you have taken an oath and we know you will abide by the oath. but for over 200 years in this country, our constitutions of the united states and florida have allowed for jury trials to engage in these disputes and settle them. think what might have been, how many happy pictures you saw there from 20, 30 years ago, how many more there would have been for the next 19 years. what could have been if tobacco would have joined the surgeon general instead of shouting over him. thank you, your honor.