mr. bigger: thank you, your honor. good morning, everybody. some days it feels like a long time ago that i stood before you guys -- i guess it is about two weeks ago now --and started talking to you in jury selection, and some days it feels like just yesterday. the first thing i have to say at the outset, obviously, as i think you will probably hear from mr. geise as well, is just thank you. you have taken time out of your lives. i know you have other things that you do if you were not here. you have commitments and obligations. and we appreciate you being here and fulfilling your civic duty as a juror on this case. it is a fundamental concept in our democracy that we have this trial by jury process. it is enshrined in the constitution, and it is important. we do all appreciate you being here. the trial, as you saw, had a lot of testimony and a lot of documents that were received over many days, and most of which you saw. there were some that people just moved into evidence that you may not have seen, but all of that will be in evidence for you to consider back in the deliberation room when you go to deliberate on this case. you probably should all get college credit for having sat through this and the information that you have learned, the history lessons you have had and all this sort of stuff. if you can get -- audit a class and get credit for it, this would be probably be a good example of it. you literally had a chance to hear from some of the leading experts in the world on these subjects, people who are at the top of these fields. now, you were very attentive and we do appreciate that. all the effort and time that we have spent together over the last couple of weeks will now boil down to how you will collectively, as a jury, answer the questions on the verdict form. you will likely never get another chance to serve on a jury. you may, but it is doubtful. i can almost guarantee you that you will never have another chance to serve on a jury like this involving a smoker and a case involving the tobacco industry. i can absolutely guarantee you that you are marlene nally's only jury. this is her only case. you are her only jury. it is taken nine years since she filed this lawsuit to get us here today, but here we are. the wheels of justice sometimes turn slow, but they grind fine, is what they often say. it is because of people like you, people from the community. you have in your hands a tremendous responsibility and a tremendous opportunity to actively do justice today. when you go back into the deliberation room in just a few hours after we both have presented our arguments, you really have three jobs. your first is to answer the questions on the verdict form based on the evidence that you received. your second is to follow the law that his honor just read to you, and you will have copies of those instructions. you will have a copy back there with you to read and review, but you follow that law. but the third -- and it is really important --before you answer the questions, sit down together and talk about how you feel about the evidence in the case. deliberate. you know, that is what we ask a jury to do. that is why it is called the deliberation room. we want you guys to sit down and deliberate on what the evidence has shown and what we have proven or not proven. now, all the documents that you saw in the trial, they will be back there. they will be --some in binders, sometimes in folders, different things. but that will be back there for you guys to look at if you want to look through the evidence and see. you obviously have your memory of the evidence as it came in. if you want to look at it again, see any of the documents, see any of that, it will be back there for you. now, early on in this case, i think reynolds suggested to you that a bunch of time may be wasted reproving the findings. unlike you, though, reynolds knew when this trial started exactly what they and their co-conspirators lied about. they knew how they designed cigarettes to addict smokers like joe nally during his entire lifetime, and they knew why they did it, for money. as mr. clark told you in the beginning of this case, we would prove most of this to you through their very own documents. we needed to show you all this evidence, though, because we have to meet our burden. we have a burden of proof, and we have to meet that burden on the fraud, on the conspiracy. we had to help you understand who was truly at fault for joe nally's death, and we had to prove to you why this is a case that requires an imposition of punitive damages. now, you heard from his honor that there will be a brief additional phase if you say yes on punitive damages. a marathon is 26.2 miles. okay? you-all have run 26 miles. there is .2 to go if you say "yes" on punitive damages. it will be tomorrow, less than a day. you will have the case back to deliberate on that part of the case, which will be the amount of punitive damages. okay? and so do not think that that is a big whole other two weeks of trial and all this kind of stuff. it is a brief additional phase, .2 miles to go. what you have learned throughout this trial is that the tobacco companies and the tobacco industry was the author of this tragic story of death and disease. and you leaned this was a story that was written in nicotine and in blood, 500,000 deaths every year today. it is easy to look at the world today and feel like, well, you know, that is just the way it is; things happen, you know. but now you know. you know all of it, you know the whole story was preventible. it did not need to be this way. but throughout the 1900s, it was literally these tobacco companies' world. and joe nally was just a kid who grew up in it. he was indoctrinated by all of it while he was still a boy, an adolescent, a kid. and he was unquestionably detrimentally affected by the reynolds' fraud and the industry conspiracy. folks, you saw. he got copd and kidney cancer caused by his smoking, and he died an awful death of lung cancer caused by smoking. that is as detrimental as it gets. he died. you probably remember this chart, you have seen it a number of times now, but it is important to look at it and really understand what this shows. if you look back there on that timeline, back to 1900, the turn of the 20th century, there was a huge market that was created for cigarettes when there was none before. until reynolds and its predecessor companies in the industry did all the things we showed you, that market was not there. they made it attractive to children. you saw in their documents. they wanted to line up kids in high schools as consumers and boosters, boosters for peer pressure from their own peers. and they sentenced generation after generation of kids throughout the 1900s to a lifetime of addiction for those kids and enormous profits for the companies. they did not just create a market for cigarettes. they invented lung cancer. this whole epidemic you have heard about, lung cancer, before 1900, 140 cases worldwide. it does not exist without this modern cigarette and this epidemic of 600 to 700 billion cigarettes being consumed. they did it all for money. the love of money is the root of all evil, and now you know that was absolutely true for reynolds and its co-conspirators. it was motivated by financial gain, by greed. and how do they respond when someone like marlene nally comes here to court -- into a court of law where they can be judged, and, of course, folks, they have the right to defend themselves, do not get me wrong. okay? but how do they do it? what is the manner? well, they blame kids for starting, saying, we did not have anything to do with it. it was not our advertising. despite what the documents you saw say about the power of that advertising, how influential it was in creating that rise, that spike before 1953. they blame the kids for getting addicted to their products, just like they designed, and say it was just choice or decision. they blame the smoker for doing everything exactly the way that they wanted until he inconveniently died and stopped buying their cigarettes. there is claims, like responsible people cannot be addicts. folks, addiction does not discriminate. and you know that from dr. hurt and from your own reasoning and common sense. you have heard the judge tell you. you can consider all of that too when you look at the evidence and you look at what you are deciding. now, our society has always protected children. it is something at the moral core of all of our souls. and as society, we do not tolerate and we should not tolerate people or companies targeting children or willfully putting them in danger, especially not grave danger. but what reynolds knew when this trial started and what you now know straight from the mouths of many of the executives of reynolds and these other companies, they have always needed children to devour to sustain their morally bankrupt business model. it depends on it. from the 1920s, you saw those documents, right through today, same story, calling kids the next crop of prospects, today's teenager is tomorrow's potential regular customer, looking at kids as replacement smokers critical to the rise and fall of every major brand from 1934, before joseph nally even started smoking when he was just six years old, to 1984, in that retrospective document from reynolds. they always knew that if they could not get their hooks in them by the time they turned 18, they probably were not going to get them at all. you saw that. after 21, after 25, people do not start smoking. it is all before the age of 18. two-thirds before the age of 18. and it worked famously well. famously well. we told you, you have to go back. you have to go back to that time when it was working so well and it caused that tremendous rise in consumption to realize that the industry did whatever it could to make smoking acceptable, normalized, available, attainable. fifty percent of the country was smoking in the '50s and of '60. sixty percent of the doctors in the 1950s, and still fifty percent in the 1960s of doctors. they used doctors, scientists, nurses, politicians, celebrities, people who were smoking. they used them not just in other ways but in their advertisements too. they used athletes. you remember, it takes a moment. and we focused on this presentism because it is important. we could probably not imagine today peyton manning or lebron james, any famous athlete you see on the gatorade commercials, the nike commercials, under armor, jordan spieth, any of these people sitting in the locker rooms, walking on the golf course, walking the sidelines smoking cigarettes. but that is what they did. that is how successful their plan was at getting everyone to become a smoker. four of the seven mercury astronauts -- these guys were titans. they were responsible people, smoked cigarettes, addicted themselves. smoking was permitted everywhere. it was the fabric of our lives, and it was always by design and manipulation. thinking for a second, about a week before joseph nally's 13th birthday, we were attacked at pearl harbor and america was drawn into world war ii. young boys like joe nally would idolize the brave men of our military serving in world war ii. you can use your common sense to understand that. meanwhile, reynolds and its future coconspirators were addicting these same men with cigarettes in their rations, using them as brand ambassadors in their prolific advertisements. these messages were inescapable by anyone going through their adolescence in the 1940s like joe nally. they desperately desired to get joe nally smoking as a teenager, and they succeeded. just like they needed him too, he started smoking regularly around 16 years old. you heard from some of the evidence, he had his first cigarette around 12 in the movie theater. as expected and needed, by the time he enlisted in the u.s. army air corp at 17 years old, he was a regular daily smoker and well on his way to a lifetime of addiction for himself and profits for the companies. joe nally served our country honorably for 20 years in the united states air force. he served in korea. it was undisputed in the case that he was an exemplary airman, exemplary. folks, based on everything you saw in this trial, you should now know that these companies do not know the first thing about honor or valor or integrity. the first thing. you know that now. you know what they knew when this trial started. i want to spend about the next hour or so walking through the verdict form with you and talking with you, talking with you, about how we feel the evidence has proven our claims. and i will tell you right now that we feel that the answer to every question on that verdict form is yes. i will walk through with you and explain to you why that is, but it should be all yeses from our perspective. that first question is class membership. it is important to know at the outset -- i apologize, can you see, mr. ventura, through this? a juror: (nods affirmatively). mr. bigger: okay. there is not really anywhere good to put this podium. i tried to do the best i could. if you cannot see at any point, please let me know. class membership is not about fault or awareness. okay? that has nothing to do with it you look at the question, you look at the instructions, it is not in there. all right? class membership is not about whether joseph nally, sr., had no choice to continue smoking. i think you heard some of that at the beginning of the case. whether addicts can quit. addicts to anything can quit. it is not about that. it is about whether he was addicted. it is not about the fault of joseph nally, sr there is another question for that as well, you will see on there. it is not about whether they share some responsibility. again, there is a question on there for apportionment of responsibility. and it is not about reliance to his detriment on their concealment or the conspiracy. a question for that, too. okay? that is not part of class membership though. the burden of proof that you heard me say at the beginning of jury selection and you heard his honor just talk to you about is the greater weight of the evidence. okay? and it means the more persuasive and convincing force and effect of the entire evidence in the case. you look at everything in the case, all the evidence we brought you from dr. hurt, dr. proctor, dr. kress, dr. villa, all the documents. what is greater? when you look at it all, you look at the questions, have we proven our case? is our evidence greater? have we shown you that by the greater weight of the evidence we have prevailed? there is an important -- all the instructions are important, but i want to focus your attention on one in particular. and at the beginning of the case, i think you remember in reynolds' opening statement there was this slide on legal cause. well, look at the legal cause instructions. okay? do not listen to just what we say, look at the law yourself. look at what it says. and you will see in each and every one of the issues where you have to decide whether something was a legal cause, you will see this paragraph modifying that first paragraph mr. geise pointed you too. and it is important, because it is called concurring cause. and it makes sense too if you think about it. all these things were going on at the same time. okay? these were not silos in joseph nally's life. these were real things that were going on -- the fraud, the conspiracy, his addiction, the smoking, all these different questions you are going to have about whether these things were a legal cause. they do not have to be the only cause. one of them does not have to be the only cause. there can be multiple causes going at the same time. you just have to decide is that one you are looking at, addiction, is addiction a substantial contributing cause? does it contribute substantially, or is it just some insubstantial thing? the smoking for 50 years, did that contribute substantially to lung cancer and death or was it just some insubstantial thing? was it not significant? the same thing for concealment and conspiracy. so this concurring cause instruction is important. it is in 7, 10, 12, and 13, all four of these instructions. you will see it when you get back there. and that is were addiction, smoking, concealment, and conspiracy come from. we tried to just kind of smoosh this together to make fewer slides so you can see them, but that same language, look at it. it is in the law that you need to follow in this case. now, the first two questions are the class membership questions. okay? and this is from the verdict form. it will look just like this when you get it back there in the jury room. question 1 and question 2. and one thing i want to say really quickly, you heard the stipulated facts that since may 5th, 1990, mr. nally was a resident of -- a citizen resident of florida. he was a citizen resident of florida since 1968. that is just a legal thing. that may 5th, 1990, was a legally significant date, so that is why that date was used. you heard, after they retired from the air force, they moved here to winter haven. ms. nally has been ever since, and so has mr. nally. they lived in the winter haven since '68. that is why you heard that in the stipulations, though, and you will see it in there. that is why it is that date instead of '68. but these two questions deal with class membership, and i will take them in order. i'm going to start with the first one just because it is first, but also because i think it is easiest. it is really the easiest one you are going to have on the whole verdict form. so this is the one that deals with manifestation. okay? did joseph nally, sr.'s, copd manifest on or before november 21st, 1996? and you see at the bottom, there are instructions there that tell you what to do. if your answer to that one, if you answered no to that one, then you would go just to 2(b) on the kidney cancer. if you answered yes, then you answer 2(a) and 2(b) -- okay? -- on that first question. and his honor gave you the law on manifestation. this is in your instructions. it is in final instruction 7. manifestation of a smoking-related disease prior to the cutoff date of november 21st, 1996, for purposes of establishing membership in the engle class is defined as the point at which joseph nally, sr., began suffering from or experiencing symptoms of a tobacco-related disease or medical condition. and in this case, copd. the smoker does not need to have been formally diagnosed or know that the symptoms were tobacco-related prior to the cutoff date. all right? so that is what the law is that his honor instructed you. and i say this is the easiest one because reynolds agrees mr. nally had copd. they agreed he has it by 2000. the just say that the record does not support that he has it before then. but everyone also agrees that it is chronic and progressive. that is what copd is. it is chronic and progressive. so what do the medical records alone show us about the symptoms that mr. nally was experiencing from that copd that every one agrees he has, at least by 2000 as far as reynolds is concerned, what do they show and why is it so obvious? well, may 31st, 1996. this is a 67-year-old white male who is an emergency request of dr. hallett who has dyspnea. shortness of breath, you heard that from dr. kress. he has a long history of the cigarette smoking, a pack to pack-and-a half a day for the last 50 years. that takes it back to 1946. he has a cough. the patient has had bronchitis in the past. these are all symptoms of copd. the impression was, possibilities include chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. also that pneumonia at the right base that he had as well, that was another concurring cause going on at the same time. it was there. but he also has copd. moderate airway obstruction. this is from the pulmonary function test taken june 4th, 1996. i do not have a calendar, but i'm pretty sure that is before november 21st, 1996. moderate airway obstruction with evidence of hyperinflation and mild reversibility. severe diffusion abnormality. that is that copd that dr. kress told you was a diagnosis he was given in june of 1996. the diffusion abnormality, that is called emphysema. you will see the records reflect emphysema. copd, emphysema, same thing. all right? no dispute about that. this is from june 5th now. he had multiple chest x-rays showing some degree of chronic copd changes. chest x-ray on june 4th showed some left pleural effusion, copd. this is from august 12th, now, still before that cutoff date. the lungs are moderately emphysematous. conclusion: pulmonary emphysema. this is now september 11th, 1996. postoperatively he did well from a urological and surgical standpoint. however, he has chronic pulmonary problems. chronic pulmonary problems. and these certainly made themselves evident. if you looked up manifestation in the dictionary, it would say, "made itself evident." that is like the definition of "manifestation." he was seen by dr. vanhook and treated by him for these conditions. apparently -- this is october 4th, now, 1996. apparently evaluated by dr. vanhook for the breathing and is on albuterol and atrovent. and folks, there are some records in here where some doctors wrote some things down wrong. okay? but mr. nally was getting the proper treatment for his copd. they gave him albuterol and the atrovent. they are giving him medications. the fact they wrote something down that says he does not have copd or whatever in the records, they were treating him for it. he was getting the proper treatment for the medical records. and no one has said that the doctors treated him wrong, they just made some -- wrote some things wrong in the records. okay? now, here, october 5th. a couple of weeks after this cutoff date. maybe this is where all the rub came, i do not know, but you saw all those other to records we have already well before that cutoff date. patient stopped smoking, but now feels breathing seems to be tighter. only ten to 20 feet, has to stop. he ran out of albuterol, because he was receiving it for his copd before this cutoff date. impressions: copd. this is a dr. yau-tong lien, the one who was his primary care physician that was seeing him the most frequently in this period. so he has a diagnosis of copd here just a weeks later. unquestionably folks, the symptoms were there before. the records demonstrate everything we need, but we still brought you dr. kress. we brought you dr. kress because we wanted to make sure that it was abundantly clear on these questions what the correct outcome should be. one thing i want to say here at the outset as we are looking at experts. you saw in the instructions that when you are looking at the experts, you need to think about their knowledge, their skill, their experience, their education, and their training. you saw with all the experts, we spent some time going through their qualifications and background, who they were. you know, we do that because it is important. the law tells you to consider that. that is why we do that with each of the experts at the outset. their qualifications do matter, and who they were and what their experience was. and so we brought you dr. kress. he is board certified in four different areas. he was a professor and practitioner at the university of chicago medical center. he said no question, joseph nally, sr., was suffering from or experiencing symptoms of copd at that time. and, in fact, he said, if you look at the pulmonary function test, he had copd. the doctor who read that pulmonary function test was correct, there was a moderate airway obstruction. he had copd. you remember this is where reynolds wanted to look just at ratio, the fev1, fvc ratio and say, well, in '98 it looks different, and so therefore we have to throw these first two out and only consider the one from 2000. obviously folks, dr. kress explained all that to you. you look at everything, all of the data, and you see what was going on here. and the reason that '98 one was odd and was high and showed that joseph nally had 125 percent predicted for his fev1/fvc, which is very strange, it is because he did not blow long enough. it was not a good test. he did not blow out long enough and made numbers too close together. okay? you saw that. you heard from dr. kress. and the fact that there was an indication in the records that, you know, said he did not have copd -- okay -- if you have blood work done and shows you have hypertension, if the doctor writes you do not have hypertension in the record, but we look at the blood work and see that you have hypertension, that is what you look at. that is what matters, the data. the same thing, if there was a broken bone and you had a broken bone in your arm and the radiologist looks at it and says, i do not see a fracture -- okay -- and that is what is written down in the records, but you look at the films and you see there is a fracture, there is a broken bone there -- okay -- it does not matter that the doctor wrote there was not one. if it is there, it is there. all right. the same thing here. dr. kress explained to you how you look at the data. go back and look at the pulmonary test, and he explained how you look at everything and you see that joseph nally, sr., had copd before november 21st, 1996. but at a minimum, he unquestionably was suffering from the symptoms of that copd that everyone agrees he had just a few years later. so the answer to question 1 on the verdict form is yes, it undoubtedly manifested before then. so that takes to us to the second question. and the second question is, was joseph nally, sr., addicted to the cigarettes containing nicotine, and if so, was that addiction a legal cause of his copd and kidney cancer? okay? what this really means is was he an addicted smoker, and if so, was his addiction to nicotine a legal cause of his copd or kidney cancer or both? that is kind of how that breaks down in that second question. let me get you to think about something, if i can, for a second. okay, folks? let me show you this. this is one pack year. okay? this represents one pack year of smoking. okay? this many cigarettes is just one pack year. you saw in the records, mr. nally, sr., had 50 or more pack years, fifty or more of these boards. you could probably wallpaper this courtroom will these boards if you wanted to. okay? why is that important? because would anyone but an addicted smoker do what mr. nally, sr., did over his lifetime? okay? fifty to 55 years at one to one-and-a-half packs per day. there are some discrepancies. i mean, some folks said two, some folks said one-and-a-half, there was a record that said one. one to one-and-a-half, use that. okay? that is 7,300 to 10,950 cigarettes every year. that is 365,000 to 602,000 cigarettes over the course of that 50 to 55 years. if you smoked -- it is about ten minutes per cigarette that the average person takes --okay? -- to smoke one cigarette. that is 3,650,000 minutes or six million minutes of smoking. the number of hours you see up there, 60,833, 100,000 hours. the number of days spent smoking, if you just -- so all day long, nothing by smoking except for that eight hours that he slept, it would take 3,802 to 6,273 days to consume that many cigarettes, ten to 17 years of actual time using the substance. okay? if we locked him here in the polk county courthouse, it would have taken him ten to 17 years, smoking the number of cigarettes he smoked, only allowing eight hours a day for sleep. would anyone but an addicted smoking do that folks? reason and common sense can be applied to this case. but even beyond that, look at the evidence you had to show that joseph nally, sr., was addicted to nicotine in cigarettes. he had that first cigarette when he was 12, and he started smoking as a young teenager when his brain was developing. remember dr. hurt went through all the neurobiology. not just about how it affects the brain and alters the brain receptors, but how our brain and our executive function is not developed yet. and we understand the science now. it was understood at that time. nicotine addiction was well understood by the industry but not understood by researchers and scientists the way we understand it today. that is important, because it makes it harder to quit. it makes it more likely the person will be addicted and smoke the rest of their life. he was a regular daily smoker by the time he was 16. when he met marlene in 1951, he remained a regular smoker of lucky strikes at that time. she told you he smoked first thing in the morning, immediately, upon getting up. he smoked immediately before going to bed, it was the last thing he did every day. he smoked in the middle of the night, he would wake up, he would have that nocturnal smoking. okay? you remember seeing that dsm-5 we went through with dr. hurt? there was multiple quit attempts. excuse me. he smoked a pack to pack-and-a-half a day for those 50 to 60 years, like i showed you on that last slide. multiple quit attempts. he used nicotine replacement therapy. okay? patches and gums. people who are not addicted do not use nicotine replacement therapy. that is for people who where addicted. and the quit attempts before too. so mrs. nally testified, thinking back over all those years, yes, he had multiple quit attempts before. could she remember, was she writing down, okay, this time joseph nally, sr., quit for three days or for a day-and-a-half or for 20 hours. of course she was not. okay? that is not expected. she is being asked in a deposition a year ago to remember back 40, 50 years and do the best she can. she said he tried to quit. there was time when he tried to quit. okay? and if your wife did not like you wearing yellow shirts and said, you know what, joe? you just do not look very good in yellow shirts. do not wear those anymore. he is, okay, i will not wear those anymore. he would stop wearing yellow shirts. all right? you cannot do that, though, when you are addicted to something. you cannot just stop doing it. it is different. so he struggled. he wanted to quit, but he struggled with it. and you heard about those quit attempts. even, you know, unfortunately, he did not even tell his doctors the truth. he was not telling the doctors. you heard from the mrs. nally, she said, look, he did not quit. he told his doctors he did. and if you look at the records, you will see he is saying he quit in '96, then he is saying in '98, then he is saying in 2000. the times do not match up. you can see the inconsistencies in him saying when he quit. he may have been talking about quit attempts, that i attempted to quit, but he was not telling his doctors the truth about that, because mrs. nally knows he smoked right up until the end. you know, he is dying of lung cancer and he is smoking. that is an addicted smoker, folks. that is exactly what their products are designed to do, take them all way to the end. three hundred doses to the brain every day. if it was 300 bumps of cocaine or 300 shots, would there be any question? of course not. but that is exactly what these products are. we brought you dr. hurt, director of the mayo clinic nicotine dependence center. he is an internationally recognized expert on nicotine addiction. you know, those peer reviewed publications, that is important, because that means that he is standing up for what he -- what he says to you in the courtroom, he is putting out in peer-reviewed publications to other scientists, other doctors, and if it is wrong, it will not get published. that is how the process works. he is a leading expert in the world on the subject of nicotine dependence, and he came here to tell you the important things that he told you. he went through the heaviness of smoking index. okay? a validated reliable study. he said, if you look at it -- he was fair. he said, look, i mean, she said immediately, it sounded like it was within five minutes it might have been within ten or 15 minutes. so let us give them a 3 or a 2 . how many cigarettes a day do you smoke, thirty-one or more? that is a 3. that is a pack-and-a-half or day. that is what the evidence shows. okay? so that is a 5 to 6. high dependence on the heaviness of smoking index. dr. hurt made it very clear. he went through the dsm-5. he said, you know, this is not the right test for this, but sometimes they want to see it in these cases, so i will use it. so he used the dsm-5. he went through and he said, look, these are all the criteria he met, 2, 3, 4, 7, 8, 9, 10, and 11. okay? all those criteria indicate that there is a severe disorder, if you look down at the little key at the bottom. you also remember there were those four conditions on cross-examination, when they were cross-examining him, and i asked him, i said, well, let us read up, there is more stuff up there at the top. and we read that. those four conditions that are highly associated with dependence are the exact four conditions that joseph nally had: smoking within 30 minutes of waking, nocturnal smoking, smoking for a long period of time. all of those, he had all of them. dr. hurt told you that joseph nally, sr., was an addicted smoker. you probably could reach that conclusion on your own without his opinion. you saw the evidence, you know these boards, you know how much the person smoked. okay? his addiction to nicotine was a substantial contributing cause of his copd. he said that. he also said it was a substantial contributing cause of his kidney cancer, as well as a substantial contributing cause of his lung cancer and death. you will see on the verdict form, for the lung cancer and death, you do not have to say it was at addiction that was the cause, it just has to be the smoking cigarettes. but that is why he smoked all those cigarettes, is because of the addiction. so we had dr. hurt clarify that too. it applies to that one as well. we went above and beyond to bring you more proof that we even need it. it was not just dr. hurt. yau-tong lien, his primary care physician. i had to bring this out. you remember? joseph nally, sr.'s primary care physician diagnosed him with nicotine dependence. impression, tobacco abuse. that 305.1. if you go back to the dsm, look at the numbers, see it, 305.1. that is code that is used for the dsm. tobacco abuse. this is july 16th, 1996, when he finally starts seeing these doctors. so his treating doctors are diagnosing him with nicotine dependence. okay, folks? and reynolds knew this. reynolds and all its co-conspirators knew all of this. we are in the business of selling nicotine, an addictive drug. the dominant specification in any of the products is nicotine delivery. our industry is based upon design, manufacture, and sale of attractive dosage forms of nicotine. the -- the surgeon general's report, '88. this is all probably fresh in your minds. the surgeon general made it clear in '88, once the truth finally started to break free, what was really going on here about how addictive these products are. this is from the 2010 surgeon general's report. this is in evidence. you saw part of this. you did not see this part. we moved it into evidence, but this is important. this is 2010, surgeon general's report: nicotine addiction is the fundamental reason that individuals persist in using tobacco products, and this persistent tobacco use contributes to the diseases described in this report. this is from the ftc report in ' 67 : there is no indication that if a person --after a person smokes regularly, smoking is no longer a matter of choice but becomes a matter of need. there was no doubt that mr. nally was an addicted smoker. that should be clear in this case. let us look at how addiction causes these diseases -- okay -- like copd and the smoking. first of all, dr. kress told you that mr. nally's copd was caused or substantially contributed to be caused by his cigarette smoking okay? folks, that was undisputed. all right? undisputed that he had copd by 2000, undisputed that cigarette smoking was the cause of his copd. it was not legitimately challenged. there was no challenge to that, the fact that the cigarette smoking was the cause. let us look at the kidney for a second. okay because the kidney cancer is part of that too, it is part 2(b). dr. villa came in here, had six board certifications, folks, board certified in six specialties. he was a pathologist and an oncologist. he told you that the only treating physician who saw inside mr. nally's kidney was the pathologist. he was the only guy who actually looked in there and actually opened the kidney up and saw the site of origin of this tumor. okay? he explained the pathologist's gross description regarding the primary site, and he demonstrated unequivocally that the tumor arose from the renal pelvis. okay? that is where this thing arose from. and everyone agrees that is in the kidney. all right? the renal pelvis. remember? dr. villa told you, this spot right here. you can see over here. it says "renal pelvis." that is right there in the kidney. and it is not just dr. villa who says that it is in the kidney. mr. geise in his opening statement said, mr. clark mentioned the renal pelvis. that is in the kidney. okay? so we all agree the renal pelvis is in the kidney. why is that important? right there. the pathologist's gross description. after he is bivalved the kidney, it says, present within the renal pelvis. okay? within. if you look it up in the dictionary, it means inside something. okay? that is what "within" means. so the tumor was present within the renal pelvis which is in the kidney. all right, folks? it was only visible and identifiable when the pathologist opened that kidney up. the surgeon, dr. hallett, he could not see it. he saw a growth. he saw it was growing out and through there, because it was growing out and through into the ureter, but he could not see. he was not the one who opened it up. he could not see inside. he just cut the kidney out, gave it to the pathologist and said, here you go. all right? it is like eggs, you cannot tell if the eggs are broken if you do not open the crate and look. all right? it just makes sense. the pathologist put a diagnosis, and it is a hard -- in everyone's defense, this is hard to read. i mean, it is hard to read that copy of the diagnosis from the pathologist. okay? but in the later record, when he went back and got the rest of that ureter taken out because he wanted to make sure it did not come back, september 3rd, 1996, it has the previous surgical specimens and the previous diagnosis listed right here crystal clear as a bell. okay? and what is that? surgical specimen, noninvasive papillary transitional cell carcinoma, grade 1, with uretal obstruction and secondary hydronephrosis, left kidney, left nephrectomy. what he is saying is what dr. villa told you. there is transitional cell carcinoma in his kidney. that is the specimen he is looking at. okay? it is right there, left kidney, transitional cell carcinoma. that is a diagnosis of kidney cancer. i cannot tell you why dr. hallett did not write that down, i cannot, but i can tell you, look at the evidence, look at the records, and listen to dr. villa and how he explained it to you, and it makes sense. okay? it makes sense. the facts are what they are. the transitional cell carcinoma was in the renal pelvis, it was in the kidney. that is where it was. dr. villa also told you that cigarette smoking caused or substantially contributed to causing the kidney cancer. and that also was undisputed. okay? no legitimate challenge to that. there was no other cause identified, nothing else suggested. that was the cause. okay? and why does that matter? because you have to apply the facts to the law. all right? addiction causes the continued smoking which causes the continued kidney cancer and the copd. okay? it directly produces or it contributes substantially to producing either the kidney cancer or the copd. once you are addicted, you smoke all that time. and these are dose-response diseases. with every dose of nicotine you are smoking for, it carries along with it all those carcinogens. they deposit in the lungs. all those toxins that damage the cilia in your lungs and damage your air sacs, like dr. kress explained to you, and ruin the lungs, and it deposits, you know, through --into the kidney as it runs through that filtering system and deposits in the renal pelvis too. okay? and it is not just our experts. it is in evidence. the surgeon general's report from 2004. okay? nicotine addiction causes all these mutations, which causes, in this case, lung cancer. the same thing that doctors told you applied to kidney cancer and copd; different specific biological mechanisms, but the same concept. all right? that is how addiction causes disease. when you look at the legal cause instruction, again, remember to look at the second paragraph. all right? it did not have to be the only cause. addiction does not have to be the only cause. you can think that joseph nally enjoyed to smoke, you can think that he chose to smoke too, okay, but he was an addicted smoker, and the addiction contributed substantially to that long-term smoking he had. and under the law, that means that addiction was a legal cause of his copd and his kidney cancer. okay? that is what the evidence in the case has clearly shown. as soon as you decide mr. nally is a class member, then those findings kick in. okay? the engle findings apply, and they apply to everything else in the case from thereafter. all right? i'm not going to read them again. they are in your instructions. you can look at them and read them if you want to see them. it is final instruction 7, i believe. okay? so the next question you are going to have to answer on the verdict form is, was smoking cigarettes manufactured by reynolds a legal cause of his lung cancer and death? all right. so this one you will note, it does not say "was addiction a legal cause," it says "was smoking." the addiction really only applies to the class membership question, but they are related. i mean, he smoked all that time because of the addiction. you cannot truly separate them. but all you have to say was was smoking cigarettes the legal cause of his lung cancer and death? all right? i say that the first question on the verdict form is the easiest, and i truly believe that it is, but this is pretty easy too. he smoked all those cigarettes for 50 years. we stipulated they were all made by reynolds, the luckys, the kents, and the kools, all reynolds cigarettes, the only cigarettes that you heard he smoked for all those years. okay? dr. villa is the only person that came and who talked about it. he told you those squamous cell lung cancers that mr. nally had, 98 to 99 percent caused by smoking. it was inoperable. he was only able, unfortunately, to receive palliative treatment. they could just try and make him comfortable. it was too late. okay? his lung cancer was caused by smoking, his lung cancer caused his death, and smoking reynolds cigarettes was the substantial contributing cause of his lung cancer and death. it really was undisputed, folks. okay? so maybe this question is the easiest one after all. the answer to that question no. 3 is yes. i want you to put a pin in no. 4 for a second, because i want to talk about concealment and conspiracy, because it is important to understand those questions before we look at no. 4. okay? so put a pin in no. 4 for a second, and let us look at the concealment and the conspiracy. and these are related but they are different. okay? so the concealment really focuses on reynolds, reynolds and its predecessor companies. all right? lorillard, brown & williamson, american tobacco. it focuses really specifically on those companies that are represented by reynolds today. the conspiracy looks at everything they all did collectively and together, because, to use a poor analogy, there were some nights when lebron was with the heat when lebron james would beat you single-handedly; there were other nights where the team beats you. the same thing is true for baseball, there is a night where a great pitcher throws a tremendous game and he beats you single-handedly; other nights it takes the whole team to win. that is kind of how the concealment and conspiracy are. concealment is focused on reynolds and its companies. conspiracy looks at the whole industry. and the findings that apply -- all right -- look at the findings. you have decided he is a class member, the findings apply here. and it is undisputed and cannot be disputed in this case that reynolds concealed or omitted material information. all right? cannot be challenged. no matter what reader's digest articles or whatever -- air force times, whatever other stuff you saw, they concealed material information. and if you look at the instructions, material information is defined as that which is of such importance that mr. nally would not have acted as he did but for the concealment or omission of that information. the stuff they concealed through their 50-year conspiracy and through reynolds' activities and the lying all those years is the very stuff that would have made a difference to mr. nally. he would not have acted as he did but for that. okay? keep that in mind as you are looking at these questions. and for the conspiracy one, it is the fact that they agreed with their other organizations and their other companies to conceal or omit information, and they did it with the intention that smokers in the public would rely to their detriment. okay? they did it with the intention, the finding tells you, that mr. nally and other smokers like that would smoke and keep smoking and keep smoking and get lung cancer or copd or some other horrible disease. that is why they did it, because it was very profitable. they made a lot of money doing that. okay? that is why they did it. we brought you in dr. proctor to talk to you guys about this. and that was just, you know, a couple of days ago, last week, end of last week. dr. proctor, i think you got a clear sense, is literally the foremost expert in the world on this subject. okay? and it is a specific subject. the history of tobacco and the history of the tobacco industry. he has written books on it, he is published on it. he is the guy. all right? if we were going to have a case about president john adams or the president truman, we would have brought you david mccullough, you know, the guy that writes all those books about those presidents. dr. proctor is that guy for tobacco industry. he was imminently qualified, and, i would submit, on cross-examination he was untouched. his opinions came in and they were clear to you guys. he told you all about what they did, why they did it, and most of it he was telling from their own documents. okay? he helped you to contextualize some of that too. but it was -- so much of that was their own documents. all right? he was telling you from their own words. now, we saw a lot of documents in this case. we did not get to see everything though. we did not get to see it all. how do we know that, because reynolds destroyed and rewrote some of their documents. we saw there that document from murray senkus, he was one of the research directors, one of the key people, and he said, we do not foresee any difficulty in the event a decision is reached to remove certain reports from research files. i that action is necessary for our defense of present and future lawsuits, we will promptly remove all such reports from the files. okay? invalidating reports, destroying reports, because it was about how they knew cigarette smoking caused disease and nicotine addiction and the power of addiction. their co-conspirator, philip morris, did the same thing. in furtherance of the conspiracy, they were shipping that stuff off to inbifo. remember you saw all those documents? that lab over there in germany? and dr. osdene, who was a key individual in the conspiracy. remember --i've got dr. proctor's drawing up here. remember he was one of those folks on the technical committee, like dr. wakeham. he was one of those research folks that was on those committees. he said, hey, ship all documents to cologne. check. okay, it is a checkmark. this his checklist. if important letters have to be sent, send them to home. i will act on them and destroy. checklist. it is like a grocery list. he is checking it off. this is the stuff that he did in furtherance of the conspiracy, because they could not let their secrets get out. okay. it is important to know reynolds is responsible for all the actions of its co-conspirators. all right? legally responsible for the acts or omissions, if any, of these other parties. philip morris, you are going to see philip morris stuff. they are responsible for that. they are responsible for the ctr, for the ti, the tobacco institute, for tirc, for all the stuff those executives did. they are legally responsible for it. your instructions tell you that in final instruction 13. and that is why i asked dr. proctor -- i said, dr. proctor, i know the advertising -- they were competing for advertising. that is not the same. but all this stuff you showed us about how they lied, how they deceived, they used ctr and tirc, all this stuff you showed us on here about philip morris and liggett and lorillard and the other predecessors, all that stuff they were involved in, was that the furtherance of the conspiracy? he said absolutely. absolutely it was. you look at it and you see what is going on. you understand the story now. you know yourself it was in furtherance of the conspiracy. they are also responsible directly for their predecessor companies, american tobacco, b&w, and lorillard. we talked about that. i think you get that, but understand that when you are seeing this, they have direct responsibility for that. not conspiratorial responsibility, they are directly and legally responsible for all that stuff they did. so what did they conceal? let me give you a summary of it. they launched that conspiracy in '53 to conceal the health effects and the addictive nature of cigarette smoking. they hired scientists and doctors to mislead the public about the health effects and the addictive nature. they misled the surgeon general, the surgeon general of the united states, and other public health authorities about the health effects and addictive nature. they studied nicotine and they knew exactly how highly addictive it was and they controlled its delivery. they studied teenage smokers, and they knew that 80 to ninety percent starting at teenagers, or just beyond their teenage years. they knew fifty percent of smokers, maybe even more now, would die of some smoking-related disease, and they concealed it, they lied about it. reynolds and their co-conspirators knew that it was killing -- now it is 500,000 americans a year, and it kept increasing thought the years. you will see in the '67 ftc report, 300,000 people a year at that time. it is continued to go up and up and up. remember, dr. proctor talked to you about the five peaks. you know, the youth smoking peaked in 1997. that means it is going to keep going, because those kids got addicted and they are going to stay addicted. many of them are going to stay addicted and not be able to quit. they concealed the manipulation of the levels of nicotine to keep smokers addicted and buying their cigarettes. they concealed those cancer-causing agents, 70 of them in every puff of smoke that joseph nally inhaled. reynolds and their co-conspirators -- they knew that there were those 9,000 chemicals in there. and folks, think about this. all right? there is not a market for arsenic lozenges or cadmium mints or phenol gum. okay? the things that are in cigarettes smoke, people would not ingest them or take them in if it was not for the nicotine. that is why they did it. they start as kids, they do not know any better, they are experimenting, they get caught up in it, they get addicted, and they are taking that stuff in their lungs because they need the nicotine, because the nicotine is a good drug. it is makes them feel good. maybe it relaxes them. it is something that they desire. they get addicted to it. and then they take those chemicals in. no one does that otherwise. you do not ingest those chemicals otherwise. they knew that filtered cigarettes were no safer, i mean, no safer. the filter, literally, in their words is a gimmick, a sales and merchandising promotion idea. that is all a filter is. it does not do anything for the safety. and then they misled the public about the safety of these filters. you remember dr. proctor telling you that there were three pillars of the conspiracy. okay? this is their document about how it was brilliantly conceived, and it was done for three reasons: litigation, they were trying to avoid lawsuits like this one; politics; and public opinion. those are the three pillars of the conspiracy. and they say while that strategy was brilliantly conceived and executed, 20 -- this is a 20-year retrospective or almost 20 years retrospective. okay? hundreds of thousands, if not millions of people, have died from smoking-related diseases over this time. and they are patting themselves on the back and saying how brilliantly conceived and executed their strategy was. all right? there was no remorse in here. there is no indication. look in their documents and see if you can find anywhere, anywhere in any document, where they said, gosh, we are killing all these people; i really do not think we should do this. it is not there. okay? there was no remorse. there was no remorse. what there was in the plaza hotel, when you go back to december of '53, what was there? whew, it is fortunate for us that cigarettes are a habit they cannot break. would not it be wonderful if our company could produce the first cancer-free cigarette. the sales we could make. they were always only concerned about money and keeping their smokers smoking -- okay? -- from the very beginning. and do you remember all this? there was that thing about the department of justice that came up. okay? dr. proctor explained that to you. do you know why they had to let the doj know they were meeting? and just the fact of the meeting, not what they talked about. they did not tell them that. but just the fact of the meeting? because they had been prosecuted for criminal price fixing before that. okay? dr. proctor told you about that. that is why they had to do it. they had anti-trust problems. they were very concerned, and they had a good recent experience with it. it was not some gesture of goodwill or trying to do the right thing. not at all. okay? the frank statement. look at this and ask yourself, knowing what you know now, how frank was this? "frank" means honest. it is a word that we do not really use much anymore, but it means this is -- it was called the frank statement to cigarette smokers, which means an honest statement. and you know what you know now. was there -- there was no honesty in this. these promises were made, never intending to be kept. okay? we accept an interest in people's health as a basic responsibility. well, that is a great promise if they meant to keep it, but they never did. they never did from the beginning. we believe the products we make are not injurious to health. you saw in dr. teague's memo, 1953, he did the survey. he went and surveyed all of the available literature. he looked at everything, stuff that was in german, brazilian, all these different languages, different countries. he found the stuff joseph nally or no smoker ever could. he reviewed it. he did a great job. it was early on in his job with reynolds. he provided it to management. he provided it to management. he said, hey, look, it is clear; it is clear. okay? they confirmed the relationship between tobacco smoking and cancer of the lung. and management says, that is great. thanks, claude. we are going to go the other way. we are going to form a conspiracy instead. okay? we are going to form a conspiracy to conceal and lie about this for the next 50 years. '58, they acknowledge it. all the individuals we met, all from the industry, believe smoking causes lung cancer. the evidence accumulated to indict smoke as a health hazard is overwhelming. this is in the '50s and '60s. they are calling lung cancer a side effect. that is from that same document where they say, we are in the business of selling nicotine, an addictive drug, which they are excited about. addiction, incorporated was exciting to them. oh, but it is got the side effect of lung cancer. that is how they talked about it. they formed these organizations to purely sow doubt, confusion, and deceive people. and it was famously successful. you saw sales dipped in '53 '54. sales started going down. it could have been a bad time for the industry, but they salvaged it by this conspiracy and this concealment campaign, and they moved those sales right back up. okay? we would have been in a deplorable position, except for your defensive operation. obviously, the key word is confusion. doubt is our product. doubt was their product that they were selling. this is after the 1964 surgeon general's report. hugh cullman, this guy who spoke on behalf of the industry. (whereupon, a video clip was played in open court as follows:) hugh cullman: we want to be the detective just as much as the surgeon general or the ama. we will cooperate in every way. well, obviously, a filter takes out certain tar and nicotine. i do not think the industry admits there are any bad elements. if there are bad elements, through our laboratories, through the surgeon generals, through the ama, through acts of god and luck, we hope we may find them. and if they are found, they will be removed. (video clip interrupted.) mr. bigger: this is joe cullman. (video clip continued.) joseph cullman: [video clip inaudible] talk to the question of whether or not cigarettes are hazardous. we do not believe that cigarettes are hazardous. we do not accept that, because when, as, and if any ingredient in cigarette smoke is identified as being injurious to human health, we are confident that we can eliminate that ingredient. narrator: do you believe that cigarettes are safe? have they been proved to be safe, mr. cullman? joseph cullman: i believe they have not been proven to be unsafe. (video clip concluded.) mr. bigger: chairman of the ctr, head of philip morris at that time, speaking on behalf of the whole industry. he could have told the truth. i mean, nothing stopped him except for greed and money. he could have told the truth. it was not hard. continuing. we are interested in evidence which we believe denies the allegation. that is what they were really looking for. okay? they set it up an as industry shield in 1954. it was a front organization. we know what that word means. you can use your reason and common sense. you know what a front organization is. tobacco money ain't so dirty any more. ctr was the cheapest insurance we could buy, and without it we would be dead. this is in their own secret words that they never thought juries like you guys will see. it was greed. these are some more documents, how they use their power and influence. they were going to washington d.c. okay. it was not a fair fight in washington. there is no way any smokers had a fair fight in washington with the influence they had. it is a fair fight here. you heard the instruction. corporations are people in here. we are all on the same platform. it was not a fair fight in washington during those 50 years, though. okay? they had the 75 senators lined up as grade a contacts, 300 representatives lined up. they had tremendous power and influence, and they kept their products on the market, kept them successful, kept them going. folks, filters are a fraud. there is no other way to describe it. okay? they are a fraud. they knew it from the beginning. there is no doubt about it. they actually, in some circumstances, are worse than unfiltered cigarettes, and they knew that in their own documents. they misled everyone, the public, the public health authorities, the surgeon general. all of them were misled on the safety of filters. the industry is not making filter tip cigarettes. this is the guy from the american tobacco, mr. hanmer -- or dr. hanmer, i think it was, that dr. proctor told you about. head of american tobacco, the most powerful research director at that time. and he says, it is just purely a merchandising and sales promotion proposition. then they say, here is our quintuple, quadruple filter, capable of removing whatever constituents we currently suspect. you only say stuff is the quadruple, quintuple if you are just making it up. it is like words kids use, you know: well, you are quadruple out, or, i got you quintuple times. okay? it is nonsensical. this is how they are describing filters, though. we can market them this way; it will be great. the smoker was getting -- a filter cigarette was getting as much or more nicotine and tar as she would have gotten from a regular cigarette. the illusion of filtration is as important as the fact of the filtration. these are people they are talking about. they were selling millions and millions of filtered cigarettes to people who were buying them with the promotions thinking they were getting something better or safer. you do not buy filtered water thinking you are going to get the same thing that comes out of your tap. it is just common sense. and that is exactly how kent was positioned. it is exactly how kent was positioned. in fact, it was positioned probably more strongly than any other brand as the health cigarette. okay? the greatest health protection, showing the scientists with the beakers and showing all the studies about how scientific and great their filtered health protection is -- all right -- this is exactly the market that kent keyed in on, and it is exactly what joe nally did at that time. we do not know exactly when. mrs. nally was trying to remember back. she was trying to remember back when it was. it was around the time that joe junior was born. okay? he was born in '55. could have been '55, could have been '54, could have been '56. around that time, though, is right when kent was making a huge push for this. and it worked. you saw the chart. it worked very, very well. and she was asked, you know, do you know why joe switched to those things. again, trying to remember back, taste, sure, i'm sure that was a factor. all right. not a smoker herself, thinking back over 50 years, do you honestly think it is reasonable to expect her to remember the exact reason why he switched or what he may have said to her at that time? what makes more sense is to look what the evidence is. what does the evidence show as to why people switched to kent? it says in there, you can make reasonable inferences. use your reason and common sense. make reasonable inferences from the evidence. taste, i'm sure that was a reason. was this not it? did this really have nothing to do with why he switched when this is exactly when he switched and it is exactly the way they were promoting their product? use your reason and common sense. use it better than kristy leung did. this representative from lorillard, remember this video? i'm sure some of you probably painfully remember this video. we had to bring you this, though, because this was lorillard's words. okay? what did she say about why kent was marketed, why it was promoted? why -- she would not admit it. why would not she admit it? go ahead. (whereupon, a video deposition clip was played in open court as follows:) q. kent was marketed as a safer cigarette, correct? (mr. bigger briefly interjected as follows:) mr. bigger: look at her expression. (video clip continued.) a. what time period are you talking about, the early 1950s, the early kent ads? q. yes. a. kent was marketed as a product that eased minor irritations associated with smoking, throat irritations, dry mouth, cough, those types of things. q. so mr. yellen, the executive vice president of sales, is simply wrong when he says kent was marketed as a safer cigarette? a. i'm not saying that mr. yellen was wrong. i'm just saying that the word "safer" was not used in the advertising of kent during this time. q. manuel yellen, executive vice president of sales with the company says, and i quote, kent was marketed as a safer cigarette. now, i'm not asking whether the word "safer" appeared in any lorillard ad i'm asking, is this a true statement, or is he making an untrue statement, that kent was marketed as a safe cigarette? a. and i'm just trying to explain what was actually -- what actually appeared in our advertising --q. okay. a. -- and what was communicated -- communicated to the consumers in our advertising. q. manuel yellen, the executive vice president of sales for the company reports to the president of the company, as all of us are aware, kent was marketed as a safer. is that a true statement, or was mr. yellen making an untrue statement? true or untrue? a. i do not think that it is that cut and dry. i'm sorry. q. mr. yellen thought it was that cut and dry apparently, correct? a. i do not know what mr. yellen's thoughts were at the time. (the video clip concluded.) mr. bigger: we know what mr. yellen's thoughts were at the time because he wrote them down. kent, as all of us are aware, kent was marketed as a safer cigarette for the smoker who was concerned about smoking and health. okay. if you have got any of those doubts, if you are worried about anything, switch to kent. that is what they told them. why will not she admit it? i do not know. the words are there. it is in their document. the surgeon general in the 2010 surgeon general's report made it clear that they had no idea: public health officials had little basis to anticipate the degree to which manufacturers could design cigarettes to allow smokers to draw more smoke and nicotine than was represented by machine measured yields of tar and nicotine. those new designs were used by a tool -- filters, things like this, were used as a tool to undermine prevention and cessation efforts. marketing gimmicks is all those filters were. the ftc report to congress, the addition of suitable adjectives to say the word -- like the word "filter," this impression of relative safety is enhanced. okay? things like greatest health protection, as you saw in those kent ads, recognizing the danger of that. it was depicted as satisfying itself, carrying relatively little risk. that is how all those advertisements worked. but what did they know? what did they know? what did they say internally? this is from 1968 document after that little true magazine article got blown up and they realized what the industry was doing in planting those 13 or 14 researchers. our basic position in the cigarette controversy is subject to the charge and may be subject to a finding that we are making false or misleading statements to promote the sale of cigarettes. okay. they recognized in 1968 what that engle jury was going to do and what you have now to apply in this case. there is a finding that they are making misleading statements, that they lied. they concealed. they knew it then, did not change the course, did not tell the truth. more deceptive statements. they continued to claim they did not know. (whereupon, a video clip was played in open court as follows:) narrator: what about the controversy about cigarettes? in the 91st congress a house committee heard testimony from leading experts on smoking and health. the record shows that many of the country's most respected doctors openly challenged anti-cigarette claims. anne browder: and i have to disagree with you in that we do not know what causes the elements that have been attributed to cigarette smoking. narrator: cigarette smoking does not cause cancer, yes or no? tobacco executive: it is not known whether cigarettes cause cancer. narrator: all right. tobacco executive: it has not been causally established. narrator: cigarette smoking, no causal relationship between cigarette smoking and emphysema? tobacco executive: despite all of the research to date, there has been no causal link established. anne browder: okay. the jury has not come in. narrator: it may not be harmful. you are not convinced? anne browder: it may be or it may not be. we do not know. narrator: so this question, it must be answered. insofar as the correlation between lung cancer and cigarette smoking are concerned, no one knows. it may, it may not. there are some common sense questions one can address to those who make bold assertions about smoking and health. for example, how can cigarette smoking be the cause of lung cancer if the cause of lung cancer is, as yet, unknown? in fact, no one knows what causes lung cancer. narrator: they agree that smoking causes lung cancer. do you agree? mr. johnston: it may. narrator: do you know whether it does? mr. johnston: i do not. narrator: the medical experts agree that smoking causes emphysema. do you agree? mr. johnston: it may. narrator: you are the head of a manufacturer of a product that is been accused by the overwhelming scientific community to cause cancer. you do not know? do you have an interest in finding out? mr. tisch: i do, sir, yes. narrator: and what have you done to pursue that interest? mr. tisch: we have looked at the data, and the data that we have been able to see has all been statistical data that has not convinced me that smoking causes death. tobacco executive: we do not know what causes cancer in general right now, so i think that we may find out what causes cancer and we may find out some relationship which is yet to be proven. (the video clip concluded.) mr. bigger: opportunities for truth wasted. did you see how flippant johnston was? it may; it may. and tisch, the president of lorillard, you know: i have looked at it, and i do not know. i realize how far out of touch i am, yes. they just could not break from their conspiracy, even in 1994, even here in front of congress and the american people. they manipulated smoke and nicotine and smoke ph. you heard about all this from dr. hurt, as well as some from dr. proctor. these documents are in evidence. i'm not going to spend time going through each and every one of them. you will see what we are doing. these are documents. these are their own words you are going to see, the evidence you have to prove our case. you know that nicotine addiction is the most substantial ingredient in the whole business. they said in their own words, without the chemical compound, the market would collapse. we would all lose our jobs and consulting fees. if the exit gate to our market should suddenly open, we could be out of business almost overnight. they knew that as people began quitting, without nicotine, without addiction, they would be in deep trouble. they chose profits over public health. this is one where they said there was an antagonist, something that was going to stop the effects of nicotine on the brain. and what were their concerns? were they worried about all of the other graves that were being dug around the country for smoking-related deaths? no. they are worried about digging their own graves. they said, this has the potential of putting us out of business. we are digging our own graves for this work. ctr needs to shut this down. they stood before congress and the american people and they lied. (whereupon, a video clip was played in open court as follows:) rep. wyden: let me begin my questioning on the matter of whether or not nicotine is addictive. let me ask you first -- and i would like to just go down the row whether each of you believes that nicotine is not addictive. i heard virtually all of you touch on it. just yes or no, do you believe nicotine is not addictive? tobacco executive: i believe nicotine is not addictive, yes. rep. wyden: mr. johnston? tobacco executive: congressman, cigarettes and nicotine clearly do not meet the classic definitions of addiction. there is no intoxication. rep. wyden: we will take that as a no. and, again, time is short. if you could just -- i think each of you believes nicotine is not addictive. we just would like to have this for the record. tobacco executive: i do not believe that nicotine from our products are addictive. tobacco executive: i believe nicotine is not addictive. tobacco executive: i believe that nicotine is not addictive. tobacco executive: i believe that nicotine is not addictive. tobacco executive: and i too believe that nicotine is not addictive. (the video clip concluded.) mr. bigger: every single one of those, lies, that you know based on their documents. and you saw that document from just before the hearings, the ctr document. remember, they had the meeting just before these hearings took place where they had the coronation of the new god king. remember that? that is how they referred to the head lawyer, the head of ctr, the committee of counsel, the guys who ran the whole show, they referred to themselves as the god king. how self-aggrandizing is that. that is how they viewed themselves. and they were the ones who were working on the agenda for the waxman hearings. they all stood up there and took their oath, and then they said, i believe nicotine is not addictive, despite what all the documents we have shown you have to say. all right. they wasted five decades of opportunity to tell the truth. they wasted the '50s; they wasted the '60s; they wasted the '70s, the '80s, and the '90s. they wasted all of that, only finally coming clean in part in 1999 at the end of that decade after all this that you saw, when it was far, far, far too late for joseph nally, sr. the instructions on reliance, they say, we need to prove it by direct or circumstantial evidence. okay? that is important because they are equivalent. direct or circumstantial evidence are the same. and you see that direct or circumstantial evidence is specifically identified down there in that bottom one, down here at the bottom. reliance on the conduct of r.j. reynolds may be inferred from the evidence and testimony. okay? what that means is when you look at all of this -- and you see that the material information is defined. what they concealed -- what they concealed from him was the very stuff that he would not have acted as he did, but for their concealment or omission of that information. so when you look at all of it, can you honestly say this did not have any impact, that this did not make any difference in the life of joseph nally, sr.? i mean, he was not suicidal. he loved marlene. can you look at all this and say that this massive concealment and conspiracy campaign did not make any difference, did not have any substantial impact on him, his life, his development of lung cancer, and his death? can you possibly say that? 250 billion in advertising dollars, a quarter of a trillion, and that does not even include the hundreds of millions, if not billions, of dollars they spent on ctr and ti over all those years. okay? could that money be spent and not make any difference, money that, by the way, could have been spent on research, for cancer research, for cigarette disease prevention. there is a lot of ways you can spend a quarter of a trillion dollars that you did not need to spend on advertising of cigarettes and getting more kids to start smoking. had joseph nally, sr., known the truth, it would have made a difference. you heard from all the family members who testified. no one told him anything. none of these companies told him a word. they concealed all of it, all of it. and he was a hero. he was a military hero. you heard about his record in the military. okay? do you think if he knew this was going on -- this is what these companies were doing. do you think if he knew they were doing this in america, killing people, do you think he would have just stood silent, not said anything? or do you think he would have taken a flamethrower to these companies -- okay -- the kind of man that he was, a military man like that seeing this going on, the freedoms that he served for? this was what was going on, people dying. if he had known the truth, if he known the lies they were keeping from him, that he would have just stood silent and shrugged his shoulders and said nothing? what do you think is more believable. remember the story that joe junior told when he spanked joe junior as a kid, how he cried, went in the room and cried. he said, he was a man of character and conviction. he was a man of compassionate strength. is there any doubt how he would have acted if he had known what they kept from him. okay? it is a concealment campaign. they lied. they did not tell him. they did not tell anybody, and they did it as a conspiracy. okay? what does the evidence show? he was 25 years old in 1953 when they had that choice to make. okay? his whole life could have been different if they had made an honest choice. he was basically just a kid, just barely not a kid when they started to conspire to kill him after they extracted enough money from him. okay? leave no doubt. that is exactly what they did. his name may not have appeared in their documents, because it did not need to. it was not just him they were focused on. they were focused on everybody, the whole market, all of them. everything this industry did has something to do with joseph nally, sr. okay? they concealed those health effects. they conspired to do it, the filter fraud, and the reliance they knew people would place on that by switching, the manipulation of nicotine to keep people smoking and addicted, the marketing to kids, all of it. all of it had something to do with him, and all of it means you need to say "yes" to the concealment question and "yes" to the conspiracy question. i want to jump ahead because we are talking about this subject of punitive damages. we are going to talk about compensatory damages in a moment, but i want to jump ahead to this question because i think it ties better to what we are talking about right now. for conduct like this, okay, for conduct like you saw from these tobacco companies, from this industry, from how they acted over all these years, it is not going to be enough to compensate marlene nally for her loss. okay? we are going to ask you to compensate her for her loss. we are. but it is not going to be enough to just compensate her for her loss, okay, for the loss of her husband and for joseph nally's death. we are going to ask you to avenge joe nally's death. okay? that is what this question is about, whether punitive damages are warranted in order to avenge joe nally's death. and we are going to say yes, they are in this case. lady justice, it is hard to see her up there. the picture of lady justice, she holds a scale where she balances the evidence. and she also holds a sword. what we are asking you to do in the punitive damages side of this case is to take that sword as the jury, take that sword and strike down reynolds, strike them down for their conduct and for what they did and what their co-conspirators did for 50 years, and for what the toll was. you heard dr. proctor tell you. in the history of the world, there is no other company or person that was able to single-handedly save 20 million -- mr. geise: objection, your honor. pretrial ruling. the court: sustained. mr. bigger: you heard what dr. proctor said about the ability that this company had with the choices they were making. the instructions are very clear. punitive damages are warranted if you find by clear and convincing -- and you heard the instructions. "clear and convincing" is different than greater weight of the evidence. it is, because we do not -- we do not punish every wrong someone does. if you are speeding and you get a speeding ticket and you bump into somebody, you do not get punitive damages for that. okay? you get punitive damages for this, for what you saw in this case, this industry did for all these years, for what they did and why they did it. it was solely motivated for financial gain, folks. that is why they were doing this, for the money. okay. and, look, the reckless disregard of the human life or the safety of persons exposed to their conduct, it does not get more reckless than plotting and hatching a conspiracy like this, spending all that money to keep smokers smoking. it does not get more reckless. the conduct has such an entire lack of care that they were consciously indifferent to the consequences. remember the pictures of all those executives? these were not like random acts by rogue employees. these were grown men that were running some of the largest companies in america, and they were consciously making these choices, knowing the consequences. an entire lack of care that they must have wantonly or recklessly disregarded the safety or welfare of the public? folks, absolutely. such a reckless indifference of rights as to be an intentional violation of the rights. they conspired and concealed. those are intentional violations of the rights of joseph nally, sr. the engle findings, obviously, apply. you need additional evidence beyond those. but you can consider those in looking at this. and we brought you all that additional evidence. that is one of the reasons we have dr. proctor and dr. hurt here, is to tell you the whole story, because when you hear the whole story you see this is a case that involves conduct warranting punitive damages. okay? why? protect, do not addict or lie to kids. remember the consumer letters that reynolds wrote? dr. proctor told you if anyone wrote these -- if anybody at all wrote these letters, reynolds would respond. okay? they responded the same way to kids, fifth graders, second graders, high school kids, as they would to adults. all right? with that same form, boilerplate language? despite many years of research, science has been unable to establish that smoking has a direct causal link. they wrote that to fifth grade and second grade kids knowing it was not true, knowing what they actually knew to be the truth. this is '63, '72, '72. there is no doubt, but this is what they were saying when consumers would ask them. if joseph nally wrote a letter and asked, hey, what is your position on this? this is how they would have responded to him. this needs to be punished. they were targeting those kids from the very beginning. remember the "school days" letters: line up the most popular students because school days are big tobacco business for somebody. get those students lined up as consumers and boosters. get them to market to their friends. they basically invented peer pressure for smoking with this stuff. the base of our business is the high school student, a lorillard document from 1978. and make no doubt about it, joseph nally was not a young kid at that time, but nothing changed. it is the same pattern of conduct throughout all those years, the same course of conduct. you will see in the instructions the conduct has to be substantially similar to what they did to joe nally. it is not just substantially similar; it is the same. they were going after these kids. 1965, after the surgeon general's report, do not worry, it is okay, the punch was not lethal because there is a backlog of new youth. they call them their crop of prospects, this year's crop of prospects, talking about kids like farmers bringing in stuff from the fields. inducing a pre-smoker or a nonsmoker to become a habituated smoker, you saw their documents, folks. they are looking at kids that are 12, 13, 14 years old as the kids who are already experimenting with cigarettes. pre-smokers are younger than that. that is a pre-smoker. okay? and those nonsmokers, younger than that too. that is who they are talking about here. they were going after kids all along. the 14-to-24 age group is tomorrow's cigarette business. today's teenager is tomorrow's potential regular customer. the overwhelming majority of smokers begin to smoke in their teens. this was not an accident. it is a deliberate plan throughout the entirety of joe nally's life and throughout the entirety of the 20th century. younger adult smokers are the only source for replacement smokers. dr. proctor told you, well, they were worried someone is going find out what they were saying, so they started changing their phrasing. younger adult now is sort of the code word to use. okay? but they were talking about looking at kids that were all under 18, 68 percent under 18 when they were studying. look at the data, right? look at the data and see what it says. do not just trust the words. look at the data. the same thing is true for their documents. look at what they were studying and calling them replacement smokers. the surgeon general in '89 began to recognize the problem. look at this: 20 million of the 7 million teens living in the united states smoke cigarettes as an adult, but at least 5 million of them will die of smoking-related diseases. this figure should alarm anyone who is concerned with the future of today's teens. it should alarm you, folks. the rats in the cages. okay? think about this in the context of who they recognized their business was and who they were getting addicted. kids, again it all starts with kids. it started with joseph nally as a kid. it starts with kids from here on out. all right? and they were saying, look, imagine a hungry rat in a cage. put a lever in there. make it so the lever delivers a pellet of food. he will be rapidly pushing the lever for food. now consider the smoker. the cigarette is the lever press. the effect that that has is the reward. folks, these are people. these were human beings, and this is how they were describing them in their internal documents. okay? human beings that were suffering from and dying -- or would be suffering from and dying from diseases, and this is how they imagined them, as rats pushing levers. you had those ctr executives, dr. wakeham and james bowling, those were key officials in the ctr, key officials here. and the executive committee and the technical committee, these guys were making significant decisions about the course and the future of the conspiracy. and you saw when they were interviewed and they were talked to and they were asked, hey, let us ask you some honest questions and see if you give us some honest answers, you saw what they said. go ahead. (whereupon, a video clip was played in open court as follows:) narrator: is it possible that your refusal to accept the evidence may be covered by the fact that you make cigarettes? tobacco executive: is that possible or  of course that is possible. i think i'm a fairly reasonable human being and not in any way removed from the other members of society. i certainly would not be in the business if i thought cigarettes were harmful to people. i think it is important that there be a lot of us around who are trying to keep the research honest and open. i think the real dishonesty is telling people things that are not so. narrator: are you saying that cigarettes are harmless? tobacco executive: i do not know that. i do not know that they are harmful or harmless. what i'm saying is i think someone should find out. tobacco executive: none of the things that have been found in tobacco smoke are at concentrations which can be considered harmful. narrator: but the components themselves can be considered harmful? tobacco executive: anything can be considered harmful. applesauce is harmful if you get too much of it. narrator: i do not think many people are dying from applesauce. tobacco executive: they are not eating that much. narrator: people are smoking a lot of cigarettes? tobacco executive: well, i would say it this way. the people who eat applesauce die. the people who eat sugar die. the people who smoke cigarettes die. does the fact that the people who smoke cigarettes die demonstrate that smoking is the cause? (the video clip concluded.) mr. bigger: yes. yes, it does, and he knew that. he trivialized it and compared it to applesauce. and jim bowling saying, the real dishonesty is telling people things that are not so. could there be a better summary of their conspiratorial and their concealment campaign? he summarizes it for you. that is the real dishonesty, is telling things that are not so. and think about this. okay? it is not hard. it would not have been hard other than the fact that they were so greedy and they wanted the money. but, logistically, it would not have been hard to change the course of human history. okay? it was not hard at all. all right? it was actually logistically very easy, because they could have saved those 20 million lives and joe nally's life. they knew exactly how to do it. the frank statement? well, what if the frank statement was truthful. how hard would that have been? i mean, for these things right here, all they had to do was delete two words: there is proof that cigarette smoking is one of the causes of lung cancer, because they knew that was true. we accept an interest. that could be the exact same language: we believe the products we make are injurious to health. just strike out the "not," and then it is a truthful statement. imagine the difference that would have been. cooperating closely with those whose task it is to safeguard the public health, if they had chosen that, if they had chosen to tell the truth, then when dr. hammond and that research was going adverse shortly after this and he stopped it early because he was so worried he had to get the word out, they could have joined him. they could have joined voices together and said, you are right, dr. hammond, we agree. we have got to get the word out on this. people are going to die if we do not change course. if we do not stop doing this, people are going to die. we agree. it would not have been hard at all. and what would the difference have been? what would the difference have been if reynolds had that choice to make? all that shaved off, 20 million lives saved. it was not hard. oftentimes it is not hard to tell the truth. it may feel hard, but you tell the truth if you want to do the right thing, if you want to do the honest thing. they could have made an enormous difference in the lives of those 20 million people, but most importantly in the life of marlene nally, because joe nally would not have died of lung cancer and death. are punitive damages warranted under the circumstances of this case by the clear and convincing evidence? absolutely. and i will tell you what, folks. if you do not find punitive damages are warranted in this case, you might as well pin a big blue ribbon to reynolds' chest and tell them, good job, this is exactly how we want companies to do business in america, way to go. okay? punitive damages are warranted in this case. they would have made a difference in the life of marlene nally, because they would have saved that guy if they had made the right choice, if they had made the truthful choice, the honest choice, the safe choice. you could have met joseph nally through some other way than his family members and the documents and the testimony. they were an amazing and a wonderful couple, and you got a good sense of that when mrs. nally testified the other day. she told you the story about the roller rink. i mean, none of us have probably been to a roller rink in a long time. but they went to the roller rink and happened to sit down next to each other and their eyes met and it was over. that was it. it was over for them. they eloped to carson city, nevada, three months later, and they entered a life together in the military service. they had 20 wonderful years in the service before he retired, and they had spent that time here in winter haven. they loved it so much. they loved the people, loved the community, so they came back after retirement, and they made a life together here since then. they had so many good years. and you heard that from joe junior. you heard that from marlene. they had a wonderful time together. and, you know, they did. they had a good -- they had a good life together, a very good life together. but that life was cut short. it was cut short, much shorter than it needed to be. they would have had many more years to come. and there may be some among you who say, well, it was later in the years; it was those later years of their life; it is not as significant; it is not that important. i will tell you, folks, the loss of a loved one is always significant. the untimely loss, especially the loss as a result of conspiracy and concealment and death, it is significant that loss. okay? and those years they would have had together, those golden years, those are the years when you really need each other the most. that is when you have the most fun together at times. your love gets deeper and quieter and just full. those golden years are special, special years. okay? and that was what was taken from marlene. she has lost that. and you heard -- i mean, i'm not going to focus on it, but you heard also ty has some difficulties. and she is dealing with ty alone now, where she would have had joe there to help her out, you know. so she has that burden as well. she is suffered a significant loss, folks. i do not think there is going to be any dispute about that. so what does the evidence show? okay? you heard his honor's instructions that you are to measure the compensatory damages in the case based on the evidence in the case. the only evidence you have in the case is that joe nally died in 2002. he was -- if you look at the instructions and you will see and go all the way back to the date of injury. you go back to the date he was injured. the injury we are focused on here is the lung cancer and the death. okay? his diagnosis for lung cancer was around june 14th, 2001, so i will use that date. okay? june 14th, 2001, all the way through to today. all right? that is 5,451 days. okay? that is how many days she has been either living with joe's diagnosis of terminal lung cancer or since his death. and there was no question that when he was diagnosed with lung cancer, it is undisputed that was not something that he put on the shelf at night when he went to bed. it was not something he could take off. he had that diagnosis 24 hours a day, and she had that diagnosis to live with and care for him 24 hours a day. you heard about how that was, how the experience was. and there is no dispute in this case that after he died that loss has been a 24-hour-a-day loss. okay? there is not a day that goes by, not a moment where she does not -- you know, she does not have her husband. he is not there. there is no companionship; there is no protection. and there is obviously mental pain and suffering when you lose a spouse. from the future -- it is not -- i mean, no one knows the future. nobody knows for certain. okay? you can be reasonably certain, though, based upon mrs. nally. she is still doing well. she is doing great. she is got some years left in her future. okay? and you will see in the evidence and the record that mr. nally, you know, his mom lived to 92, you know. there is good genes in that family. if it was not for what their products had done and the way they struck him down early from these diseases, that could have been him too. so we are going to submit to you that you look at mrs. nally and the time she is got in the future. we are going to give you four more years in the future from today. okay? four years seems reasonable from our standpoint. that is until, basically, from today until approximately june 1st, 2020. that is 1,478 days. all right? that is how many days that is. and so the reason i'm giving you the days is because i want you to think about something. the smallest amount of currency we have in our society is a penny. and the smallest amount of the time we keep track of is a second. all right? that is what we keep track of, seconds and pennies. okay? and some of us, you see a penny on the ground, you might not even stoop down to pick it up. all right? maybe it is that insignificant. but it is the smallest amount of currency we have got, is one penny. the smallest amount of the time is one second. all right? a penny per second is $864 a day. okay? that is what that adds up to. one penny per second is $864 per day. if you look at the past, that 5,451 days when she is not had joe or he is had that lung cancer diagnosis that he was battling, that amounts to $4,709 -- excuse me, $4,709,664. okay? and if you look at the future, using that penny per second, $864 a day, it is $1,276,992. okay? and if you add both those totals up, which is what this question is asking you for -- okay? this question is asking you to add those up. if you add them both up, it is $5,986,656. okay? that is what it is to the penny and to the cent for that time. all right? if you want to round up, that is fine. if you want to round down, that is fine. this is just a suggestion. we are making a suggestion to you. if you do a penny per second, that is approximately $6,000,000. okay? it is just under $6,000,000 that we are suggesting to you. and if you want a range, okay, if you think a penny per second is too insignificant, if you think that it should be more for a loss of a loved one, a loss of a death, at two pennies per second, two cents per second, it is 12 million. okay? just under 12. $11,976,312. so if you want a range, i would submit to you -- our suggestion is a range is between 6 million and 12 million for the loss that she has sustained of her joe that she is not had. that is a reasonable amount that is fair and just, and it is based on the evidence. okay? it is not arbitrary. it has an anchor; it has a reason. if someone comes up and suggests something arbitrary to you, just remember that the evidence is what you look at. and we submit that is a reasonable suggestion. as i said, you can think that is too high; you can think it is too low. it is entirely your discretion as the jury. that is just our suggestion to you of what a reasonable idea could be. the last thing i want to end with is the apportionment of fault. and, you know, you have to consider everything in the case when you are looking at this. all right? and, obviously, you heard his honor's instructions that we have stipulated. the plaintiff has stipulated that the question of whether mr. nally belongs on this verdict form, it is in the instructions that your honor gave you. that is not on the verdict form. you are not asking whether he was at fault. that is been stipulated to. that is why he is on this verdict form. that is why he is there, his name is there. okay? how much fault he gets, i mean, it is really -- it is entirely up to you. you heard they asked mrs. nally. i mean, she knew him best. and she said, you know, look, my belief, it was the addiction. the addiction was the driving force of him, the addiction that was designed and created by them. okay? and it is important to understand, too, this case is a case where the concealment and the conspiracy were the legal cause of joe nally's death. okay? we think we have proved that certainly to a greater weight of the evidence, if not further. but in the event that you say "yes" on those questions, there is no apportionment of fault. okay? there is a reason for that. under the law, liars and cheats do not get the benefit of this. okay? if you are a liar and you cheat somebody and you caused their death, you do not get the benefit of a discount on the apportionment of fault. okay? even if the other person was foolish or stupid or made some bad decisions, you do not get that, if you lie and you cheat and you cause someone's death. all right? that is the way the law is. it makes sense. but our suggestion when you are looking at this is you consider those findings that they placed cigarettes on the market that were defective and unreasonably dangerous. they were negligent. the nicotine in their products is addictive. they knew it in their own words. we cannot defend continued smoking as free choice if the person was addicted. okay? 1980, it is like you opened their diary and read their secret thoughts of what they knew to be true at that time and what they know to be true today. there is no indication in the advertisement that if a person smokes for a while, it is no longer a matter of choice, despite how much you heard about choice and choice and choice in this case. the '89 surgeon general, these two factors refute the argument that smoking is a matter of free choice. most smokers start smoking as teenagers and then become addicted. okay. whether you knew that before you came in here or not, i do not know, but you can decide it on this evidence. this is what you have to consider. all right. and because of that, we would suggest that it is 95 to 5. okay? if you are going to write numbers in there, that is our suggestion, because you look at the evidence in this case and there is no way that reynolds was not 19 times more powerful, 19 times in a better position to avoid this whole thing from happening, 19 times more knowledgeable than joe nally. remember the document that says, we now -- in '63, i think it was, or '58, we now have a greater understanding of the power of nicotine than anywhere in the published literature. they brag about it. there is no way they want 19 times more responsibility than him. but, again, if you -- we believe you should say yes on the concealment and conspiracy. and when you do, liars and cheats do not get the benefit of this, so whatever number you write in there, if you find that these liars and cheats caused his death, that gets wiped out. okay? that number is just a suggestion, again, from me. okay? just like the damages are, it is a suggestion. you guys decide. you are the jury. you sat here through all the evidence. you will make the right decision. i want to leave you with one final thought before i'm done. and i know you have heard a lot in this case. you have heard a lot of evidence. you have heard a lot of testimony. you have learned a lot. you saw a lot about what the industry did and what it knew and why it did it. you have heard about the 500,000 deaths per year. you have heard about the 20 million deaths over the last 20 years -- excuse me, 50 years. and it can probably feel like just -- i mean, it is just incomprehensible. it is, like, what do we do with all that? how do we comprehend? how do we process all that? so i want to leave you with sort of a final thought if i can. a group of individuals was walking down the beach one morning here in florida, and they came upon the ocean. it was early in the morning, and hundreds of thousands of starfish had been washed up upon the beach. and they were kind of taken aback by the loss, by the tragedy of what they saw. and they stood there for a moment, and they looked down the beach and they saw someone else was walking up the beach toward them. and the person who was walking toward them would stop every so many steps and pick up a starfish and throw it back in the ocean. and, eventually, the group and this individual met, and someone from the group said to the person who was walking up the beach, what are you doing? i mean, there are hundreds of thousands, if not millions, of starfish here on the beach. i mean, what are you doing? you cannot possibly make a difference. and the person looked at everyone in the group and bent down and picked up a starfish and threw it back in the ocean and said, i can make a difference for that one. i made a difference for that one. okay? folks, you can make a difference for this one, for mrs. nally. this is her case. and you can make a difference for her. i thank you for your time. i thank you for your attention. it has been a pleasure and an honor to try this case before you. i hope you saw the joy with which our team did this. thank you, and i look forward to your verdict, whatever it may be. thank you very much. mr. bigger: please the court. it is good they set us here, because the clock is right there, and i'm very cognizant. you guys have been very patient and you are ready to deliberate, so i'm not going to take a lot of time. what i wish, i wish i could pull a chair up right here and just sit down and have you tell me what you are wondering or what you are thinking about or what questions you have. it would be so much easier. that is not the way the process works. i cannot do that. so i'm going to try to go back through what mr. geise said very briefly and just hit on a few points. i'm not going to be able to touch on everything he said. what we say here in closing arguments -- obviously, you know this already --in opening statements, closing arguments, our words are not evidence. we are giving you a summary of what the evidence in the case was or our views on it. but the evidence in the case is what you saw throughout the trial itself before we rested our case. so i cannot address everything he said. your collective wisdom and judgment will know what things were factually correct, what things were not, what was consistent with the evidence and what was not. let me just touch on a few points though. this thing about the lawsuit and whether mr. nally wanted to file a lawsuit. folks, at the beginning of the case, the judge told you that this engle case started in '94, it progressed, and in 2007 the supreme court authorized this lawsuit to go forward with mrs. nally. okay? mr. nally was dead five years before that. all right? so i do not even know where that is coming from or what that is about. let us just put that out of the way clearly and easily. it is a wrongful death case. it is about marlene nally's loss. it does not have anything to do with what joe nally's decision about filing a lawsuit was. okay? if i had nickel for every time i heard the phrase "paid experts," i think i would have made a lot of money in this trial. of course the experts are paid, folks. they are medical -- they are the leading experts in the world on their subjects. they are taking time away from their lives to come here and talk to you all. they are paid. stephen stamkos is about to renegotiate a big contract. he is going to get a lot of money because he is really good at what he does. dr. hurt and dr. proctor are the best people in the world at what they do. and the money that they have made over 20 years, or whatever it was, in doing this, if you add it up, it is not even that much money per year. they are paid because they come here and they are experts. okay? how about just think about this. james johnston and bill campbell and andrew tisch were the presidents of those corporations when they stood before congress and lied to the american people and congress. they were being paid quite a bit as the presidents of those corporations to stand there and tell those lies. you saw johnston's testimony they put on for you about how 43 million americans have quit. that is why we know nicotine is not addictive. in this case it is 60 million americans who have quit. so joe nally could not be addicted. okay? think about it. remember what you heard and saw. the medical part. we did not gloss over the medical part. we had the experts here that presented the evidence to you guys. and you guys heard it and we summarized it. but just bear in mind, just looking at a couple of the slides --and i'm not going to go through all of these, but, you know, the slides mr. geise used today, this one from october the 4th where he was pointing out this, if you look at the document itself that is shown on here, it is the same one that i used with you during closing argument. you saw it during the case. apparently he was evaluated by dr. vanhook for breathing and is on albuterol and atrovent, october the 4th, 1996. you go on albuterol and atrovent when you are suffering from copd or the symptoms related to copd. that is what those medication are for. you heard that in the case. you saw that in the case. and this 1998 pulmonary function test that mr. geise referred to today. again, i remind you go back to what dr. kress said. look at the data why is this wrong? it is not because dr. kress does not like dr. salas or anything like that. it is nothing to do with that. you saw the witnesses that were here, dr. kress and dr. villa. i think the suggestion was made to you that they will say anything for money, or something along those lines. you saw them. you saw who these people were, their qualifications and who they were. they told you what the evidence itself shows. somebody who is that age that has 125 percent of the predicted value on their fev1/fvc, you know something is wrong. and so you look at it and say, well, why is this coming out this way? you can see it is because he did not blow out long enough. they did not perform the test correctly. and even dr. lien had that note on there that said this is not good, this one is no good, do this again. okay? if you look at the albuterol that is supposed to improve symptoms, after the drug he negative 30, negative 47. something is wrong with this data. something was wrong with the data on the pulmonary function test. and that is why dr. kress looked at it and said, where is the problem? oh, here it is. and when you look at it and you look at the data collectively and look at everything you see, joseph nally did have copd in 1996, as dr. everhart, the one who actually read that pulmonary function test, not dr. vanhook, interpreted it and said, and he continued to have copd throughout that time. but there is no question that at least he is suffering from -- even if you do not want to believe the pulmonary function test of dr. everhart that shows moderate obstruction, if you look at this '98 one and think, well, i do not know, there is unquestionably the symptoms that i showed you. and everybody agrees he has it in 2000. you do not get that bad that fast. you do not get to fifty percent of your lung function by 2000 in just four years without having symptoms. and that is why the records reflect there were symptoms there. the fact that some of the other doctors that had repeated things that other doctor said, like restrictive lung disease getting repeated by other doctors, the fact that with the kidney. you know, dr. villa explained how the pathologist was the only person that looked inside there, and it is three-dimensional, so you have got to open it up to see what is going on in there. the tumor did go down into the ureter. it is what it said. it extended into the ureter. that is what it was. it was growing out and through there. that is part of the record mr. geise showed you. but it was present within the renal pelvis. that is where it originated. and that is why dr. botz on that pathology specimen for his diagnosis put the transition cell carcinoma in the left kidney. i cannot tell you why dr. hallett wrote ureter cancer. but that was just repeating. and just like pollution in a river. if you put some pollution in it and it flows downstream, that is what is going to happen. and unfortunately, that is what happened in these records. it just flowed downstream to the other doctors' records. but from their standpoint, they were just trying to treat him. they were not trying to go back and make sure everything was correct, they were just trying to treat him. but we did a thorough examination, gave dr. villa all the records. he reviewed them all. but what he pointed out to you is that you have got to start at the source. you have got to start from this one record and look at what it tells us. and that is why he focused on that pathology report. there were some comments about copd and the law on manifestation. i think there was a suggestion to you that we had to have a diagnosis. look at the law, look at the instructions. it specifically says no formal diagnosis is required. it is whether there were symptoms. and the limits on the performance of his pulmonary function tests in '96 because of the surgery. dr. kress explained that to you. you would not have complete, you know, greater than normal results on the total lung volumes, you would not have these results you otherwise see on the totals lung volume measurements if he was suffering. it would have been worse. it would not have been what it was. if it was anything, he did -- it was -- it would have been worse than that. and that is why he looked at the total lung volumes. that is why that number matters. remember dr. kress's testimony on that. when we got to the addiction question, they put a lot of emphasis on kellyn nally. and i just -- just for a moment, i need to say, seriously? no disrespect to mrs. nally. i'm sure she is a fine lady. she is the ex-wife of joe, jr., being asked questions about something regarding her father-in-law who she admittedly saw maybe once a year over the course of their marriage, not very much at the end. so she is asking questions about things that go back, you know, 20, 30 years. and what did she really say? he was courteous and he was not blowing smoke in my face or smoking around me. so because he was courteous, that is evidence somehow that he was not addicted, despite everything else you saw, all the other evidence in the case? you all use your reason and common sense and think about that. if that is where they are putting all this weight, that is why they wanted to read that testimony this morning, why? why are they so desperate? what is the reason they have to focus on kellyn and try to put so much stock on what she said? because nothing else adds up. nothing else works for them. i think there was also a suggestion somehow that concurring cause does not apply to certain questions in the case. nothing we say is evidence, but also, nothing we say is the law. we do not wear robes. his honor is up there. his honor gave you the law. you are going to have the instructions on the law, and you will see that concurring cause is a part of every single question when you are evaluating legal causation. okay? his honor decided what the law is that applies to this case, and you will have that in your hands to decide. and there were like legal gymnastics or something, argument gymnastics on question 3, the whole thing about how he was addicted before, so despite the fact that he smoked our kents, our lucky strikes and our kools for greater than 50 years, that somehow the smoking of those cigarettes was not the legal cause of his lung cancer. folks, the question is was smoking cigarettes a legal cause of his lung cancer and death? he smoked for 50 years. he died of the kind of lung cancer that 98 percent of the time was caused by smoking. and the only expert in here told you it was caused by smoking. it was not even challenged. i think -- i think drs. heller and burney would probably roll over in their graves if they knew that their statements were being used in defense of a case like this. these doctors are the public health officials that were defrauded. even -- i asked dr. proctor, and he said they probably went to their graves never knowing the conspiracy, never knowing the fraud, never finding out what we now know, what we found out, what we now realize. and just to be clear, we do not have to prove that anything was secret to mr. nally. there is a finding. if you find him to be a class member, the finding says that they concealed material information. look at what it says in the instructions. material information is the stuff that joe nally would have acted differently but for their concealment. they concealed the stuff he needed. it is in the instructions. it is in the law that you are instructed to follow. and please do not let the success of the conspiracy, the holding strategy -- remember, one of the pillars was litigation defense -- do not let the success of the holding strategy in the conspiracy, the delay in getting the truth out, the passage of time for mrs. nally bringing this case and mr. nally switching to filters and whatnot distract you from what actually happened. folks, use your common sense. okay? mrs. nally may not remember. she said, i cannot quite recall. i recall taste. but why do people switch from unfiltered to filtered? we know. it is in the evidence. it is in the documents. they do it because they think it is safer. they said it. these companies said it. they do not say it here in this courtroom, but they said it in the documents we brought you. it was marketed as a safer cigarette, and it worked. that is what all those filters were. they were health cigarettes, safer cigarettes. the punitive damages side of the case. all the stuff i think mr. geise suggested to you there, it did not make one iota of difference for the death of joe nally. and you are instructed you are punishing this company for what they did to joe nally. that is what the law says. you are punishing them because their conspiracy, and their acts, their deplorable conduct over all these years led to joe nally's lung cancer and death. all right? the nobel laureates, the ctr research, the work rodgman was doing, whatever it was, they were not telling the truth. they did not have to do all that stuff. they did not have to do all the other stuff they are trying to point to to say we are good. all they had to do was tell the truth, just be honest and avoid this whole thing. that is all they really had to do to save his life and prevent his death. and one final thought just on the damages. i mean, aside from the fact that it is a wrongful death case, she lost her husband. she lost her husband. okay? that is a significant loss. but this thing about insurance calculations or insurance policies or pension plans, whatever that was, there is no evidence of that. there is no evidence of any of that. the only evidence in the case you have is the date of diagnosis of his lung cancer, the date of his death, these dates, and the number of days that have passed between them, the number of days she is going to live in the future with this loss. and if you think it is less than a penny per second, go ahead. i mean, you can do the math on that. that is purely a suggestion that is up to you guys. but that is based on the evidence. okay? that is based on the evidence and your reasoning and common sense. none of that other stuff was there. there is no evidence of it. so when you are evaluating the damages in the case, please do what you committed to do. follow the evidence and law. if they wanted to suggest another number or provide other evidence, they could have. and they did not. okay? you are going to have a chance now to deliberate. i, obviously, will not speak to you again until after the trial is over, if you wish. if you do not wish, that is fine as well. but i really enjoyed it. i appreciate it. and i thank you again so much for your deliberative attention and time. i look forward to receiving your verdict. thank you, folks.