mr. geise: thank you. may it please the court. the court: yes, sir. mr. geise: mr. bigger, mr. clark, mrs. nally, and good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. again, i have a real enviable time slot. 12:30. your stomachs will be rumbling. you will be thinking about something, and i now have to captivate your attention for probably the next 90 minutes. i'll do the best i can. once again, we are in the bottom of an inning. and, once again, i want to start as i have throughout this whole process, and that is by thanking you, thanking you for your jury service. the lawyers, we have to be here. we chose to do this for a living. mrs. nally, she is here. she chose to file a lawsuit. but none of you-all chose this. we chose you. and there are a lot of ways that people can contribute in this country. for primaries and election days, some of us vote. we may not want to, but we do. coming up in a couple weeks, we have memorial day, and we honor those who have given their lives in service of this country. and jury service is also a big part of that contribution. and for the past few weeks you have sacrificed what you do in your daily lives to come here and do this with us. so whatever you decide, whatever your verdict, you can go home to your family, to your friends, to your co-workers, and tell them that you contributed to make this country what it is, because you have. and on behalf of myself and ms. baker, my team, and my client, we thank you for your service. now, when this case started a couple weeks ago, i told you that this case was not about other smokers; it was only about joseph nally. and to use mr. bigger's analogy at the end of his closing argument, this is not about a lot of starfish. this is about one starfish. this is about one person. it is about mr. nally. and, in particular, this case is about the choices that he made when it came to smoking. as this case draws to a close, that is still what it is about. two weeks ago i told you you would hear that mr. nally was an intelligible and independent man who succeeded over and over in both the military and civilian life; who, when he was motivated, he demonstrated the initiative to put a plan in place and achieve his goals. and that is what you heard. i told you you would also hear that he was a cigarette smoker who chose to smoke for decade after decade without any motivation to stop or any attempts to stop, that he did not take the initiative to try to quit until after his surgery for his ureter cancer. and that is exactly what you heard. i told you you would hear that this lawsuit was never his idea. even after he had copd, even after he had cancer, he never expressed an interest in wanting to sue. and that is what you heard. and i also told you you would hear an avalanche of information and evidence that had nothing to do with mr. nally. and you sure did. and you saw recaps of a lot of that earlier this morning, things that judge radabaugh and you told you back in the beginning of the case had already been resolved in that other case, things that did not need to be reproven to you, things that i told you in my opening statement were not an issue. dr. villa and dr. cress, they spent a lot of time telling you that smoking causes lung cancer or copd. you heard that from me in my opening statement. it was not an issue then. it is not at issue now. you heard from dr. hurt and dr. proctor that nicotine is addictive. you heard that from me in my opening statement. you heard that from me back in jury selection. it was not an issue then. it is not an issue now. and another thing that is not an issue is whether cigarettes should be legal. you heard from some of their experts they would prefer that cigarettes be banned. that is what they want to happen. but this case is not about that. cigarettes are a legal product. they are legal to make, they are legal to sell, they are legal to advertise. those are all legal acts. and cigarettes are also legal to smoke. all smokers like mr. nally during his life made the choice to smoke cigarettes. and that was a legal choice. in my opening statement i also told you that the plaintiff would probably only tell you half the story for a lot of things, and that you would have to wait to the bottom of an inning to get the whole story. and the plaintiff did just that. throughout this trial we tried to respect your time, and we tried to be as efficient as we could. and part of that was we only called one witness on our own, and that was kellyn nally, who you heard from in her deposition today. but the plaintiff's witnesses were our witnesses too. the answers they gave to our questions or to their questions is evidence in this case that we can use. and in many cases, the answers they gave when we asked them the questions show the other side, the side they did not tell you in their direct examination. now, it is fair. we could have called more witnesses. but one, it is not our burden to call any witnesses. and what would these other witnesses have told that you did not already know? we could have called a witness to tell you that mr. nally's medical records and his treating physicians said he had ureter cancer, not kidney cancer. but we did not need to. you saw those records. we could have called a witness to tell you that mr. nally was not diagnosed with copd prior to november 21st, 1996, and that his medical records show he did not have any chronic symptoms of copd before that. we could have done at that, but we did not have to. you saw those records. we could have called a witness to tell you that mr. nally was a responsible man, that he was never out of control when it came to his smoking. but we do not need to. you heard that testimony from mrs. nally and her son. we could have called a witness to tell you that mr. nally never made a serious attempt to quit smoking until after those surgeries in 1996. but we did not need to. dr. hurt admitted that, and you heard that evidence. we could have called a witness to tell you that mr. nally was surrounded by information about the risks of smoking and the fact that nicotine in cigarettes could be addictive. but we did not need to. you saw the public information about the risks dating back to before the time mr. nally was born, from all around the country, all around the globe, and from right here in polk county, places that neither dr. proctor nor dr. hurt bothered to look. we could have called a witness to tell you that mr. nally was not influenced by advertising, but we did not need to. mrs. nally told you that. and we could have called a witness to tell you the other side of the story, that other side of their experts did not tell you during their direct examination. but ms. baker and i took it on and we asked those experts on cross-examination to pull the other side of the story out. and, folks, that started with their first witness, dr. hurt. i'd like to tell you how much dr. hurt has made testifying in these cases, but he claims he does not know. we do know that the week he was here he spent the first part of that week in sarasota testifying in front of a different jury collecting $5,600 a day to do it, and then he came over here and was collecting the same amount. and he is done that multiple times in the last few years. now, strangely, when ms. baker asked him, he claimed he had no idea how much he is earned. but he knew exactly how much he paid in taxes last year on how much he earned. now, one half story that came out with dr. hurt was this story on internal company research on nicotine, and in particular, cigarettes that would have lower tar and a maintained level of nicotine or a higher level of nicotine. and i think dr. hurt suggested to you that this was a way to try to manipulate nicotine to keep smokers hooked, to keep them smoking, and that the ph was adjusted to get that market share going. but on cross you heard the other side of the story, that a lot of that research was done at the urging of public health officials, folks like dr. russell and dr. doll. and they thought that companies should develop cigarettes that lower the tar but either maintained nicotine or, in dr. doll's case, had an artificially high content of nicotine. why? their theory was people smoke for nicotine, but it is the tar that kills them. so if you give them the nicotine but lower the tar, that is progress. now, dr. hurt would call it nicotine manipulation. dr. russell and dr. doll would call it progress. the plaintiff's paid medical experts did not tell you the full story either. do you need a cough drop or some water? the bailiff: he needs water. mr. geise: all right. i'm beginning to think that there is something wrong with the courtroom and everybody is going to get sick. the court: please do not say that. mr. geise: you have already been through that litigation, right? the court: we have been through it. mr. geise: in addition to dr. hurt, the plaintiff's paid medical experts also did not come here and tell you the full side of the story. we will talk about the medicine in some detail, but one example is dr. villa. you will recall he is a doctor who came in here, and he is not a urologist. he is not a doctor who takes care of patients with ureter or kidney cancer. and on the direct examination of dr. villa, they showed him a grand total of one medical record. one. it was the pathology report that mr. bigger talked about today. and it does not even say kidney cancer. that is just the way that dr. villa interprets it. now, on cross ms. baker had to show dr. villa all of the records that said ureter cancer. and those were not a secret or a surprise. i showed them to you in opening statement. but for some reason they did not show them to dr. villa during his direct examination. we had to show him. and that brings us to their last expert, dr. proctor. you recall he is made almost $4,000,000 testifying in cases like this, and i think this is his ninth trial already this year. and he said that one of his specialities when he is not testifying is a term he coined called agnotology, or the history of ignorance. and that was true for dr. proctor when it came to mr. nally. he was completely ignorant of any facts involving mr. nally. i asked him, i believe you told the jury that you are not a biographer of mr. nally. i'm not. you are not here to testify about any facts specific to him? not in particular. you do not have info about when he smoked his first cigarette? that is correct. or why he chose any of the brands that he smoked? that is true. and you are not here to discuss whether he relied on any statements by reynolds or lorillard or any tobacco company? that is correct. and you are not here to tell the jury whether any of things you talked about mattered specifically to him? that is right. you cannot say he personally saw any of those specific ads? correct. or you relied on them? true that is. and not just the ads you showed, but to any advertisement at all? and he said, that is right. dr. proctor told you, you do not know what you do not know. well, we know what dr. proctor did not know. and he did not know anything about mr. nally. but not knowing anything or saying nothing is probably better than only giving you one side of the presentation. and how many times did dr. proctor say something on direct but then on cross-examination i had to get up and do the full side of the story with him? his direct examination was a one-sided, slanted presentation by an advocate against tobacco companies. make no bones about that. he showed you sound bites and sound clips from a tobacco executive's, employee's, documents where they would question or deny the risks of smoking. but he did not show you a single news story about the risks of smoking. he said he looked at all the literature to see what was communicated out there. do not you think he could have showed you one or two or five or a hundred articles that talked about the risks of smoking? of course he could have. but he did not show you any. that is certainly not the full story. and you remember on cross examination he admitted to me that the industry comments that were out there were what he called the tail of the kite? do you remember that? and i asked him, well, sir, when somebody is flying a kite and look up in the sky, do they look at the kite or do they look at the tail? and he had to admit people look at the kite. on direct he showed you a lot of tails. on cross we showed you a lot of kites. another example with dr. proctor is the flintstones. and mr. clark showed part of this in his opening statement. and i mentioned this in my opening statement to tell you the full story. i did not think they would do it. i did not think they would show it, but they still did it. so on cross you heard the rest of the story with the flintstones. you learned that it was originally an adult comedy. it was modeled on the honeymooners, and it aired in the evenings, not saturday mornings. and flintstones were co-sponsored by alka seltzer and one-a-day vitamins, hardly products targeted at kids. and we showed you the ad featuring fred and wilma for those products. you also learned that reynolds never advertised on flintstones after it moved to saturday mornings. dr. proctor did not share thos facts with you on direct. i had to ask him. you learned that mr. nally was a grown man when the flintstones debuted. you learned that there was no evidence that he ever saw the show. and the last part of the story they did not show you that we had to, he never smoked winston cigarettes. why were they showing you that? document destruction, or as i called it with dr. proctor, document retention. you know that there are 80 million pages of documents available and they pick one or two that suggest maybe documents were destroyed. and i'm not here representing philip morris; i'm here representing r.j. reynolds. and i asked dr. proctor specifically with regard to reynolds about their documents. and he told you back in the '50s they started saving everything in the library. he told you in the '60s they started microfilming everything. and they microfilmed it so they would keep a copy and the individual people could get rid of their own copies if they wanted to. he told you that evidence with respect to my client. he also told you there were no documents from reynolds that said, bury this, ship this off shore, we are going to use a dummy address. he told you that did not exist for reynolds. still, i had to point that out on cross-examination. he did not tell you that on direct. so why did you have to wait until cross-examination to get this full side of the story? i think the answer is pretty obvious from dr. hurt, from dr. proctor, and from the closing argument earlier this morning, to get you mad, to get you upset. dr. hurt and dr. proctor were here to get you so mad that you would decide the case based on emotion rather than the facts pertaining to mr. nally, because if you focus on the facts of joseph nally, mrs. nally's case fails. it fails because his medical records and treating doctors prove he had ureter cancer, not kidney cancer. it fails because he was not diagnosed with copd before november 21st, 1996, and did not have symptoms of copd before that. instead, you know, at that time -- and we will talk about it -- he was recovering from abdominal surgery and he had pneumonia. he had no cough, no shortness of breath, no sputum production prior to that. the case fails because mr. nally was not an out-of-control, involuntary smoker. he was not an addict. and the case fails because addiction was not a legal or substantial cause of any disease he had. he was not motivated to quit smoking. he made his own decisions. you heard that again today from kellyn nally. he did not make an effort to quit until after he was sick. before that, addiction never kept him smoking when he was otherwise trying not to smoke. and, finally, it fails because the plaintiff cannot prove a link between any of that stuff that they dumped in and a choice or decision mr. nally made. now, i'm going to talk about all of the things on that verdict form one by one, but that is a preview of where we are going to go today. i showed you this slide in opening. these are the three hurdles or three burdens the plaintiff has to prove for class membership. she has to prove that mr. nally had a qualifying disease. and in this case they have to prove he had kidney cancer or prove that his copd manifested before november 21st, 1996. if they are able to accomplish that, they also need to prove that he was addicted and then prove that addiction was a legal cause of those diseases. all three hurdles. if they fail to meet just one of them, they fail altogether. two out of three does not cut it here. you need three out of three. one by one i'm going to address these hurdles and show why the answer to each should be no. i want to start with the medical issues. now, mr. bigger did not spend much time on the medicine. he kind of glossed over it, told you it is an easy call, flashes up a couple records and moves right on, because he wants to talk about conduct, he wants to talk about documents, he wants to talk about video clips. so they kind of glossed right over the medical part. but that is the first hurdle, and it is a significant hurdle in this case. and you need to look at the evidence. do not gloss over it. so i'm going to start, as i did in opening statement, with kidney cancer or ureter cancer. which is it? you know from their drawings, these are two separate parts. the kidney is here. and just to make it clear, the renal pelvis is in the kidney. i never said it was not; nobody was going to say that. the ureter is not. question: kidney? ureter? and as i said in opening statement, this question comes down to whether you want to believe mr. nally's treating doctors, who operated on him, treated him for, and cured him from his ureter cancer, or you want to rely on the paid expert who came in here 20 years later to tell you something different. and in my opening, i showed you the documents that were going to say it was ureter cancer. and to refute that they called dr. villa. dr. villa never treated mr. nally. he did not talk to any of mr. nally's treating physicians. and he may be board certified in six areas, but one of those is not urology. he is not a urologist. he is not a doctor who diagnoses and treats cancers of the urinary tract, cancers of the ureter or the kidney. nevertheless, they had dr. villa tell you that mr. nally had kidney cancer. and during his direct, as i said, they did not ask you a single --did not ask him a single question about any of the documents we showed in opening statement or any of the documents that said ureter cancer, not one. they showed him just the one record, the pathology report. you saw it again today. and you have to ask yourself, why would they only show this expert one record and not all of the records? why? because they know all the other records disprove what he is trying to tell you. and the record they showed you, the pathology report, it never says kidney cancer on it. but in dr. villa's interpretation, he thinks the doctor is talking about kidney cancer. well, that doctor was dr. botz. and he also says in the same report, probing the ureter reveals the ureteral lumen passing through the middle of the mass being surround by it. now, i'm not saying this is crystal, but this also says as he probes the ureter, the lumen of the ureter, the middle part, the air part of the hose, is going through the mass. he is writing that too. now, at no place in this pathology report does he say kidney cancer. and, admittedly, he does not say ureter cancer either. at best, this record is inconclusive, i think. but this is the only record that dr. villa relied on, the only one. but we have so many other records that tell us exactly what mr. nally had, we do not have to guess what a doctor meant in this. we do not have to guess. all of the records that they did not show dr. villa that we did show that it is in the ureter, and they prove that he had ureter cancer. dr. robert hallett, he was a urologist. he was mr. nally's urologist. urologists know the difference between a kidney and a ureter. and unlike dr. villa, this is what dr. hallett does for a living. he was the doctor who performed the operation on mr. nally to remove his kidney and his ureter in may of 1996. now, mr. bigger said no one had a chance to see what was there except for dr. botz. this is the operative report from dr. hallett, describing exactly what he saw in the operating room. when he cut into mr. nally, he looked at the kidney, he looked at the ureter and surgically removed it. he held the cancer in his hand. and this is his eyewitness account of what he saw and where he saw it. he describes the location of it, along the course of the ureter. there was a nodular area measuring about two and a half to three centimeters in diameter. that is where he saw it, the course of the ureter. now, when he showed this record to dr. villa, he admitted that dr. hallett is describing a mass on the ureter. he had to. this alone proves the cancer was in the ureter. they did not show you this record; we did. but there is more. this is dr. hallett's discharge summary. again, still his urologist from june 5th, 1996. and he explains why his patient had been in the hospital and what disease he has. and, again, dr. hallett describes where mr. nally's nodule was. he writes, there was a nodule in the ureter below the level of the renal pelvis. mr. bigger talked about needing to go get a dictionary to explain what terms mean. "in" means in, in the ureter. "below" means below, below the level of the renal pelvis. if renal pelvis means kidney, it is means it is below the kidney. if "in" means in, it means it is in the ureter. crystal clear language from mr. nally's urologist. it does not need to be interpreted by a paid expert. dr. hallett stated that the nodule was in the ureter below the renal pelvis. this alone proves it is in the ureter. again, they did not show you this document; we did. but there is even more. in the same document dr. hallett is talking about the pathology. laboratory data of significance includes a pathologic diagnosis of noninvasive papillary transitional cell carcinoma grade 1 of the ureter. he is referring to the pathology report that dr. villa tried to interpret. when dr. hallett looks at it, he is like, yes, what the pathologist is describing is cancer in the ureter. and he did not leave it open for interpretation. he wrote it down. when we showed dr. villa this record, he agreed that is what dr. hallett wrote. he had to. this alone proves that the cancer is in the ureter. they did not show you this document; we did. but there is more. you heard about dr. lien today, his general doctor, the doctor he saw throughout this period. and what does he write in july, after he is out of the hospital? the patient has been seeing dr. hallett for renal problem, apparently had left kidney removed not too long ago and now has found cancer of the ureter. this is what dr. lien writes. no mention of kidney cancer. he says it is in the ureter. in september we know that mr. nally goes back in to have the distal part, the lower part, of the ureter removed. he goes to see dr. hallett. dr. hallett, again, he refers to what happened in may. the patient had a left nephrectomy in may of 1996 for a nonfunctioning hydronephrotic left kidney, was found to have a urothelial tumor in the upper ureter. he has returned at this time for removal of the distal segment of the ureter. again, no dictionary is needed here. dr. hallett says "in the ureter." again, this record proves he had ureter cancer. they did not show this to you; we did. and then, you know, we have that pathology report from that second operation where dr. botz says, carcinoma, ureter. now, dr. villa tried to dispute this and says, oh, he is just referring to what he is looking at on the second. it does not go back to the first surgery. it does not matter. he says carcinoma, ureter; he never says carcinoma, kidney, not in this pathology report or his other one. so what do we have? the only urologist in this case, dr. hallett, told you repeatedly that mr. nally had ureter, not kidney cancer. those are the facts. those are the medical records. those are his treating doctors. time and time again, ureter cancer, not kidney cancer. so when we look at this first hurdle with regard to kidney cancer, they cannot clear it. they crash into the hurdle. they have to. why? because of the medical records and the treating doctors. the pathologist, the urologist, and the general doctor in 1986 all say ureter. those are doctors who were working to treat and cure mr. nally in 1996, not a paid expert who comes here in 2016 to tell you something else. the greater weight of the evidence, which is your standard, the greater weight of the evidence demonstrates that mr. nally had ureter cancer, not kidney cancer. let me turn to copd briefly. and as i said in my opening statement, there is no question that mr. nally had copd at some point. that is not a question. the issue is, when did it manifest? did it manifest before november 21st, 1996? mr. bigger showed you this instruction, so i'm not going to read it to you again. and he stressed this, and stressed it to say, they do not have to prove he was officially diagnosed in that time period. i agree. i'm not saying they have to. but i do not believe the evidence shows that they can meet this burden, the burden of manifestation. now, whether he was diagnosed with copd before this time period or not is important to the question of manifestation. why is it? because it tells you whether he had the symptoms of copd or not. it stands to reason that if he had copd, that his doctors would have diagnosed him with copd and put it in the records. if he had the symptoms, they would have mentioned it. but if he does not have the symptoms and they do not report the systems, it makes sense that is why they would not make that diagnosis. now, mr. bigger told you this was easy, that this is an easy call. it is such an easy call that they had to fly in a doctor from chicago to tell you how easy this call was. you will recall their paid expert on copd came down from chicago, illinois. he has never treated mr. nally. he is never been licensed to practice in florida. he is never treated anyone in florida. and from his testimony, as we will talk, it seems like he thinks most of the doctors here in florida should not be licensed to practice either, because almost all of them were wrong in his book. he is been an expert witness between 200 and 300 times. he is never written a peer-reviewed paper on copd, and he is never been invited to give a presentation on copd, but he was invited to come here as a paid expert to tell you about copd. i want to start quickly with this graph. i showed you this in opening statement. these are fev1/fvc results from the three pulmonary function tests that mr. nally sat through. now, dr. kress disagreed with a lot of things, but at least he agreed with this. he agreed that the global initiative for chronic obstructive lung disease -- that gold, it is called for short, the acronym -- is a group from the world health organization and the national institutes of health that set out criteria for the diagnosis of copd on a pulmonary function test. and he admitted that that gold criteria sets that seventy percent level as the cutoff. now, i confronted dr. kress with this graph, and he admitted, i had everything on there correct and that my line represents what the gold standard is. but he knew this was going to give him trouble in 1998 with that pulmonary function test, so dr. kress, instead of just relying on the gold criteria, he had his own criteria. remember he tried to talk about those lung volumes and he tried to get into residual volume and total lung capacity? but on cross he had to admit that those gold criteria do not use residual volume as a criteria; they do not use total lung capacity as a criteria; and the gold standard does not use any element of the lung volumes to make a diagnosis of copd. so those were dr. kress's criteria, not the gold criteria. but in addition to the criteria, dr. kress told you that there are physical symptoms of copd. what were they? shortness of breath, or something doctors called dyspnea, chronic cough, and chronic sputum production. those are the symptoms that dr. kress said are related to copd. now, as you have heard throughout, the "c" in copd stands for chronic. it means once you have the symptoms, once you have copd, they do not go away. they stay the same and get worse. so let us look at the evidence with regard to mr. nally before november of 1996. dr. kress admitted to you that he did not have any breathing problems at all before he went in the hospital in may of 1996, he did not have any chronic cough, he did not have any shortness of breath, and he did not have any sputum production. so before he goes into the hospital, he does not have any symptoms of copd, nothing chronic, nothing at all. on may 28th, 1996, he goes into the hospital for that first surgery on his ureter cancer. dr. hallett, the urologist, is treating for that, but he begins to have problems breathing, so he asks dr. vanhook to come in and see him. you saw this record from dr. vanhook, a pulmonologist. he says he saw him as an emergency at the request of dr. hallett. that means this dyspnea or shortness of breath, it came on him while he was in the hospital. he was running a fever. that dyspnea was getting worse. and, importantly, mr. nally denied any previous history of pneumonia, tuberculosis or emphysema. he had a cough at that point, but he was not producing any sputum. this is what -- what happens in may of 1996. and dr. vanhook records his impressions. he said dyspnea, etiology multiple possibilities. so he is trying to find out what is causing the shortness of breath. it could be this -- could be fluid excess in dealing with early congestive failure, it could be copd, or it could be pneumonia. well, dr. kress told you this impression means that dr. vanhook thought he had copd. but dr. vanhook was checking out these three possibilities to see what was going on. and dr. vanhook took a look at the x-ray. and what did he say? he said the chest x-ray shows an early infiltrate, the right pericardiac shadow, as well as air beneath the left diaphragm. and dr. kress told you, what is the infiltrate? do you remember this? the infiltrate is pneumonia. so copd, absolutely. was it a possibility? yes. but the x-rays showed what was causing it was pneumonia. dr. vanhook did not see any signs of copd, any signs of emphysema on the x-ray. he saw an infiltrate. so he answered the possibility with the answer, pneumonia. now, mr. nally had his first pulmonary function test june of 1996. and you know that was a pulmonary function test administered while he was in the hospital for a week recovering from that surgery. and he also had developed pneumonia so bad that he had to go to intensive care. you heard that pfts are usually given in an outpatient setting. and you heard that the american and the british thoracic societies recommend waiting three to six weeks after abdominal surgery before conducting a pulmonary function test. why? because the pain in the recovery can impact the reliability of that test. and that is common sense. as dr. kress demonstrated, you need to take a deep breath, hold it in, and then blow it out as hard as you can for as long as you can on a pulmonary function test. having your abdomen cut open and having your kidney and your ureter removed is probably going to limit how well you can perform on that test. on top of that surgery, having pneumonia and being put in icu is probably going to impact you as well. pneumonia makes it pretty hard to breath. being put in icu for it means it was really hard to breath. now, mr. bigger showed you -- flashed up today a reference to dr. kress where he said something about an x-ray showing some degree of copd changes. well, that is dr. kress. he is the urologist. we know that the pulmonologist looked at it, and dr. vanhook said it is pneumonia. so dr. kress tried to rely on dr. hallett here and not rely on the pulmonologist. but as you will see in a minute, when dr. hallett says something different, then dr. kress just torches the guy. he is picking and he is choosing. so dr. kress admitted that dr. vanhook, who was the pulmonologist, did not diagnose mr. nally with copd in may or june of 1996 or at any time before november 21st, 1996. the next month mr. nally sees dr. lien again. dr. lien says -- he comes in. the problems he was having back in may and june, when he was in hospital, those are gone. he had been treated for pneumonia, and those problems went away. pneumonia is temporary. copd is permanent. those problems in may and june were gone at this time. if they were copd, they could not have been gone. and he is also on no medications at this time, so he is not taking inhalers or anything to cure anything. so dr. lien reports, chest clear to percussion and auscultation. his chest is fine. and his impression is hypertension, dizziness, tobacco abuse, status post left nephrectomy. so dr. lien is saying, no symptoms at all associated with copd. he does not mention copd. he does not emphysema, no cough, no shortness of breath, no dyspnea, no sputum production. so when he goes in in july, he is not having any of these chronic symptoms. if he had copd, if it had manifested, he would have them. now, this is an interesting point on tobacco abuse that mr. bigger mentioned in his opening. mr. bigger said he showed you that with dr. hurt. i want to clarify the chain of events that led to that. you remember dr. hurt testified through his whole direct examination. they did not show him this document. ms. baker started her cross of dr. hurt. then we interrupted it to do dr. kress. i showed this document to dr. kress to demonstrate that mr. nally did not have copd. if it was that important would not -- would not dr. hurt have found it and brought it to you on direct? he did not. they did not even know about it until i put it up there. so, yeah, i put a document up there that said tobacco abuse. why? because it demonstrates he does not have copd, and it did not manifest in july. now, if they want to pick and choose and say, well, dr. lien is right here, well, then he is right on copd too. if he is right on one, he is right on both. and if he is right on both, the copd did not manifest before november 1996. mr. nally goes back for that second surgery. and, you know, at this time he sees dr. hallett. and dr. hallett says, what in september? he is on no medications. he is still not taking inhalers. if he had copd symptoms in may and june, he would be on inhalers, but he is not. and dr. hallett also says he does not have copd. and his lungs, they are clear to auscultation and percussion. so, again, in september, no chronic cough, no dyspnea, no shortness of breath, no sputum production, no copd. now, dr. kress says, with all due respect, dr. hallett is wrong. and while he relied on him for the one thing he said about an x-ray, now when he is talking about copd, dr. kress is saying he is wrong. remember what he said? he is not a radiologist? he is not. he is not a pulmonologist? that is correct. and i think you said that a urologist would know as much about the lungs as you know about kidney surgery, right? i did say that, yes. so dr. kress is trying to pick and choose from when he is going to rely on somebody and when he is not to come in here and testify. now, dr. lien, again, this is in october of 1996. he sees mr. nally. again, chest completely clear. impression, viral syndrome. he does not say copd, does not say emphysema, no chronic cough, no sputum, no dyspnea, no shortness of breath. now, when he sees him here, this is after that second surgery, so he does say that he had a cough, but it was related to a cold he developed while he was in the hospital, and that is what he says. so, again, if we look at the evidence that came in and the medical records, they have to demonstrate that it manifested by november 21st, 1996. mr. bigger showed you today a december 1996 record that had copd. i do not mean to be technical. it is the law. that is after the cutoff. prior to november 21st, 1996, there is no diagnosis of copd. and the records we just looked at, there is no chronic symptoms of copd. there is no chronic cough; there is no sputum production; there is no dyspnea or shortness of breath. now, while there are some stray references to the lung problems that mr. bigger pointed out, the consistent and greater weight of the evidence from mr. nally's pulmonologist, from his urologist, and from his treating physician, his general doctor, demonstrates that he does not have copd, and he had not manifested the symptoms. now, that is all before november of 1996. and this alone proves that it did not manifest prior to that date. but we also have the 1998 copd --or the pulmonary function test that shows he does not have copd. and dr. kress admitted that, according to the gold standard, this does not show copd. he admitted that. and we looked at the doctors who treated him in 1998, dr. martinez-salas. he said spirometry -- that is the testing -- does not reveal significant obstructive changes, and it does not reveal significant air flow obstruction. dr. martinez-salas does not mention copd in 1998. now dr. kress says, with all due respect, dr. martinez salas is wrong. you remember he even went this far as to say, and as i think you said, anyone who knows how to read a pulmonary function test would not make this conclusion? and he said, that is right. so this is another doctor here that he came in here and just torched. not only is he wrong, but he does not even know how to read these test. but dr. martinez-salas is not alone. there is also dr. gooden. dr. gooden, who was treating mr. nally for a heart condition at this time, he looked at the pulmonary function test and says he has restrictive lung disease, and there is no evidence of significant obstructive disease. again, dr. kress says dr. gooden is flat out wrong. well, i know this is 1998, but you know by now that copd is chronic and it is permanent. if mr. nally had it in 1996, he could not un-have it in 1998. and mr. nally's treating doctors, including his pulmonologist, say he does not have it in 1998, but their paid expert they brought in from chicago says everybody is wrong. quickly to 2000. there is no dispute in 2000 the pulmonary function test shows he has copd and the medical records report those chronic symptoms to support it. but before he concluded that he had copd in 2000, dr. martinez-salas referred back to 1998 and said that that pulmonary function testing revealed normal spirometry, meaning no copd. so there is no dispute that mr. nally had copd by 2000. but the question is whether he began suffering from it before november 21st, 1996. and with all due respect to dr. kress, he is the one who is wrong this time. to try to explain what we mean, the plaintiff has the burden of proof here of proving by the greater weight of the evidence that the copd manifested before november 21st, 1996. and they pointed to a couple medical records that had some mention about a lung issue going on, or something like that. so they raise it a little bit. and then we have the pulmonary function test, that even though he is recovering from his abdominal surgery, even though he just got out of the icu with pneumonia, under those it just comes in right under that level to be copd. so we will give them credit for that. and that takes him over that burden of proof. but the problem is we have dr. vanhook, the pulmonologist, never describes any symptoms of copd and does not make the diagnosis. we have dr. hallett, the urologist, who does not describe the symptoms and says conclusively, he does not have copd. so that takes it to here. and then we have dr. lien, his regular normal physician, who before november 21st, 1996 never makes a diagnosis of copd, never records that he is having a cough, sputum production, or shortness of breath. so when you consider that, that takes it back down to here. and then, finally, we know in 1998, according to the pft, he does not have copd. so that would take you -- ladies and gentlemen, the greater weight of this evidence in this case from dr. vanhook, from dr. hallett, from dr. lien, from dr. martinez-salas, from dr. gooden, the doctors who treated mr. nally, the doctors who are licensed in florida, the doctors who formed their opinions that you see in their medical records for purposes of treating and caring for mr. nally, they show you that his copd was not diagnosed and did not manifest before november 21st, 1996. for that reason, the plaintiff cannot prove their burden. now, the one thing that they try to say is, well, look, you know, this is out there. this is -- well, they have the burden of proof. they do not get the benefit of the doubt. and you saw the evidence here that they cannot overcome. so for those reasons they fail to establish class membership on this first question with regard to copd. so i think on both diseases -- and we will recap this in a minute -- they cannot prevail on the kidney cancer because it is ureter cancer, and they cannot prove that the copd manifested before november 21st, 1996. and, ladies and gentlemen, that ends this case. those facts about those medical records ends this case. you do not have to go any farther. that decides it. it decides it before we ever get into any company documents or anything else. those facts alone from mr. nally's medical records and from his treating physicians dictate the answer in this trial. now, if they were able to get over those hurdles, you would then need to consider addiction, so i'm going to talk about that. that is the next hurdle. and you need to define what "addiction" means in this case. the court is not going to define it for you. and dr. hurt came in here, and i think he offered two tests or two ways to determine if somebody is addicted. first, the heaviness of smoking index, and, second, he asked if the person experiences a loss of control over their smoking behavior. and i'm going to deal with this heaviness of smoking index first. there is two questions to this test. how soon after you wake up do you smoke your first cigarette, and how many cigarettes a day do you smoke? two questions that basically come down to this. do you do it when you get up, and do you do it throughout the day? that is what it comes down to. and no matter what your answer is to these two questions, you are dependent or addicted. it is no wonder dr. hurt always comes into court and testifies that smoker is addicted. he uses a test that you cannot fail. no matter what you answer, it says you are addicted. now, to put this in context, i changed the heading to look at some other behaviors. what if you applied this kind of a test to coffee drinking? you heard mr. nally drank coffee all the time, always caffeinated. and mrs. nally does not recall him trying to quit. but if you use these same two questions, how soon after waking up do you have a cup of coffee, and how much coffee do you drink during the day? on a test you cannot fail, every coffee drinker would be dependent. what about something else? what about the heaviness of cell phone index? how soon do you look at your cell phone after you get up in the morning? how soon do you check to see whether you got a text, an e-mail, a post? do you keep your phone with you all day? do you check it on breaks, or do you look at it at lunch? is it the last thing you look at before you go to bed at the night? now, if you have use these same two questions, everyone would be dependent on their cell phones. now, let me be clear, i am not equating coffee drinking or checking your cell phone with smoking cigarettes. i'm not at all. i'm merely using these as examples to point out that a test that makes everyone an addict is a test that becomes meaningless. mr. bigger talked about the dsm-5. and he said, dr. hurt does not use it, but dr. hurt went through the criteria of it, anyway. i guess he said he teaches students how to use it but he does not use it himself. well, on cross-examination ms. baker pointed out that the dsm-5, in it, it reports that only fifty percent of daily cigarette smokers are addicted. so the flip side of that, according to dsm, fifty percent of daily cigarette smokers are not addicted. and so i'm not surprised that dr. hurt chooses not to use that test. because he would rather use his two-question test that finds one hundred percent of daily smokers addicted. now, in addition to the two-question test, dr. hurt said the tipping point for addiction is a loss of control. loss of control means you are doing something you do not want to do. you are doing something you are trying to avoid, or you are doing something that you would otherwise stop but it is out of your control to do so. it means in the smoking situation that you have become an involuntary smoker; you have loss control over your smoking. mr. nally was not an involuntary, out-of-control smoker. did anything you heard from the witnesses who knew him paint a picture of him as somebody who was out of control? no. he was in control. he was independent. he was responsible. he always bought his own cigarettes. he would not allow his wife to buy them for him. he thought it would be demeaning to ask her to do that. he bought them at the base exchange. he would buy them 10 cartons at a time. he planned ahead to have cigarettes available to him until he would get there for his next trip. he never bummed cigarettes from another. he was going to smoke what he bought, and not someone else, and he controlled his smoking around others. you heard that when they were playing cards that mrs. nally would say, hey, get that away from me, and he would oblige and get it away from her. you heard this morning that when his former daughter-in-law kellyn would come visit, she was allergic to it, and he would not smoke around her. she never saw him smoke when she visited. now, as kellyn nally testified, no one questioned his decisions, not on smoking or anything else. he controlled those decisions. now, another of the criteria dr. hurt looked at on that dsm is -- asked, is somebody smoking more cigarettes or for a longer period of time that they intended? and he told you he cannot say that about mr. nally. he cannot say that. all of these actions are actions and evidence of control. smoking as you intend to, as you plan to, not more than you want to, and keeping your smoke away from loved ones, that is evidence of control not loss of control. and from every story we heard from mrs. nally or her son, did mr. nally sound like a man in control of his actions? absolutely. and you know that nicotine does not turn you into some out-of-control automaton. it does not permanently change your brain receptors. it does not interfere with your ability to understand the dangers of smoking. it does not interfere with your ability to choose to continue smoking or choose to try to quit. and it does not prevent you from quitting permanently. as dr. hurt admitted, over 60 million smokers have stopped smoking, addicted and nonaddicted. people can quit smoking. people can and do quit smoking every day. now, dr. hurt, to try to fit in this other test of somebody who is out of control, he tried to paint that picture about mr. nally. he tried to paint him as this person who was out of control for 50 years smoking, and he described his attempts to quit this way: he tried everything he could; he tried from the very beginning; he tried many, many times to quit; it was kind of a constant thing; it was innumerable times. ladies and gentlemen, what dr. hurt told you is just not true. you heard from mrs. nally and her son. and what did they tell you? her son remembers two times that her dad -- that his dad tried to quit. two, that is it. and it is the same with mrs. nally. i asked her, now, you talked a little bit about mr. nally's attempts to quit. it sounded like those were after the surgeries he had in 1996; is that fair? i would say, yes, that would be when he would try, because he had the patch and the gum, but i had forgotten all about it, yes. that was it. that was the testimony you heard from the people who knew mr. nally about his attempts to quit. according to the witnesses who knew him, not dr. hurt, he did not make an attempt to quit in the 1940s, 1950s, 1960s, 1970s, or the 1980s. and dr. hurt told you that the surgeon general defines a serious quit attempt as one that lasts for at least 24 hours. we did not hear about any serious quit attempt under that standard about mr. nally. dr. hurt also admitted that motivation leads to trying, and trying leads to stopping. for decades there was no evidence of mr. nally having the motivation to try to quit. and as a result he did not try. now, mrs. nally did not nag him or harass him about it. this is what she said? i think you said before that you did not believe in harassing people. not at all. and is that one of the reasons you did not talk to mr. nally about smoking? yes. to be a peacemaker makes a happy home. so you figured that was his thing to do, and you were going to -- and she said, that is his problem, and not mine. but i do not like it. it stinks. and i asked her, but it was his problem, not yours? and she said, right. it was his choice not hers. if he was going to quit, it was going to be up to him to try to quit. no one was going to tell him what to do. you heard that from kellyn nally today. he made his decisions, and nobody questioned them. and, you know, when he did make up his mind to do something how he achieved. you saw these descriptions. you heard about these from his military reviews, and the military records are all in evidence. he had determination, initiative, he was resourceful, and he could successfully accomplish any job. but the difference with these things in the military compared to smoking is mr. nally wanted to accomplish these things. and his smoking history, if he is not trying to quit, he is not making a plan to quit. and you know the things he did not try to do to quit. he did not throw out his cigarettes. he did not throw out his lighters or matches. he did not go to one of those clinics that you heard about that saw the coverage where willis lyon had those stop-smoking clinics in winter haven. he did not ask his friends or family to help him quit. he did not ask doctors to help him quit. and you heard about these triggers that keep people smoking when they are otherwise trying to stop, triggers like alcohol or coffee? he did not try to give those up. now, this was not a man who was out of control. this was a man who was just not interested in trying to quit. and i'm not blaming him, and i'm not criticizing him. his decisions were his decisions. as kellyn nally told you, nobody was going to tell him to do something he was not going to do. now, one of the things that they did not mention today but came up during the testimony was on these couple of occasions that he tried to quit, maybe he got moody or agitated. but mrs. nally told you last week that these types of mood -- when he was moody or agitated were after he had those surgeries in 1996. he was a man who was very active, working in the yard, working around the house. and after his abdominal surgeries, he could not do that as much as he wanted to before, and that made him moody and that made him agitated. you will have to decide, if the evidence shows, whether mr. nally actually quit smoking or not. i agree from the testimony and the fact witnesses he did not. but we also have the evidence from the medical records that are in evidence. time after time after 1996, 1997, mr. nally reports that he is no longer a smoker. mr. nally is telling his doctors that he stopped. and, in fact, we have the one record where mr. nally himself fills it out and says he is no longer a smoker. now, based and mr. nally's testimony and the records of the doctors who were treating him, he quit smoking. that is what that evidence is. and i'll tell you, based on the testimony from mrs. nally and her son, he never quit smoking. you will need to decide which one is right. you are the judges of the facts. if you believe the records, it shows he had the ability to control his smoking and his ability to quit. if you do not believe the records, it means mr. nally kept telling his doctors something that was not true. and then you will need to ask, why would he to that? if that is the case, i suggest that mr. nally telling his doctors that he quit smoking is another example of him exercising control, control over what he wanted to hear or not hear from his doctors, control over the fact that he did not want to be reminded to quit, so he told them he already quit, control that he knew smoking was bad for him and did not need to be told again. and since he did not ask those doctors for help to quit, it was control over whether he was going to try to quit or not. and when you take all of these things into account for mr. nally, it is clear that he was independent and he was responsible, but he was in control, in control of his smoking and in control of whether he was going to try to quit or not. he was not an involuntary smoker. so because the plaintiff cannot prove that he was addicted, they cannot prove that he met that criteria that dr. hurt said is where he lost control, they do not clear that second hurdle for class membership. the third hurdle is addiction causation. if they prove the diseases and they prove addiction, they are not done yet. there is another hurdle they have got to get over, and it is called legal cause. now, mr. bigger talked to you a little bit about the instructions. this is how the court will define it. it is a legal cause if it directly and in natural and continuance sequence produces or contributes substantially producing copd or kidney cancer, so that it can reasonably be said that but for the addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine, his copd or kidney cancer would not have occurred. now, this instruction may seem confusing. it is not something we ever talk about outside of the courtroom, and i'll admit it is a little bit confusing to me. but what i think it essentially asks you is, did his addiction, not his smoking, but did his addiction cause his copd or alleged kidney cancer? and i think the evidence in this case proves that the addiction did not. the evidence proves that the addiction was not the "but for" reason for his smoking behaviors, because before he got sick with the ureter cancer he did not try to stop smoking. so at any time before that, addiction was not keeping him smoking when he was otherwise trying not to smoke. we just do not know. now, if he had made a serious attempt to quit smoking before that and was not able to quit, you might be able to say that smoking was beyond his control and addiction was the legal cause. but because he did not make an attempt to quit, i do not think we can say that. and ask yourself this question. if he was not addicted, would he have continued to smoke? no. but i submit to you that he would have, especially because he was not trying not to smoke. so if he had no interest in quitting, it was not addiction that was keeping him smoking. this is another way to look at what those criteria are for legal cause. it must directly, it must naturally, it must continuously, and it must substantially cause those injuries. but what we saw in between is mr. nally's choices. it is his choice to start, his choice to not try to quit for decades, his choice to not ask the doctors for help, to not ask families or friends for help, and a choice to tell his doctors he already quit. now, when it comes down to it, this case is about the plaintiff seeking money on account of mr. nally's decision to do what he wanted to for years. and during mr. nally's life, she thought smoking was his problem, not her problem. she let him do as he wanted. now in this lawsuit there is -- they want to reexamine his decisions. they want to second guess his decisions and say that he was not doing as he wanted. it was not his problem. he was out of control. he could not help it. but throughout his entire life mrs. nally never questioned those decisions and whether they were his own or not. it was always his problem, not hers. and when mr. nally made that choice to smoke and no effort to quit until after 1996, his choice was the legal cause, the only legal cause. now, they showed you the concurring cause instruction that is in a handful of the instructions. i submit to you that it does not apply in the facts of this case. it is law you can consider, but i think when you look at the facts there is no concurring cause here. his choice to continue smoking and not try to quit is the only legal cause. so when we look at these two hurdles for class membership, the last two, addiction and addiction causation, not only is mr. nally not an involuntary, out-of-control smoker, but addiction was not a legal cause of his injuries. instead, the substantial, the direct cause of his smoking and his disease was his decision to do what he was going to do. so i think when you put all three hurdles together here, the plaintiff does not clear any of them. and remember, they have got to clear all three. i think the answer is "no" to all three. as i mentioned, the plaintiff did not prove that mr. nally's copd manifested before that date or that he had kidney cancer at all. he was not an involuntary addicted smoker who lost control. it was not the legal cause of his injuries. so when you look at the questions on the verdict form, the first one, whether the copd manifested on or before that, the answer to that question has to be no, based on the evidence here. and if the answer to that question is no, as mr. bigger said, do not answer question 2 as to copd. so the issue you need to decide on copd is over with the first question. you answer no, and that one is over. and then on question 2 for kidney cancer, he does not have kidney cancer. he never did. so the answer to that has to be no. now, if you found that he did have kidney cancer contrary to the medical records and his treating physicians, or you found that his copd did manifest before november 21st, 1996, you still do not check yes to no. 2. why? because he is not addicted. he did not lose control and addiction was not a "but for" cause of that. so i submit to you that your answer on copd on both of these questions, even though after you answer the one on 1, you do not answer 2, would be no, and your answer on kidney cancer is no as well. ladies and gentlemen, if you do this, this case is over. that is it. we do not proceed any further. you sign the verdict form. you hand it in, and you can go back to your normal lives and your jury service is done. and i think the evidence that we have pointed to you -- and i know it took me a long time to talk through it, but i do not want it gloss over the medical stuff. i think it is very important. i think when you look at all three, the answer to these questions has to be no. i'm going to touch quickly on question 3. and a couple observations on this. if you answered yes on question 2, it means that you would find mr. nally's addiction to be a legal cause of his copd or kidney cancer. so that means you would find that his addiction was the direct, the natural, the continuous, and substantial cause of his injuries. so if you found that, i want you to also keep in mind dr. hurt's testimony. and he testified that mr. nally became addicted before 1951, before there was any evidence that he smoked a reynolds product. and you recall that no one knows what he smoked before the lucky strikes in 1951. so according to dr. hurt, if mr. nally became addicted before there was evidence he smoked a reynolds product and if that addiction was so direct, so substantial, so strong that he had no choice but to keep smoking until he got sick, then i submit to you that the -- whoever manufactured the cigarettes is not really an issue anymore; it is the addiction. so if they are going to say that that addiction caused it and there is nothing he ever could have done about it, it would not have mattered whether he smoked a reynolds product or not. and then you understand the definition of legal cause, if it does not matter whether it was reynolds product, you cannot say that the reynolds product is the "but for" cause of that lung cancer. and i know this is somewhat confusing, but when they put the two questions side by side and want to prevail on the one, i think it makes it harder for them to prevail on the other one. so for this reason, if you get to question 3, i submit you should check no. i'm going to work through these in order. question 4 is the question of comparative fault. and if you get there, you will have already decided that mr. nally had either kidney cancer or the copd that manifested before november of 1996, that he was addicted, that addiction was a legal cause of it, and that reynolds' conduct was a legal cause of his death. and if you get that far, you are going to have to allocate responsibility between mr. nally and r.j. reynolds. and mr. bigger talked about this. but he did not tell you this. there is a couple points to keep in mind. the assignment of fault relates only to actions that were a legal cause of mr. nally's death. reynolds cannot be assigned fault for actions that were not a legal cause of his death. so these points are important, because the comparative fault percentage, it is not a global comparison of conduct. it is not, what did joseph nally do over the course of his lifetime versus all of the conduct by the tobacco industry throughout the years? it is a comparison of the actions of mr. nally and of reynolds that were a legal cause of his death. it is a very narrow inquiry. now, you may have seen things in the tobacco company documents or the public statements that you do not like. i'm sure you did. but the issue is whether those things affected mr. nally or not. if you find something reynolds did was wrong and you do not like it but it is not connected to mr. nally, it cannot be considered part of your analysis for comparative fault. and you will see in instruction 11 where plaintiff has admitted that the acts of mr. nally relating to the duration and frequency of his efforts to quit smoking were a partial legal cause of his lung cancer and death. you are instructed on that. now, i pointed this out in voir dire and opening statement. mr. bigger and mr. clark told you that they accepted responsibility for mr. nally. and i told you to listen to see if you hear any evidence about that from the witnesses in this trial. and on friday i asked mrs. nally that question, and she did not think there was any responsibility. so we have an issue of what the lawyers have told you on one hand and what mrs. nally told you on another. and i think this is an effort on one hand to get you to feel like the fair thing and the reasonable thing is to allocate fault, to allocate responsibility but, on the other hand, still tell you they do not think mr. nally should have it. i do not think the plaintiff can have it both ways. you are instructed by this instruction that mr. nally is a legal cause of his lung cancer and death. that is already decided. you are instructed he is responsible. and you know he is responsible. look at how he accepted responsibility throughout his life, with his jobs, with his military, with his children, with his new business, bookkeeping, everything. and the other thing is when he was diagnosed with lung cancer, he never placed the blame or the responsibility on reynolds or any other tobacco company. you heard this testimony. (whereupon, a video testimony excerpt was played in open court as follows:) q. did he ever talk to you about wanting to sue tobacco company after he got sick? a. no. (video testimony excerpt concluded.) mr. geise: he never said he wanted to sue. so what does that mean from mr. nally's standpoint? it means mr. nally accepted responsibility. it means mr. nally did not point the finger at anyone else. now, we are not saying his choices throughout life are right or wrong, but they were his choices. and they admit he is responsible for them. since they admit that he is a legal cause of his lung cancer and death and mr. nally never expressed any thought that anyone else should be responsible for it, i would submit that that makes one hundred percent responsible. i think that is how that has to work. and if you think about it, if somebody goes out on a friday night and you drink way too much and you wake up the next morning and feel terrible and you look in the mirror, and you look in the mirror and you are, like, who is responsible for how i feel right now? it is the person in the mirror. and if mr. nally had to assign responsibility, would he accept it? of course he would. nobody made his decisions for him. nobody could decide for him to choose to smoke. nobody could choose for him to stop smoking. mrs. nally left it up to him during his lifetime. it was his problem, not hers. so if you have get to this point on the verdict form, i ask you to give him one hundred percent responsibility for what she considered to be his problem. i want to turn now to questions 5 and 6 on the verdict form. and these are the concealment questions. and there are, essentially, two parts to these questions. first, the question is, you need to determine if information about the health risks and addictive nature of cigarettes was a secret. was it known? and, if so, you need to determine if there was a connection between something that reynolds said or did or did not say or did not do and some -- and a connection with one of mr. nally's choices. well, here, ladies and gentlemen, the information about the health risks was not a secret to mr. nally, and there is no connection between any choice he made and something reynolds did or did not do. ask this question. were the dangers of smoking a secret? now, we need to start on this before mr. nally was even born. you heard all of this from dr. proctor. you heard about the slang terms going back to the turn of the century. it was even before reynolds was a company and people knew tobacco had nicotine. it is been known for hundreds of year that it is hard to quit. you have heard about cancer sticks and coffin nails, and you heard that mr. nally was aware of the term "nicotine fit." you heard in the 1920s and 1930s from dr. hurt that people were writing and recognizing that nicotine was responsible for the compulsive use of cigarettes. you saw in 1924 the reader's digest, does tobacco injure the human body? and they answer that with an unequivocal yes. in 1938 you saw the three stooges. they had that movie scene with the coffin nail cigarette company. now, dr. proctor can call it a joke, but the material information, the stooges and all of their fans understood was that smoking could kill you and seal your coffin. that is what people knew. and it was also in time magazine the same year, coffin nail. this is not a joke. this was real news, and it was in time. mr. nally was in -- at gimpo air base in korea in the '40s, and you saw the coverage in those papers: doctors warn cigarettes cause cancerous tar, cigarettes said disease cause. you saw the coverage in reader's digest in the 1950s. we went through these with dr. proctor, cancer by the carton. he talked about how influential that was. and as mr. nally traveled in the military, the information about the risks of smoking followed him. in houston these articles, in england, across the pond, they followed him. and, not surprisingly, in the 1950s the public health officials here in the united states recognized the widespread dissemination of this information, the material information about the risks of smoking. and they observed dr. burney. our position is that we have informed the public through the excellent coverage of the press, radio, and tv. and, dr. heller, newspapers, radio, tv, and other media have done an excellent job covering this problem, and a very objective job. this is an exceedingly valuable way of informing the public. now, when pressed on these statements, dr. proctor said these were giants and pioneers in public health, but they were beating their chests when they made these statements. do you remember that testimony? well, these are the guys that were making history in the 1950s, not a guy making $4,000,000 to talk about it in 2016. these were the officials who had their boots on the ground reporting what their firsthand observation was, and they observed that the public knew. and the stories continued. 1958 in newsweek, smoking is a most serious sort of drug addiction. in the 1960s you hear about the nallys had a friend, marge richardson. she got sick, and she discussed that it was related to smoking. the 1964 surgeon general's report, here in tampa, front page above-the-fold headlines. the nallys were in taiwan, but that did not keep the story from reaching him. pacific stars and stripes, front page above the hole -- or above the fold. and they even had an editorial cartoon, the hour of decision. the air force times, as well, publicized it, the coffin for the box. now, in 1964 the air force started placing posters about the risks of smoking at the base tobacco exchanges, a warning every time mr. nally bought cigarettes. and that warning was detailed. this is the language of that poster. the risk of developing lung cancer increases with the duration of smoking and the number of cigarettes smoked per day. and, you know, from 1966 on every pack had a warning label on it. this was the one in 1966. so in addition to the posters where mr. nally was buying his cigarettes, he was getting a warning in his hand every time he picked up his pack of cigarettes. he could not buy a pack or pull a cigarette out without seeing a warning. and you heard in 1967 the surgeon general wrote an article where he said that behavioral scientists called this psychological addicted. it is out there. the information is not a secret. the nallys moved to winter haven in 1968. the label changes in 1970. the information continues to be publicized in the local winter haven papers. we showed you that. the warnings changed in the 1980s. we showed you that. kite after kite, not tail after tail, kite after kite in mr. nally's sky telling him and the public about the risks of smoking and the addictive nature of cigarettes. this is material information, material information that was known and available to mr. nally. so on this first prong, the first part of these two questions, the plaintiff cannot prove that material information about the health effects or addictive nature were secrets from mr. nally. they were not. and when mrs. nally would tell him that smoking was not good for him, did he disagree? no. he knew. and he had this material information. but when mr. bigger asked, would the information --would it have made a difference to him, he had this information. and at no point during any of these things did he try to quit smoking. this information was not causing him to do something; it was not causing him to act. now, there is another component to these questions and another reason your verdict on these questions has to be no. to prevail on these questions 5 and 6, the plaintiff also has to make a connection between reynolds' conduct on one side and mr. nally on the other. and for purposes of the verdict form, if you have look at instructions 12 and 13, this is -- this connection is called legal cause, and it is called reasonable reliance. when you look at the jury instructions they will say that mr. nally must rely and any reliance must be reasonable. now, no matter what reynolds said or did, the plaintiffs paid experts are going to come in here and find fault with our conduct. they are going to tell you about all kinds of bad of conduct, even if they had no way or no attempt to tie it up with mr. nally, but the plaintiff has to. the plaintiff has to prove that reynolds' conduct caused mr. nally, not some other smoker, to take some action, to rely on something that was or was not said, and get a disease caused by smoking that he otherwise would not have gotten. they have to make that connection. if the plaintiff cannot make that connection, they will fail to meet their burden of proof on these two claims. and the evidence you heard does not let them connect any dot between the conduct of reynolds and a choice mr. nally made. through days of testimony with dr. hurt and dr. proctor, they threw as much stuff as possible against the wall hoping some of it would stick. they did it again this morning. and it is not hard. it is not hard at all. there are a lot of bad statements, stupid statements, and things that make the tobacco industry look real bad. and they played them all for you. and while it is not hard to attack the tobacco companies for those things, what is hard is proving that one of those attacks had anything to do with mr. nally's answer decisions. dr. proctor spent hours telling you about statements from these industry representatives, from reynolds and lorillard, ctr, and tirc, and ti. but the plaintiff was never able to make a connection between one of those statements and mr. nally. the plaintiff's testimony and her son's testimony confirmed that. we asked them, did he ever hear of these things? did he ever say anything about these things? did he ever rely on them? and across the board the answer every time was no. they need to make a connection, and the evidence shows there is no connection. mr. nally never heard of these organizations and did not hear or read anything they said. mr. nally made that clear. (whereupon, a video testimony excerpt was played in open court as follows:) q. so throughout the trial we have heard testimony about the tobacco industry research council or the council for tobacco research or the tobacco institute. you and mr. nally never had any discussions about that? a. no, uh-uh (negative response). q. and he never told you that he saw a statement from any of those organizations? a. no, he sure did not. q. he never said he relied on anything that r.j. reynolds or lorillard ever said or did not say? a. no, uh-uh (negative response). (video testimony excerpt concluded.) mr. geise: i know this takes people back decades to try to answer these questions. but in this trial, to recover $6- to $12,000,000 that they are asking for, they have to give you proof. they have to give you evidence. and this is evidence that they did not make that connection. i'm sorry that it is hard to come up with the evidence, but the rule is you need to. now, they will argue, look, we do not have to come up with that. you can infer it. look at this instruction that will say, oh, it is a direct -- you can go ahead and infer it. well, someone who has proof does not need to rely on an inference or an assumption. and even so, you cannot infer it here. why? well, you saw dozens of statements from the tobacco companies. and there is no evidence that mr. nally saw those or that he ever parroted back anything that was in one of those. there is no evidence. you heard this. (whereupon, a video testimony excerpt was played in open court as follows:) q. did he ever tell you that he thought cigarette smoking was healthy? a. no, uh-uh (negative response). q. did he ever dispute that cigarette smoking was bad for his health? a. no. (video testimony excerpt concluded.) mr. geise: if they want you to infer that some of those statements made a difference, even though they cannot connect it, it would have manifested itself in something mr. nally said at some point over the decades, but he never did. now, i've got to talk about advertisements for a little bit. i told you in opening statement you would see a lot of ads, and you did. and they tried to upset you with allegations about using santa claus or allegations about youth marketing and talk about ad themes that were used for a variety of consumer goods, but i want to focus on kent, because that is what this whole board goes to. the plaintiff wants you to infer or guess that mr. nally switched to kents in the 1950s because of ads that talked about safety or, as dr. proctor said, they did not use that term specifically; they talked about health reassurance. but the facts do not support that here. first, mrs. nally told you why he switched to kent. (whereupon, a video testimony excerpt was played in open court as follows:) q. and i think you said that he -- what you took from him is that he thought kents tasted better? a. yes, i think that that -- uh-huh (affirmative response). i do not really know, you know, but that is one of the things i think he said. q. and you do not remember him saying anything about kent having a filter, do you? a. no, uh-uh. (indicates negatively). q. or anything about kents being safer or healthier? a. no, i do not think so. (video testimony excerpt concluded.) mr. geise: that is the evidence in this case. we know what mr. nally's thoughts were. mrs. nally told us. he thought kents tasted better. and even though there is no evidence, they want you to think there is something there. that is the direct evidence. but even this circumstantial evidence does not support this inference they want you to draw. why? kent's market share. i talked to dr. proctor about this. if you look at when these health reassurance ads were supposed to be out there between '52 and '56, during that time period kent's market share goes to one percent, and it stayed there, meaning 99 percent of the cigarettes smoked were something other than kent cigarettes. you cannot infer somebody is doing something if 99 percent of the people are not doing it. now, the kent market did go up in 1956, but dr. proctor told you why. it was in response to a reader's digest article, an article reader's digest did based on their own testing and they published it. lorillard had no connection to it. so if you want to infer a connection, you can infer a connection between reader's digest and the kent market but not lorillard and anything. and if they want you to believe that everyone thought kent was the safest cigarette and everybody was mesmerized by these ads. the market went up at its peak to eight percent. you still had 92 percent of the people who did not think that. so you cannot infer that it had an impact on the public if only eight percent of the people at most could have thought that, when 92 percent of the people; did not. dr. proctor could not link any ad or any statement to mr. nally because he did not know anything about him. we asked the witnesses who did, and they said he never talked about advertisements or said ads had anything to do with their decisions. those admissions sealed the deal on this issue of advertising. and ask yourself this. if there was any evidence that mr. nally did rely on some statement or did do that, would not they have given that evidence to dr. proctor or dr. hurt so they could come in here and talk to you about it? of course they would have, but they did not because they cannot. it does not exist. so use your common sense here and focus on the facts about joseph nally when the plaintiff cannot produce a single witness to say he heard, he read, he saw, or he relied on anything reynolds did or did not say. do not infer otherwise, because what they need to do is they have to make this connection. they have to make a chain that goes from the conduct, the concealment, or the agreement to conceal, and that conduct and mr. nally's death. the evidence in this case showed you that they could not make that connection. there was no evidence of that at all. there is no connection, there is no proof of reliance, and no proof of reasonable reliance. they did not prove those claims. so if we go to these two questions, i submit that the answer to these has to be no. it has to for a couple of reasons. first, because mr. nally knew the material facts about the health risks of smoking and the addictive nature of cigarettes, the answer must be no, on that reason alone. secondly, because there is no reliance, there is no connection, there is no legal cause between mr. nally and something reynolds said or did not say, the answer has to be no. further -- and i think mr. bigger alluded to this -- if you check yes to either question 5 or 6, you will be wiping out any bit of responsibility that you thought was fair in question 4. it would be completely wiped out. that means if you were to check yes on either five or six, there will be no responsibility whatsoever on mr. nally, none. and even though mr. bigger started this case in voir dire by telling you, absolutely, there is responsibility; we accept responsibility, when they ask you to check yes on these questions, it means they are trying to erase any of that responsibility that they said they accepted. even five percent -- even five percent suggests to you that the answer on 5 and 6 has to be no. they cannot have it both ways. if they accept responsibility, the answer to these two questions has to be no. now, if you find everything that i have said in the last hour and almost a half to be unpersuasive and decide to return a verdict for mr. nally, you will have to determine an amount of damages in question 7. and you will have to determine the amount of damages you want to award to her for mr. nally's death about 14 years ago at the age of 73. and this is hard. we all feel compassion. you saw when i asked mrs. nally questions, we all wish her the best. there is no doubt about that. but compassion and good wishes are not reasons to exceed common sense and good judgment. your instruction tells you that there is no exact standard and that any such award should be fair and just in light of the evidence. it cannot be a number that somebody pulls out of a hat. and mr. bigger asked for a range between $6,000,000 and $12,000,000. now, one thing to keep in mind, this is not a question of who the defendant is for purposes of compensatory damages. it is not a question of whether reynolds is a big company or a small company. if you find reynolds liable, the question is solely about what damages does mrs. nally have. so if there was a different defendant on this side of the case, would they be asking for 6 million or $12,000,000 or are they basing it on the fact that it is a big corporation? because whatever their request, it needs to be grounded in the evidence with respect to mrs. nally's damages without respect to who they are asking. now, you did not hear much evidence in this case to support a request for millions of dollars. you hear that mrs. nally has to have some neighbors help her with the yard work, and she had to hire a handy man to come in and do some plumbing and other things around the house, and you heard that it was a house that they moved into in 1968 and it was bought and paid for. and you know that at the time that mr. nally passed away, he had already retired from working and so he was done with that. and, ladies and gentlemen, i do not doubt that mrs. nally misses him every day. i do not doubt that at all. but we all have miss loved ones that we have lost in our lives every day. but missing a loved one does not equate to a request for 6- to $12,000,000. and you are also instructed that sympathy cannot play a role in your verdict, and i think when you leave sympathy out of it, there is not much evidence of damages in this case. now, mr. bigger suggested that one way you can calculate damages is by giving mrs. nally a penny for every second. i suggest to that you that that kind of calculation is not a calculation that reasonable people do when they plan the amount of money they want to leave for those if they have not to die. life insurance policies, they are not calculated on the basis of a penny per second. pension plans are not calculated on the basis of a penny per second. 401(k)s are not calculated on the basis of a penny per second. that is something that you heard here for calculation of damages. and instead of using that equation, i suggest you using the rationale behind those other policies of insurance or pension plans. and i think that would suggest an award in the thousands, not in the millions. so if you make an award and you decide to compensate mrs. nally, please compensate her based on the evidence that you heard using your good j udgment. i have just a few minutes left to talk to you. i can hear my stomach grumbling, so i'm sure you are getting hungry. but if you get all the way to the end of this verdict form, you have to decide whether punitive damages are warranted. and if we get that far, you will have already fully compensated mrs. nally for her loss. now, punitive damages are not to about compensation or making someone whole; they are about more money. they are about more money in this case for mrs. nally. they are in addition to the damages that would fully compensate her, and they can only be awarded for conduct was that a legal cause of the harms suffered. and punitive damages are designed to punish and deter, punish for conduct that is tantamount to a reckless disregard. and you heard that the plaintiff has a higher level of proof here called clear and convincing. and that is going to be your instruction. this requires evidence that is more compelling and persuasive. it requires evidence that is precise, explicit, lacking in confusion, and of such weight that it produces a firm belief or conviction. and, ladies and gentlemen, despite all of the bad things that mr. bigger wants to talk about, i do not think they come close to meeting the burden in this case. some of things that you heard from dr. proctor that you need to keep in mind. i guess this is one of the things you heard first from -- i guess was kristy leung who mr. bigger talked about. lorillard has pre-cleared its ads with the ftc beginning in 1958. if you were troubled with ads with celebrities and athletes, they stopped doing that in 1964. if you did not like the radio or tv ads, those stopped in '71. if you did not like billboards, those have been gone through the '90s, and kent, in fact, is no longer advertised at all. so there is no need to punish or deter on advertising. that is already changed. dr. hurt and dr. proctor showed you a lot of memos, from bench scientists and other reynolds employees, but we had to show you this one. this is from 1968 from the president of reynolds to the head r&d telling them, if there is a safer cigarette, let us continue and increase our efforts in this program. please prepare a plan to carry it out. this memo was not prepared to be a trial exhibit. it was a directive to continue, which means the work had already started, and to increase efforts to develop a safer cigarette. and you heard about some of those efforts from dr. proctor. with regard to reynolds, he told you that dr. rodgman was the first to identify a variety of compounds and constituents in tobacco smoke. reynolds published the methods to -- that they invented to identify those. he submitted them to the surgeon general's committee. he gave a speech to them at the american chemical society. and you probably remember when i showed them to dr. proctor, that he even drew then benzo[a]pyrene and those other things. he published it. the same thing was going on at lorillard. they worked with dr. wynder. they supplied dr. wynder with those cigarettes he used for those 1953 tests. and they worked on phenols. that is what they focused on, and the thought phenols were a cilastatin. they would paralyze the cilia in your lung and your trachea and it could lead to lung disease. and dr. spears published on methods to identify and remove those phenols. they did not keep that research secret. and t he 1964 surgeon general, after this was submitted to them, they thanked them. they thanked the companies for their submission. now, i have to talk about filters, because throughout the entire time that mr. nally smoked, the public health community was encouraging people to switch to filters. they were telling people they thought filters were safer. and part of that was based on the american cancer society's own research on filters. they were doing those epidemiological studies. the tobacco company was not involved in what the american cancer society was doing. and they were saying filters reduced risk. and they were also telling the companies to make them, to make filters. now, you heard today that internally the companies were calling filters a gimmick. you might remember, i asked dr. proctor specifically, can you point to any record reynolds has where they called a filter a gimmick? he said no. i said the same thing for lorillard. can you point to a document? he said no. and then despite what you heard earlier, that filters do not work, filters do not do anything, dr. proctor told you something different. do you remember the first constituent i think he talked about on direct was this polonium 210? and he talked about this radioactive substance that can get into tobacco, and it gets there through the fertilizer, if something is grown in it, the fertilizer can put that in there? so i asked him on cross a couple things. and he told me, one, that the surgeon general has known for over 50 years that polonium is in tobacco smoke. they know about it. and then dr. proctor admitted that yes, the surgeon general recognizes that filters reduce the amount of polonium. now, do filters make cigarettes safer? i cannot say that. do they make it safe? definitely not. why? because every pack of cigarettes since 1966 has had the same warning on it, whether it is filtered or unfiltered. you saw in the 1980s how reynolds turned their attention to cigarettes that heated instead of burned tobacco to reduce the level of carcinogens. dr. proctor told you about that. you saw where reynolds -- we talked a lot about flue curing in this case, dr. proctor did. reynolds discovered a way to cure tobacco to lower tobacco specific nitrosamines. and reynolds published it and shared it with the world, and even retrofitted barns to do it. you heard about publications. ctr did all this research, about 7,000 peer reviewed articles, articles that appeared in all these journals, articles that are cited by the surgeon general's reports. and they funded folks who went on to become nobel laureates 10 times over. and reynolds and lorillard individually had articles cited by the surgeon general's report. you heard about reynolds' book on premier when they put that new cigarette together. it was a huge book. and ms. baker talked with dr. hurt about the book reynolds put out on the biology of nicotine that talked about those nicotinic receptors. overall, this is not a record of wanton conduct or disregard for human life. this is a record of trying to lower the risks of what is an inherent risky product. cigarettes are inherently risky, but they are also legal. this is a record of a contribution to science that was recognized by the public health community. there were some successes, there were some failures, but reynolds was trying. and trying to lower the risks of an inherently risky but legal product should not be punished or deterred. you heard that these organizations, ctr, ti, they are all gone. they were disbanded long ago. you heard in this case about secret documents. they are secrets no more. there are 80 million pages available. dr. proctor told and you dr. hurt told you they are available on a public website. so after the judge releases from your service in this case, if you want to, you can go home and you can search all 80 million pages if you want. in the past, you saw where industry representatives would challenge the findings from different public health people like the surgeon general. not anymore. you saw in ms. leung's deposition, the company website has a link to all those reports from the surgeons general, from the fda, from the ftc. you can get a link to them there. ladies and gentlemen, looking at all of this, there is no need to punish or deter for changes that already took place. so if you get to this point and you have already fully compensated mrs. nally, the evidence does not suggest awarding more money. it is not clear and convincing. the plaintiff has not met that higher burden of proof. so i submit if you get to question 8, your answer under the evidence in this case should be no. if you check no, no matter what you did on the other questions, your service will be over. your service for this trial will be done. if you check yes, there will be another phase. there will not be as many witnesses, but it will be more time, more days, more attorney argument. the plaintiff did not meet this higher burden to go to another phase of this trial. in jury selection, each of you committed to holding the plaintiff to her burden of proof, and that if the evidence warranted, you committed to your ability to enter a verdict in favor of reynolds. at the end of this trial, i think the evidence compels a verdict in reynolds' favor on every question. as mr. nally's doctors and medical records told you, he had ureter cancer, not kidney cancer, and he was not diagnosed with copd before november 21st, 1996, nor did he suffer from symptoms related to that chronic disease before that date. he was in control. he was responsible. he did what he wanted to when it came to his smoking. it was his decision, not anyone else's. he was not an out-of-control addict. addiction did not keep him smoking when he was otherwise trying to quit. and since he did not try to quit until after he came down with the disease, addiction was not the but-for cause or legal cause of his injuries. mr. nally is not a class member. in addition, the risks of smoking and addiction were not secrets. you saw all the public coverage. nor was there any evidence of a connection of something reynolds said or did not say and some action mr. nally took. the evidence compels a verdict for reynolds on every question. now, this is the final chance i get to speak to you in this trial. as the plaintiff with the burden of proof, mr. bigger gets a rebuttal. and as i've stood here, i can see he is writing down notes to respond to things that i've said in my closing argument. but i do not get a chance to respond to him again. i would ask one of you or all of you, when you go back to deliberate, to remember how ms. baker and i have put on the other side of the story repeatedly throughout this trial, how we have respond on documents, on statements, on evidence, to show you things in many cases that they did not want you to see. and i'd ask you to keep the full story in mind as you deliberate and answer whatever mr. bigger has left to say the way you think i would answer him. and finally, ladies and gentlemen, i want to end the way i began. and that is by thanking you. you have made more of a contribution to this society, to this county, to our process than many jurors ever dream of doing. and it may be a nightmare for people that have to serve this long. but you have done it. you have been on time, you have taken notes, you have paid attention, and you have been patient with us. so for that, again, i want to thank you.