9 mr. uustal: the first time cindy became critically ill was 2009, but she pulled through. she went back to work. she fought her way through rehab and then went back to work and she lived on her own on oxygen for years. this june she got very sick again. you heard that dr. singer described it as a near fatal event. but she pulled through and fought through rehab and got home. the day this trial started she went back in the hospital and she was intubated and then she got better. you heard about that last week. the tube came out. but on friday when her brother testified he told you that things had taken a turn for the worse again. she had to be reintubated. when she got the tube out last week, it looked like 1999 in june. this is a deposition you saw that was taken just a month ago. (video clip was played and taken down to the best of the reporter's ability as follows:) voice: nobody has told me i had a life expectancy of 24. who knows. i'm going to live. i'm a fighter, i told you that, one way or another. (video clip concluded.) mr. uustal: she is only 65. she is always fought off infections before. but they did have to reintubate her. and then this sunday one of the doctors in the medical record recorded the prognosis as terminal. so we have been trying to get you the records as they come in. we obviously do not get them immediately, but that is the latest record you have. and based on this, you can -- and you need to disregard the testimony that we presented to you on her future life care needs, her life care plan and the medical treatment that she would need over the next six to ten years should she live that long. dr. coopersmith told you that he, you know, he was doing his best to come up with a number but that no one really knows. and that is still true. no one knows. but we have to prove anything in this case by the greater weight of the evidence as more likely than not. and at this point with the record that says terminal, you cannot award anything from that life care plan. we agree with that. so why does this trial matter even right now to cindy? this litigation started almost 20 years ago. the plaintiffs were a group of smokers and they proved that smoking was addictive and that cigarettes were harmful. it was not admitted. it was proved in a court of law. and then after that went all the way to the supreme court those group of smokers had to proceed and continue with the case each on their own. and cindy did that. she had her first trial in 2009 that was just her divided into two phases and again she proved -- three week trial, the first trial was a year, you did not hear any of that evidence. you are getting findings from these trials. so you do not have to sit through a year of evidence. you do not have to sit through three weeks of evidence. and those findings of those prior juries are binding on you. and this jury in 2009 in those two phases found that she was addicted, that the cigarettes were defective that she smoked and that the conspiracy that philip morris engaged in to defraud smokers contributed to her emphysema. that is established. so for that reason what you are deciding in this trial is, one, how that harmed her, what her emphysema has done to her, and two, should a company that engages in an intentional conspiracy, who lies about a deadly addictive drug and that causes untold suffering and harm from those lies, should that be punished? and philip morris has told you in opening statement that in their view the answer to that is no. it was a long path. it was a long way for anyone to go, but cindy is a fighter. and we are so close now to the finish line. she is going to finish this lawsuit, and she is still going to make a difference in this world. so let me just give you a summary of the evidence. i'm not going to spend too long on this because you have already seen the evidence. i just want to put it together in a chronological way that you have not seen it before. there was a health scare here. and i want to be -- first of all, we do not dispute that there was plenty of information in the public about the possible harmful effects of smoking. that was the whole reason they started the conspiracy was the first health scare. we do not dispute that at all. and, in fact, in 2009 cindy admitted that she was also at fault. she admitted that. and the jury agreed and found her partially at fault. she said she should have quit. but they should have quit lying. so this was in the news. this was big news about the harmful -- possible harmful effects of smoking. and so that is why with that health scare the presidents and the ceos of all the major tobacco companies came together at the plaza hotel in new york city for weeks in december 1953. they stayed through christmas. there were research directors from the corporations there and the press -- public relations company, because this was a public relations problem for them. and so during the course of this weeks of actually the presidents and ceos of major american corporations all meeting together and their research directors they came up with a plan. but the first thing i want to make it clear, forget about all the scientific articles in their files, all the tobacco companies showing the tests they did, showing what they knew about smoking, the -- right there in the plaza hotel the public relations firm talked to the executives and the -- specifically the research directors of the cigarette companies. and two of the comments that they recorded tell you what the cigarette companies knew even then on those two issues. "it is fortunate for us that cigarettes are a habit they cannot break." i'm not even going to talk about the fortunate part. but they knew. a habit they cannot break. they did not say it is a habit that is hard to break. a habit they cannot break. and two, one of them said, "boy, would not it be wonderful if our company was the first to produce a cancer-free cigarette." how much money would they make if you can sell an addictive drug that is no longer deadly? but the point is they knew that it was harmful. so what did they decide to do? and the whole conspiracy that lasted 50 years was based on this, reassure the smoker. maybe there is a risk but it is not something to worry about right now. you can always worry about later, and it is so small, it is too infinitesimal to worry about. should you eat butter or not eat butter, maybe butter is bad for you, that is what they wanted people to think about cigarettes. and that was the genius in that time frame. so they can still come in here and show you -- and it is true there were lots of things in the press about cigarettes being harmful but the genius of what they did was to take that and make people feel is was not a giant, it is a small acceptable risk, like eating butter. too infinitesimal to worry about, that is what they wanted to convince people. let the scientists do the worrying for us, that is their business. and meanwhile let us go on eating, working, playing, smoking, relaxing, and living a good life every day. so as part of the public relations push you saw they published this frank statement. the point i want to focus on is the second sentence that we pulled out. "we believe the products we make are not injurious to health." they had just said, they had just said -- i'll slow down. i apologize -- the research directors, boy, would not it be great if we could produce the first cancer-free cigarette. and you have seen through dr. cummings what was in their files. cindy was seven years old in 1955, a couple years after that meeting in the plaza hotel. what does all this matter to her? you do have to take a moment and understand the world she grew up in, okay. she had already formed an idea of what the world was like. and she literally saw hundreds of times a day people she respected picking up a cigarette. how could it be so horrible of a thing to do, so deadly, so crazy, when everywhere around her, her dad, ministers, judges, doctors, everywhere around her people smoking? and to say that we cannot understand if we did not live at the time or may even be hard to remember, cigarette advertising was just omnipresent, the largest single advertiser in the country. and all those messages she is getting. and those are sophisticated advertising messages designed to appeal to people. so that is how she is formed. yeah, cigarettes, maybe somebody is saying that something could be wrong, but she is willing -- she is a perfect victim for which they set up for people like this. just a couple of the ads from that -- if we could show it real quick, baron. (video clip was played and taken down to the best of the reporter's ability as follows:) voice: tens of thousands of doctors, doctors in all parts of the country in every state of the union, doctors in every branch of medicine were asked: what cigarette do you smoke, doctor? brand named most was camel. yes, according to the survey, more doctors smoke camel. voice: when you change to philip morris, you will feel better. voice: did you say i'll feel better smoking philip morris? voice: yes, you will feel better. voice: lucy. voice: yes, dear. voice: give me a cigarette, will you? voice: do not say cigarettes, say philip morris. voice: oh, is there any other kind? voice: not for you there is not. nothing but the best for mr. ricardo. you see how easy it is to keep a man happy. why not give your husband a carton of philip morris cigarettes. voice: do you inhale? then you are better off smoking philip morris, and here's how you can prove it. light up a philip morris, take a puff, get a good mouthful of smoke and slowly let the smoke come to -- voice: i got a better idea. let us take a winston break. voice: that is it, winston is the one filter cigarette that delivers flavor 20 times a pack. winston has got that filter blend. voice: yeah, fred. voice: i tell ya, pearl, winston is good smoking. sure wish you could taste it. voice: i am tasting it, granny. voice: the dickens you say. voice: benson & hedges 100s are the new longer filter cigarettes, three puffs longer, four puffs longer, maybe five puffs longer than king size. once you get the hang of them. (video clip concluded.) mr. uustal: so these are all different cigarette companies and, you know, it is really impossible to recreate the constant tv advertising and really give you an idea of what it was like, but billboards and magazines and everywhere. and lots of health ads suggesting of doctors and health and why this particular cigarette is better. and these are all going to be in evidence. and famous people and movie stars smoking. and it is just -- the idea was created intentionally that smoking is an acceptable risk, an infinitesimal risk, not that it is proven to be safe. so that carried through until 1964 when again another health scare, the surgeon general report. and, yes, it was covered, it was out there. it was a lot, that is the whole reason they are doing the conspiracy. so they had to come up with a new plan. they had to change things a little bit. so at this point -- and by the way, i've tried here in this presentation to focus on philip morris documents because of the cross of dr. cummings about documents in other tobacco company files. but they got together, they met, they planned. it was a conspiracy. when you engage in a legal -- when you engage in an illegal conspiracy, you are responsible for the acts of all the other conspirators. if you conspire to rob a bank, you cannot say, well, i was not the one digging the tunnel. if it is in furtherance of the conspiracy you are responsible for all the acts of the conspiracy. so at this point they said, look, we need to get a psychological crutch and a self-rationale to give smokers so they can continue smoking. study the psychology of the smoker in search of information that could increase corporate profits. and they stumbled upon the illusion of filtration. see, because this was a time we are putting men into space and science seems like they can solve anything. how could it not solve the cigarette problem if there is one? and people were willing to believe that. the problem is on the bottom we have the philip morris internal document that is in evidence that you will see, "present technology does not permit the selective filtration of particulate smoke." they knew that. you heard later how the surgeon general eventually figured it out, but they knew it right in 1961. still, they are telling, again and again, you can count on the cigarette companies to take anything out of your cigarettes if science ever really finds any such hazard in the wonderful tobacco leaf. message after message because it works. they stumbled on that, the illusion of filtration, and it worked. and they say, "the belief appears to be widely held that filtered cigarettes are less hazardous." it worked. what they were saying worked, not the filters. even convinced the government. and remember, the surgeon general eventually said, we got fooled. but at that time they are saying, hey, yeah, smoke a filter. in 2010 the surgeon general says filters did not create morbidity, immortality, it did not decrease -- i'm sorry, it did not decrease disease or death. used by the tobacco industry as a tool to undermine prevention, it is not just me saying it, it is not just the prior juries, surgeon general, and unfortunately it took us a long time to realize what the cigarette manufacturers already knew. and you saw documents that said we just could not anticipate how the designers, the people who designed the cigarettes could figure out ways to make cigarettes more addictive and get around everything we were trying to do, all the time knowing the present technology did not allow it. so that was the filter. the filter fraud, as dr. cummings called it. and by the way, dr. cummings, dr. cummings has written parts of surgeon general reports, it is been his career, public health. that yearlong trial he testified twice for free. he is testifying here for free. public health is important to him. and there is one single greatest threat to the public health in the united states, and it is in this courtroom right now. but they come up with -- call it the filter fraud. but there is a second strategy, doubt and confusion. because remember they said we just need a self-rationale to give the smoker an excuse, a psychological crutch to continue smoking. because the nicotine addict, highly addicted nicotine addict, and dr. cummings explained how there is different levels of nicotine addiction based on when you first start smoking and based on your genetics. some people are more susceptible to nicotine addiction than other people. but the highly addicted nicotine addict, and this is in philip morris documents too, will choose nicotine over food in times of starvation. the brain actually physically changes and the body craves nicotine more than food. that is why you see, and i'm sure you have seen this, some people who after they have had some horrible smoking-related illness they cannot even smoke through their month, they are still smoking through a hole in their throat. but that is the highly addicted nicotine addict. and all they had to give, certainly the highly addicted, but even people who are less addicted was an excuse, the psychological crutch. and they figured out how to do it.. doubt is our product, that is what we are going to sell more of now. if we sell doubt, do not worry, we will sell cigarettes. the most important type of story, just remember the tobacco institute, center for tobacco research, these are the fraudulent organizations, propaganda organizations they set up in 1953 at the plaza hotel which in the year 1998 we killed as -- mr. mccarter: objection, your honor, to the "we killed." the court: sustained. stick to the evidence, sir. mr. uustal: but they are putting stories out in the news and in newspapers, and they say the most important type of story is which gives doubt on the cause-and-effect theory of disease and smoking. keyword is confusion. from 1954 to 1998, and i'm using those dates because that was in the surgeon general report, they spent a billion dollars on those organizations with that propaganda. they were sending out monthly propaganda newsletters to a million people. the influence makers, people in congress and doctors and leaders in the community all over the country. just some of the things they were sending out, oh, smoking is related to -- is linked to cancer? well, march births are linked to cancer. these are the type of studies. they say, oh, epidemiologically they can prove that if you are born in march obviously that is not a cause of lung cancer, just like smoking, it is just a statistical fluke. and then surgeon general said between 1940 and 2005, i have to have those years because that is the number they give us, they spent, the tobacco companies 250 billion dollars on advertising creating a world reinforcing their message. so what does 250 million -- billion, billion dollars buy? well, in 1967 we found out. the government looked into it and it said, "the public is subjected to an endless barrage of radio and television commercials that keep pounding away on a single theme," the theme, part of the conspiracy, "suddenly but effectively the message is delivered that the health hazards of cigarette smoking are exaggerated and nonexistent." that is the conspiracy in a nutshell. and that message was subtly but effectively delivered, not just in their billion dollars of propaganda, but also in their 250 billion dollars of advertising. and this is 1967, right before cindy started to smoke. and they make another interesting point. it is not well known about the addictive nature of smoking. and it is certainly not communicated in any of these ads. and if someone is trying to make a decision, a young person, should i try just one cigarette, that is something they have a right to hear. but this is the time, around the time when cindy tried her first cigarette. and it is confirmed in their files, okay. it is not just dr. cummings. it is not just me. it is not just the government. they confirmed, "very few consumers are aware of the effects of nicotine." actually, i'm not sure if this is a philip morris document. this is brown and williamson. this is not philip morris. but the point is, brown and williamson, a tobacco company, a conspirator of theirs, is telling us that the government is right, that dr. cummings is right, "at this time very few consumers are aware of the effects of nicotine, it is addictive nature and that nicotine is a poison." and that is 1970, two years after cindy started smoking. and cindy was one of those people. at this point in your life had you ever heard of nicotine? no. she never even heard the word. now, just want to stop here for a second because you have heard evidence on addiction, and the reason you are hearing this evidence is because one of the factors in deciding punitive damages is any other circumstances that you want to consider in whether the defendant should be punished more or less, but it is not to decide whether she was at fault or how much she was at fault. that is already decided. it is in the instructions the judge will give you. the prior jury heard evidence that you did not and you must accept those findings. and the judge is going to take your verdict and apply those findings about her fault to it. and she was at fault and she has always admitted that she was at fault. she should have quit. but they should have quit lying. so the prior jury found the conspiracy was a cause of her emphysema. let me talk about the health -- see, these were not warnings when she started smoking. they were changed. remember, it says "warning" later. when she picked up her first cigarette pack out of a vending machine, first of all, it was not on a poster this big. even today -- you can see these are philip morris brands that we had yesterday -- those warnings are on there, but they are not huge boards. mr. mccarter: objection, your honor. gets into preemption. sorry to interrupt, counsel. it gets into preemption. the court: i've given you legal instructions on this already, ladies and gentlemen. you may continue, sir. mr. uustal: so that is the first point, even today. they showed them to you because they want you to see a giant board. but she did not see a giant board. second thing is it did not say warning like it does now. it said something very interesting, very, very interesting. "caution: cigarette smoking may be hazardous to your health." now whose message is that? "may be hazardous to your health." may be. may be or it may not be. (video clip was played and taken down to the best of the reporter's ability as follows:) voice: cigarette smoking may be hazardous to your health, it may not be; we just do not know. voice: i do not know, frankly, i think that smoking may be hazardous, it may not be. voice: smoking may be hazardous, it may not be. no one, including tv 7, knows for certain. voice: it may be or it may not be, we do not know. voice: i do not know if cigarettes are bad or they are not bad. voice: we do not know what causes the illness that has been attributed to cigarette smoking. voice: i'm saying that the science to date and over 100 million dollars of our industry indicates that there is no causal... (video clip concluded.) mr. uustal: it may be or it may not be that is their message, and it is right there on the cigarette pack. so did it work? yeah. ftc did a study, 1967, right about the time that she picked up her first cigarette. "the warning label on the cigarette packages has not succeeded in overcoming the prevalent attitudes that cigarette smoking created and maintained by the cigarette companies through their advertisements, particularly the barrage of commercials on television which portray smoking as harmless and enjoyable, not habit-forming with no hazards to health." it is tough for a tiny little warning label that happens to be consistent with their message and that you would not even look at when you are picking up a cigarette pack to open it, to fight 250 billion dollars in advertising and a billion dollars of the most sophisticated propaganda, in this country at least. again, it is already decided about she was at fault partially, but that is already decided. the issue of fault is not for you. i want to discuss briefly about how addiction drives disease. social smokers who through genetic luck or other factors do not become addicted, they just get way less exposure. if you are lucky enough not to be addicted and you smoke here and there, you get -- over a lifetime you get so much less exposure than someone like cindy who has got to smoke first thing in the morning, last thing at night. she wakes in the middle of the night. she cannot even sit through a whole movie without getting that nicotine fix. so she gets so much exposure. that is how addiction drives disease. nicotine is one of the most addictive drugs on the face of the planet. right now 45 million smokers, way more than half, want to quit. but in any given year less than 3 percent succeed for a whole year. the illegal drugs that philip morris said in response to the 1984 surgeon general's report, oh, do not compare us to those illegal drugs. people can quit them, some of them, easier than nicotine. just talking about cindy, i mean, was she addicted? it is already been proven to the other jury. you did not hear all the evidence, but she was highly addicted. a person who has to smoke in the middle of the night if she gets up, cannot sit through a whole movie. oh, and she started to quit in 1970, when the label changed from may, from their message to "does," she realized too that she was smoking so much and within two years smoking so much -- she was smoking that much within a few weeks, but within two years she decided to try and quit. and that was a feature of her life up until the time that she got the patch. and when she got the patch it was completely different. when she was trying to quit before, she felt like she was crawling out of her skin, but with the patch it was not like that. i bring that up because mr. jupe -- you heard from dr. cummings and mr. jupe yesterday about the business with the nicorette gum. and richard jupe said, "we had a business dispute with dow. dow chemical was the producer of nicorette gum. they were saying some things in their communications we did not agree with. we were buying from dow chemical." that is a very, very important statement. let us look at it. first of all, they were buying from dow chemical. and you know from dr. cummings that they were able to successfully pressure, they had leverage over dow. well, dow sold stuff to them so they were in a position of leverage if they wanted to get dow to do something and dow wanted to continue with that relationship. and mr. jupe said, they were saying some things in one of their communications that we did not agree with. well, you know from the evidence that you have heard and in evidence in the case is the smoking cessation newsletter, which you can read through, you can figure out what the message was, what are the things that we did not agree with. and the pamphlets in the doctors' waiting rooms, you do not have a copy of that, but you can look through it because the message that they did not agree with was quit smoking and use nicorette to do it. this is in evidence. plaintiff's exhibit 2. and that was when she was trying to quit. and it is, you know -- look, some people might have a problem with a company that sells a deadly addictive drug, but let us put that aside. obviously it is much worse to lie about it so you can make more money and get more people addicted knowing that more of them are going to die, but let us put that aside. how about the people who want to quit trying to conceal the way that they can quit? is that something that should not be punished, that they are really going to come in here and say to you zero? she was addicted. the issues here in relation to her and her fault are all decided. so this continued all through the time she was trying to quit. i've just got a couple of videos from this time period. (video clip was played and taken down to the best of the reporter's ability as follows:) voice: earlier this week the rj reynolds tobacco company took out this ad in a number of major newspapers and magazines calling for an open debate about smoking. in brief, the ad contends that medical studies would show that cigarette smoking causes disease are ignoring significant evidence to the contrary. voice: cigarette smoking does not cause cancer, yes or no? voice: it is not known whether cigarettes cause cancer. it has not been causally established. voice: cigarette smoking no causal relationship between cigarette smoking and emphysema. voice: despite all of the research to date, there has been no causal link established. voice: no causal relationship between cigarette smoking and heart disease. voice: no, as a matter of fact, there are studies that while we are accused of being associated with heart disease, there have been studies conducted over 10 years that would say again that science is still puzzled over these forces. (video clip concluded.) mr. uustal: so this is the ceo of rjr, one of their co-conspirators. you know what, let me just show you one more. let us do the 1994. this continued all the way through the '90s. by the way, during this whole period they are going to come in and tell you that cindy knew. cindy should have known in 1968. everybody knew. but here they are in 1994 saying -- and it is true, they do come up with the little twist on the facts and definitions and stuff. that was in the first document from the conspiracy called the forwarding memo, which you will have in evidence, it specifically talked about putting little twists on the facts of science. and you will listen to them when they deny it, because they knew it is true, but they are denying it in a way, putting a little twist on the facts of science, and that started right in the beginning of the conspiracy. will you play that. (video clip was played and taken down to the best of the reporter's ability as follows:) voice: i'd like you to rise, and those who will be testifying as well, i'd like you to rise. if you raise your right hand. do you swear that the testimony you are about to give is the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth? please consider yourself to be under oath. voice: let me begin my questioning on the matter of whether or not nicotine is addictive. let me ask you first, and i'd like to just go down the row, whether each of you believes that nicotine is not addictive. i heard virtually all of you touch on it. and just yes or no, do you believe nicotine is not addictive? voice: i believe nicotine is not addictive, yes. voice: mr. johnston. voice: congressman, cigarettes and nicotine clearly do not meet the classic definitions of addiction. there is no intoxications -- voice: we will take that as a no. and, again, time is short if you could just -- i think each of you believe nicotine is not addictive, we just would like to have this for the record. voice: i do not believe that nicotine or our products are addictive. voice: i believe nicotine is not addictive. voice: i believe that nicotine is not addictive. voice: i believe that nicotine is not addictive. voice: and i too believe that nicotine is not addictive. voice: mr. campbell, you were also deposed and you said, quote, to my knowledge it has not been proven that cigarette smoking causes cancer." this is a rather passive and pleasant approach, especially in light of the consensus, not by some, but all of the scientific community. will you ever be convinced, and what evidence are you waiting for? and let us have the microphone passed over. voice: yes, i may be convinced. we do not know what causes cancer in general right now so i think that we may find out what causes cancer and we may find out some relationship which has yet to be proven. (video clip concluded.) mr. uustal: so just two points about that. first of all, it is 1994 under oath. so seems to me it would be difficult for them to say that cindy should have known before that when their people -- that last guy is the ceo of philip morris -- were saying that it is not proven and it is not addictive. the other thing is, that is different than what mr. jupe told you their position was back then. remember he said their position in 1994 was just, oh, well, we do not know how it causes cancer. that is not what they were saying. they did not say, we do not know how it causes cancer. they said, it is not proven that it does cause cancer. and that is a big difference. your honor, do you know what time i started? the court: you began at 9, sir. mr. uustal: thank you. let us look at the verdict form. so the first question is: "what is the total amount of medical expenses sustained by lucinda naugle in the past?" you have a box of all of her medical bills that we -- not all of her medical bills, the ones related to emphysema, and you have heard testimony on that. and attached to each bill is the records that if you need to confirm that it is related to emphysema. i have heard no objection during the entire case to any of these bills. so that is what it is. that is an easy one. and i read you the amount, $466,389.66 during the case. let me just show you a couple of jury instructions that apply to that $466,000. one of them in your instructions from the judge is the comparative fault. and it is just saying, look, when someone is at -- when a plaintiff is partially at fault, then the law sometimes requires reductions based on that fault. but that is for the judge. okay, you do not reduce anything in your verdict. the judge does that after the case. so you are not to reduce that in any way because she was at fault and she admitted it and the jury found her percentage, a prior jury, and the judge will apply that as appropriate under the law to the verdict afterwards. the second thing is, there was a question from a juror and i think a couple of comments during the evidence about insurance or medicare. so these are the bills, okay, and that is what the law requires you to put on your verdict. if there is a reason, because of insurance to -- the insurance is not in these, it is been removed from these bills, because that is not the evidence you need to determine for your verdict. the judge will handle that after the trial if there is a reason because of insurance to reduce it, if the insurance companies come in and try and get part of it, which they are entitled to, and also for future, although that is not an issue in this case anymore, there can be part of it that has to be set aside so that the money for future medical bills comes from there instead of medicare having to pay or something. it has to come from that fund. but anyway, that is not -- you do not need to worry about that and you certainly do not need to reduce it because you think, oh, there may have been insurance. in fact, you are not allowed to. let us go back to the medical expenses in the future. so you heard a lot of testimony on that. dr. coopersmith first came to an opinion on her life expectancy before 2009, and about five years later he was consistent with that before you, based on all the information he had. but he did tell you, there is a very specific question, in reality no one knows. and that is true now as well. but you cannot put in your verdict anything on that plan. her doctor, as you know, right now says terminal. so it is unlikely that she is going to leave the hospital. she went in -- so you will see from the records that her hospitalization in june at broward general was for 30 days. and it was approximately $200,000. i think it was a couple hundred dollars over that. so she is been in there since thursday, so a week and a half ago, and she will be in there, i mean, at least some future time. no one knows, but you have to base your evidence on the greater weight of the evidence, so i would suggest that two weeks of hospitalization. it is already been -- so it is one day short of two weeks. so i would say two to three weeks of hospitalization, which is 100 to 150 for that in the future. and part of it, the expenses have already been incurred but they have not been billed so that is why that would be in the future. the past you have there. and that would be the only thing you can consider. i want to just make that clear. nothing about anything the numbers dr. raffa testified to, it turns out that you do not need them. so i'm sorry we took your time on that, but at the time we thought you did. you cannot let that affect you at all. the only issue is now two weeks or three weeks of hospitalization. now, i want to address an issue that seemed to come up in the trial and it may come up when counsel for philip morris gives his closing argument. the idea that because cindy did not get pulmonary rehabilitation you should somehow, i'm not even sure, do something with your verdict, reduce something in your verdict. i'll have to wait and see exactly what they say. but let me just say, the evidence in the case is that she was not going to pulmonary rehab because she was going to work. and pulmonary rehab for someone who is bedridden -- i mean, what is it? dr. coopersmith told you it is walking on a treadmill, it is learning about nutrition, and it is very helpful for bedridden patients. and it probably would have been a good thing for her, but by going to work she had to get up, she had to get out of the house, she had to walk to the car, drive, go into work, work and get home. and dr. singer, her treating doctor for many, many, many years, specifically said that is a form of rehab. and so the idea that not doing the pulmonary rehab might have affected something in this case is just put in your heads as a speculation. but let us look at what the medical testimony says about that. first dr. singer -- oh, no, i'm sorry, let me just show what she says about that. (video clip was played and taken down to the best of the reporter's ability as follows:) voice: because we are open from 7 in the morning until 5:30. i'm a person who is on oxygen 24/7. you are going to make me go to physical therapy for two hours then make up two more hours of work? do you know how many hours of work that is putting on a person with copd/emphysema, to make that person with emphysema? people cannot believe i'm working every single day. i get up at 4:30 in the morning. i get up at 4:30 in the morning to try to get ready, myself ready to get to work every day. how many people in my -- like me would go to work and get there 7:35 in the morning and work until 5:30? (video clip concluded.) mr. uustal: that is better than walking on a treadmill for certain, very, very slow, dr. coopersmith told you how it is just very, very slow. what do the doctors say about that, her doctor, singer? (video clip was played and taken down to the best of the reporter's ability as follows:) voice: well, obviously the fact is she never went. she was doing pretty well. she was getting up and dressing and going to work. she was functioning at a very high level, and fortunately we kept her out of the hospital a long time. so recommending pulmonary rehab would be an additional benefit that obviously i think anyone with emphysema would enjoy, but it was never anything which i thought reflected poorly on her either as a conscientious patient or seriously impeded her treatment or care. (video clip concluded.) (video clip was played and taken down to the best of the reporter's ability as follows:) voice: over the years has cindy taken her treatment with you very seriously? voice: oh, very. voice: have you -- were you ever critical of her for working as opposed to taking the time off to go to pulmonary rehab? voice: no, not in the least. voice: does she typically make her scheduled appointments? voice: yes. voice: has she been overall compliant as a patient -- voice: yes, she is a wonderful patient. she is a model patient. (video clip concluded.) mr. uustal: just remember that if you hear any argument from lawyers. in fact, let us see the video of the doctor who testified that pulmonary rehab would have changed anything about her medical care. you do not have that one, baron? mr. phillips: sorry, i do not. mr. uustal: there is is not one. you heard in the evidence they showed dr. cummings some notes from the medical evaluation of a doctor they hired to evaluate her, to examine her, did he testify that this pulmonary rehab would have changed anything? so remember about that -- mr. mccarter: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. mr. uustal: argument of a lawyer is not the same as evidence, the testimony of a doctor. so just a couple of things about, you know, why, why she was not at pulmonary rehab and what type of person she is. you heard from a deposition, but her boss, "she is tough, i'll tell you that." "she is a really hard worker." she was on intravenous antibiotics at work. intravenous antibiotics and she went to work. "she was weak, we would drive her home, but you cannot get her not to come to work. she is coming to work as long as she can get up and walk." is that a bad thing? and just the last one, quotes about her being a fighter. "i do not tell people, i do not talk about it because in some ways i'm very lucky, i can go to work. i'm very lucky." second question, total amount of damages for pain and suffering, disability, physical impairment, disfigurement, mental anguish, inconvenience, loss of capacity for the enjoyment of life in the past and in the future. and the jury instruction on this specifically says "you shall consider the following elements," and it includes all of those, pain, suffering, disability, and it goes through each of them. so i want to talk to you about -- a little bit about each of them individually. but before we -- first of all, let me say, future, again, future is just limited to what you think over the next -- the next couple of weeks. but let us talk about how you are going to figure out based on the jury instructions and the evidence what to put in that line for in the past. this was cindy at her brother's wedding within a few days or weeks of being diagnosed with emphysema. she was not feeling the physical effects yet. early 40s. she is only 65 right now. and when you see pictures of her, she is only 65. that is what emphysema did to her. so let us go through quickly the different time periods. '93 to '96, obviously it was a concern for her, but it was not physically affecting her. '96 to 2006, that is when she said she could not walk the dogs anymore, in '96. and she was slowly deteriorating, her lungs getting worse and worse each day. and she was having trouble breathing. she was on oxygen intermittently, part-time she needed oxygen. she had to carry supplemental oxygen. and there were times when she was very bad during that time period. her world was getting smaller and smaller. each of the things that she had enjoyed one by one she was having to give them up. by 2006 she was on full-time oxygen, meaning she was tethered to a machine every second of her life. she had to get up at 4:30 to get to work by 7:35. and she lives five minutes from work, if you remember. so that is how long -- you know, she is got to get up and walk to the bathroom, then she is got to rest. then she is got to brush her teeth. the action of brushing her teeth, she is got to catch her breath, she is out of breath now. her baseline level is out of breath. so it is like just running a long distance, being out of breath and then trying to do something, adding to that being out of breath, the cannot catch your breath, gasping for breath. she had a serious hospitalization in 2009. 2009 to 2013 she got back to full-time oxygen but being able to live at home, tethered to a machine at all times. but by this time she lost going to her brother's house, family events. the last few things that she loved she had to give up. and her life was just trying to get to work, trying to catch a breath. and then from june 2013 to today she has been in the hospital, rehab, she got out for a short time, she is had two near fatal events. the court: you have five minutes, sir. mr. uustal: thank you, your honor. i think i'm going to need an extra five. the court: it is your time. use it how you wish. mr. uustal: thank you, your honor. (video clip was played and taken down to the best of the reporter's ability as follows:) voice: we also asked you to produce all documents, including photographs or dvds or videotapes depicting you during vacation or holiday or leisure activities. do you have any of those at home? voice: i do not do that anymore. i just come home -- i go to work, i come home. i do not go on holidays. i do not take trips. i've never been on a trip in 20 years. no, i tell you, i have no idea the last time i took a trip. i do not even go to my brother's house anymore. voice: have you taken any vacations since the last trial or any trips? the witness: no trips, no vacations. (video clip concluded.) mr. uustal: just the act of talking you can see she had to take a second to try and catch her breath, lying in bed just talking. you have heard it described as being a prisoner in her own body, always out of breath, slowly suffocating over the last two decades. she lost everything that was important to her. it was literally her life was get out of bed, fight for breath, walk to the bathroom, fight for breath, brush your teeth, fight for breath, all day long fight for breath and hopefully get to work. and that is it. so when you consider these things over two decades, and the verdict form lists them and the jury instructions says "you shall consider each of them." obviously something that is minor, say a minor pain caused by someone else's negligence, car accident or something that does not last very long is a very minor, deserves a very minor compensation, maybe nothing, maybe a couple of hundred bucks. the more serious the pain the numbers go up. and, you know, the law requires compensation for medical bills and things like that, but the law also requires compensation for things like this. because the law requires you to consider these things, because the law values a person's life, not just their money, and what their life means to them. and these things affect what their life was, what it is. so as the pain increases -- and cindy had intermittent pain throughout her life, but it is not a major consideration for you here, but i'm just using it as an example so how you can look at each one of these things. if it is minor pain and for a short period of time obviously it might be nothing or very small amount. as the pain increases or the time of the pain increases, the value is -- that is required for compensation is going up. and if it is medium pain over a medium period of time, maybe you are getting to tens of thousands of dollars. if it is an extremely excruciating pain even over a short period that could be much more significant. it could be something that scars someone for life, and as it increases in the amount of time you can get into hundreds of thousands of dollars. but if you have something that lasts for decades and is at the highest end of the scale, can you imagine excruciating pain for two decades, obviously you are talking about the most serious compensation. and so you are up to the level at that point of the most serious, if you have got the most serious harm over the longest period of time of millions. pain, it was not a significant factor for her. but if we look at each of the others, let us start at the bottom, loss of the capacity for the enjoyment of life. that is what it is. you know, sometimes these do not apply at all, but for some people it is a perfect description. it stole her life, two decades. and if her life, if you have something that -- i cannot imagine something that could take away more, the enjoyment of life and it has lasted her entire life for two decades, and she is going to die long before her time. so for loss of capacity of enjoyment of life. disability, you know, you could be paralyzed in a wheelchair, that is disability and physical impairment, but she is right up at that level in her inability to do things, the most serious form of disability, and, again, for this extremely long period of time. look, it is not -- you are not allowed to blame anyone that this has taken so long. you cannot hold that against anybody, but at the same time, this is a very long period of time, and that compensation has to reflect that. so we have at least three things on here, the disability, the suffering and loss of capacity of life that are at the highest end of the spectrum and have occurred over two decades, and so for each of those highest end of the spectrum and that long period of time, for each one of those you need to recognize what she has lost. and for the others i'm not going to suggest a number. i think you should look at them each individually, but for each one of those, it cannot be hundreds of thousands of dollars, it cannot be. taking away for two decades completely the loss of capacity of life. it is a little less than that because it occurred over a period of time. it cannot be hundreds of thousands of dollars if a life is worth anything. it must be millions to reflect what her life is worth. and so i would suggest to you for loss of capacity, disfigurement -- i'm sorry, loss of capacity, disability and suffering, each of those should be at least 2 million dollars. the rest of them much less. and disfigurement, none. but you need to consider each one of those. for the future i'm not going to even give you a suggestion. you need to consider the same factors but over a very short period of time, and i already told you that the time factor is extremely important, so for each of these it is going to have to reflect a much, much, much, much, much smaller number because it is not two decades. it is a week or two. this is the last question on the verdict form. "what is the total amount of punitive damages, if any, that you find should be assessed against philip morris? the factors that you need to consider, the nature, extent and degree of the misconduct and related circumstances, defendant's financial resources and any other circumstances which may affect the amount." so i've gone through what they did intentionally, fraud. so we have talked about the nature, extent and degree of the misconduct. the extent was 50 years. cannot be any higher. the nature was lying about a deadly addictive drug. cannot be any higher. and the degree, what it caused was death and suffering, so it cannot being any higher. second one is defendant's financial resources. you may have wondered why we read that to you, the agreed amount to how much they are making right now. your honor, i'm going to need another 5. the court: take -- it is your time, however you wish to divide it. mr. uustal: may have wondered why we put that in, but if you think about it, a punishment has to reflect that. that is why the law says that, must reflect that. for cindy, if she gets a speeding ticket it is two days of her salary, right, it means something, it is a punishment for her not to speed. so if cindy had done something wrong you would have to take into account what amount to punish her. the court: sustained. that is not proper argument. sustained. focus on the issues before the jury, sir. mr. uustal: yes, sir. so in order for this to have any effect, if that is possible, you need to look at their net earnings. so let me just say again what net earnings are. it is not revenue. it is profit. and it is not just profit. it is the company's revenue minus the cost of the goods sold, it is minus the overhead, minus the payroll, minus the taxes, minus the interest. it is minus -- it is even taxes. it is everything. it is lawyers and litigation and the msa things they told you about. and if they have assets, they buy a corporate jet, bonuses to their ceo, every single thing that philip morris could possibly need is paid for and then they have that much money, which is excess and can be kicked up to their parent company. mr. mccarter: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. it is not proper argument nor is it before you, ladies and gentlemen. stick to the evidence, please. mr. uustal: so there is three interesting things about this. first of all, from 2011 to 2012 to 2013 profits are going up every year. and in 2013 they are on track, because this is through the first six months, to make four and a half billion dollars, not made, that is net earnings, after everything, what is left. so for this year right now they are making $12,300,000 per day extra after advertising and everything, the scientists that they told you about. so what is the proper punishment for lies that cause injury and death? it is already established that they lied, they committed fraud, they committed conspiracy and it caused injury and death. so when you put a number on that verdict form, it is going to answer that question. lies about an addictive deadly drug, lies that cause injury and death and untold suffering, and lies for money. we did not get into this that much but you saw the one document where philip morris they had a decision and they said, well, we should make the decision this way if only for the primitive reason of who ain't for more money. lies for money, who ain't for more money at philip morris? so that is the question. it is already been established that they did this and it is already been established that punitive damages are warranted. you are being asked the amount. and, yes, you have the discretion to give an amount that is zero. for example, if the company did not have any assets or was not making any money, you are not allowed to bankrupt a company. but in this situation any amount that is not significant is specifically saying there is no proper punishment or there is a very low punishment for this. and why is that important? why is that important? because first of all, it effects what philip morris does. in fact, let me just show you, mr. jupe testified yesterday. "right after the jury in the yearlong trial this case arose out of found cigarettes, proved cigarettes defective and harmful and addictive, philip morris admitted" -- he brought it up. "do lawsuits have an impact on us? yeah, that is why they changed." and then the next day, talking -- i'm sorry, at the next question, "yeah, no question about it, the lawsuits, private suits, big suits like the attorney generals are they a way for us as a company to realize we are out of alignment? absolutely." so first of all, that number, the number affects what philip morris does, but secondly it answers that question for other people. one of the reasons for punishment when there is something like this is to deter other companies. if other companies look at what the tobacco companies did and say, oh, my god look at how much money they made over this 50-year conspiracy and look how little it cost them in punishment then that encourages other companies in other industries, banks, wall street, whatever it is. so for the deterrence the answer to that question is there -- and dr. cummings was asked, do you think a just verdict is a big verdict in punitive damages? and he said yes. that is the reason why. it will affect philip morris. and so i -- this is just for what they already did, what is already proven. there must be a punishment, significant punishment for that. and this is the only place ever that there will be a punishment for what they did and how it affected cindy. but they are going to say, as mr. jupe said, we are a changed company. and that is the only reason i bring it up. the punishment is for what they already did. the only reason i bring up what they are doing now is because, number one, when they say they are a changed company you need to consider what they are doing now, but number two, you can affect what they are doing now. surgeon general says cigarettes are designed for addiction, designed by people like mr. jupe for addiction. ways in which you can make cigarettes more addictive. they have found a way to freebase the nicotine. cigarettes today deliver more nicotine and deliver it quicker than ever before. that is what they are doing now. you know why? decrease the exit rates by making it more addictive, exit rates for the addicted population and increase the entry rates through advertising to beginning smokers and designs in the cigarette that help people move from experimental to addicted smokers. that is what they are doing right now, that is what the surgeon general says, and yet it goes on. the fda wanted to get these warnings you heard about, fifty percent of the pack front and back, five years ago, in 2009 it came up. it is going to happen, still has not happened. may never happen. it is not going to be the fda. mr. jupe told you what changes their behavior, and it is the lawsuits. right now in the united states they spend 34 million a day in marketing, 1200 current and former smokers die prematurely and the nation spends 260 million a day on medical costs, 270 million in lost productivity. that is what they are doing today. dr. cummings told you in the 20th century we lost 100 million people to smoking. we are on track to lose a billion souls in the 21st century because of how they design the cigarettes today. so when they say they are a changed company, you do not even need to consider this. they should be punished for what they did in the conspiracy. they must be punished. but if they say they are a changed company, you can affect what they are doing today. thank you. thank you, your honor. the court: all right, mr. uustal, thank you. we will take our morning break. i want to restrict your access, if i can, during the breaks now. so we are going to take a ten-minute recess. do not discuss the case. i ask you to stay in the jury room during the recess this time. mr. uustal: your honor, i apologize. mr. mcpharlin just reminded me. can i have 10 seconds? the court: of course. mr. uustal: i apologize. this is important for legal reasons. i have to suggest an amount. i would suggest to you the amount on punitive damages should be two days, two days of their net earnings, twelve and a half million a day, so approximately -- it is 12.3, so just under 25 million dollars. thank you. mr. uustal: it is also the defendant's position that they should not be punished. this is the only courtroom, the only trial ever, anywhere in the world that will punish them for what they did to cindy naugle. counsel made that very clear. you have to look at what they did to cindy naugle. so nothing anywhere else will ever punish them for what they did to her. and it is already established and you must accept that cindy reasonably relied to her detriment on a statement made by philip morris that intentionally concealed material information and that there was a conspiracy and a fraud and that it resulted in her emphysema. if you put anything less than a significant punishment for philip morris on that question, then you are saying that if a company does that, any company, a tobacco company, then they will not be -- anyone other than a tobacco company they will not be seriously punished. and you know why they will not be seriously punished? because they successfully concealed it for 50 years and now it is remote. because it is a different company because the litigation took 20 years. is that the incentive we want to give companies? you can avoid pun -- they did. they did not deny it. or do we want to give companies an incentive after they intentionally harmed people to hide it, conceal it until it is so old that they can come in and say, it is a different company? mr. mccarter said that it was false about the dow newsletter. read the dow newsletter. yeah, there was one issue, that is how philip morris found out about it. but there was only one issue. it was supposed to go out to those 500 doctors every month for the next decade, but it only went out once. and the patient pamphlets never went out. it is not right for a company to take away the possibility of an addict quitting so they can make more profits and then come in and say they should not be punished for it because it was a long time ago. mr. mccarter suggested -- oh, and by the way they were saying not addictive, never been shown to cause any disease, the whole period of the fraud and then suddenly the attorney generals get the confidential documents and the jury verdict in this case finds cigarettes addictive and harmful and suddenly they admit it and they want you to say, oh, they are a changed company? they did it because of the lawsuits and they are only going to change now because of lawsuits like this. mr. mccarter suggested that cindy was fine up until this year. 1999 she had a -- discharged home with a sitter. she needed 24-hour care at some period in 1999. she is had severe copd since 1996, copd, severe. at one point she had to have live-in help. there is no doubt, you have medical records, that she was not fine until this year. this is a decades long destruction of her life. she is going to die 20 years before her time. mr. mccarter: objection, your honor. the court: legal basis, sir? mr. mccarter: has to do with the mortality tables being stricken. the court: i sustain the objection. mr. uustal: there is no doubt her suffering over the decades was extreme. there is no dispute about that. and mr. mccarter misunderstood me when he heard that i was suggesting 6 million dollars for past pain and suffering, disfigurement, disability, loss of enjoyment for life. that was only three of those categories. and i concede the other ones are less, but it is not only 6 million dollars. that number is a reflection of what her suffering is and what her life was worth. and i can guarantee you there is no one in this courtroom who would choose what she had to go through for -- mr. mccarter: objection, your honor. the court: sustained. that is improper argument. ladies and gentlemen, he is not permitted to do that. you should disregard those remarks. mr. uustal: there is a chart with issues not in dispute. it should be called issues that were proven by the plaintiffs over the last 20 years. i do not want to get into the details of all the lies because there is already a finding, but there is just one i want to show you because it was a document entitled enough is enough. it is in evidence and mr. mccarter mentioned to you enough is enough. that is what they were saying, enough is enough about people talking about cigarettes being harmful. it is pt0729 if you want to find it in evidence. and back then they were saying there is -- "the fact is there is nothing about smoking or about nicotine in cigarettes that would prevent smokers from quitting." while internal philip morris documents knew that "the cigarette will preempt food in terms of scarcity on the smoker's priority list." enough is enough. and the way to stop this, as mr. jupe said, is lawsuits. mr. mccarter asked jim naugle if he told cindy about me because i sue, or i have lawsuits against tobacco companies. mr. jupe told you that those lawsuits changed philip morris. mr. mccarter: objection, your honor. i'm sorry, counsel. the reference to mr. uustal being those lawsuits. the court: objection is overruled. mr. uustal: it is not done. it is not done. the surgeon general of the united states of america says that they are designing the cigarettes intentionally to maximize addiction. is that okay? it is not done. there is more work to do and you are the ones who are going to do it. it is not easy for anybody to go through what cindy did to get where we are today. mr. mccarter: objection, your honor. the court: i'll permit that. it is overruled. mr. uustal: but she did. and it gives you the opportunity, you the opportunity to do something. to make it stop, which the surgeon general, although they have said repeatedly it is happening, cannot. which the fda has not been able to do. and you heard that the fda wanted cigarette labels that cover half the pack, front and pack, warning labels, five years ago? they are not there. that is what they want. just because the fda has some theoretical legal power does not mean they can get it done. and i think you saw in the evidence all the steps where people could put up road blocks to actually stop something that the fda wants from getting done. mr. jupe told you what changes them. lawsuits. dr. cummings spends his life helping people quit smoking. when he was working at the roswell cancer center and they asked him to take all these documents that were pried out of the companies by the attorney generals, he did not know what was going to come of this. he testified in the first phase, the yearlong case, twice for free. and now whenever people try -- the case did not finish it. it just established the conspiracy and that the cigarettes were harmful and addictive. when smokers try to move forward, get their medical bills and other things not only does he have to fly in to try and testify to what is in those documents, philip morris gets to depose him. you heard from dr. coopersmith, in the last three weeks he is been deposed four times for over 10 hours. and he called it torture. it is not wrong for dr. cummings to charge for his time. the fact that he did not in a yearlong trial and the fact that he is not in this one shows the significance of those trials. lawyers charge for their time, other witnesses did. it is not wrong. he is a man who writes -- the surgeon general asked to write sections of the report. and in order for philip morris to prevail they must convince you that someone who is writing sections of the surgeon general's report is lying to you. the court: you have four minutes, sir. mr. uustal: thank you, your honor. mr. jupe comes in here just like they have done since 1964 and tells you 15 reasons why the surgeon general is wrong today. nothing has changed. they can maximize addiction with how they design cigarettes, the surgeon general says how they do it. he can come in here and say, oh, i've never heard -- that does not do that. he showed you -- this is how they make cigarettes safer, but i showed you the surgeon general saying, this makes cigarettes more addictive, that is how they freebase the nicotine. that is why the surgeon general says, despite them saying there is less nicotine in each cigarette, it is delivered quicker. and there is more nicotine delivered than ever before. the warnings mean no punishment? this is in evidence, pt2023. mr. mccarter suggested there should be no punishment because of the warnings. this is one of the co-conspirators talking about the anti-cigarette lobby, that is what they call the public health authority, "the anticigarette lobby has called the cigarette labeling act a victory for the tobacco industry." those warnings. "one critic entitled her article 'the quiet victory of the cigarette lobby, how it found the best filter yet.'" congress. i'm running out of time so i cannot talk about everything. these rates are staggering, this increase and no one has suggested they are wrong. these rates show that people in this period when cigarette designs were different were dying of emphysema at four times the rate of the nonsmokers, now it is 22 times the rate. last thing. mr. mccarter suggests that compensating cindy for the destruction of her life in some number, and i'm just talking about in terms of the pain, suffering, disfigurement, disability, every one of those you have to consider is out -- in some number over 6 million dollars, 7 or 8, is outrageous. i would suggest to you that when someone comes in here and does not dispute an intentional act of fraud that you know has caused untold suffering and specifically to cindy naugle and suggest they should not be punished for it for any reason whatever, that is outrageous. and two days, two days to them, which they will not even notice. mr. mccarter: objection, your honor. the court: overruled. mr. uustal: i think that it would be outrageous to have a verdict that does not at least suggest to the cigarette companies and all the other companies who are watching this verdict that they can get away by delaying and concealing for decades. thank you for your time. i know it is been a difficult case with all the evidence and changes in it. thank you.