12 mr. mccarter: thank you, your honor. good morning, ladies and gentlemen. this is my last chance i have to speak to you and the last chance i have to say thank you on behalf of ms. arnold and me for your service in this case. you were constantly paying attention and note-taking and being here as our jury to resolve the dispute we have between the parties. i also want to take the opportunity to thank the folks who have helped ms. arnold and me with this case, some of whom are in the courtroom but other who have been stuck in the office the whole time and so this is my chance to thank them as well, and i'm going to do that. i want to start off this morning the same way i ended yesterday, and that is to talk about the medical record i showed relating to ms. naugle's current health status. that information may have been a shock to you because you had heard throughout the plaintiff's case from dr. coopersmith that ms. naugle had another six to ten years left. but as long as there was a claim in the case for 4 million dollars in future damages, you needed the information. and i'm sorry if it had an emotional effect on you and a shock, it is understandable if it did, because it was new to you. and you may wonder how do we deal with something that happens right at the end of the case like that where you get that news? because we are lawyers here and we fight it out with one another in i think a civil way, but we are also human beings. and we can relate to how that must feel for you. and so what i want to show you is a jury instruction on how to deal with something like that. and it talks about, and you know this from jury selection, the need not to decide the case based on emotions or sympathy. and that is what i'm focused on here is sympathy. the instruction, in fairness, really tells you not to be a human being. and you have to be a human being, but we have to do our best to set aside our feelings and you have a job that we are all being asked to do. my job today is to share with you what the evidence showed in the case and how it relates to the issues you are being asked to decide on the verdict form. that is my job today. the case will then be handed over to you after mr. uustal gets to talk to you again, and your job will be to do the best you can to decide this case based on the evidence and the legal instructions the judge gave you and only based on the evidence and the legal instructions the judge gave you. and i know you are going to do the best at that and that is why we all appreciate your being here. one thing i want to do is i -- i'm going to trip over this -- i want to start now with where i started off in my opening statement. because i told you in my opening statement that there would be some issues in this case that just are not in dispute at all, and you have heard a lot about these throughout the case. i'm not going to cover them all. but i do want to talk to you about the two bottom ones because you have heard a lot about this in the evidence. i want to talk about what the issues are before you. because you have heard a lot about philip morris over the years and different tobacco companies over the years and the tobacco institute and things that may have impacted the public, things that did not have anything to do with ms. naugle. mr. uustal: your honor, i object. the last one that he is talking about is improper argument. you have already ruled on it. the court: can you turn the board towards me? mr. mccarter: sure. i'm happy to put the board down, judge, if it is going to cause controversy. the court: you can put the board down if you want. you can use it if you wish. mr. mccarter: well, then i'll use it. the court: the objection is overruled. ladies and gentlemen, what the lawyers show you, what they say is argument in the case. you are going to deal with the evidence in the case. so stick to the evidence. you may proceed, sir. mr. mccarter: thank you, your honor. the two issues for your decision in this case relate to compensatory damages and punitive damages. the issue of fault or addiction or responsibility, as we have said throughout the case, has been decided by the first jury. the second thing is this is just ms. naugle's case. and you are going to see jury instructions on this. when we talk about reimbursement, compensation for medical bills, it is just her medical bills that are at issue. in addition, when we talk about pain and suffering, that type of damages, it is just about her. it is not about other smokers. and that is also true with respect to punitive damages. you are going to see in the instructions i'll show you later that the claim for punitive damages is based only on the conduct that harmed her. so if the conduct that you saw, much of what you saw, i'd submit 99 percent of what you saw were things that had nothing to do with ms. naugle, that has nothing to do with punitive damages. and i'm going to show you the jury instructions that talk about that. but this is not a class action. it is a suit by one person against one defendant. there is also other things now that are not in dispute and i want to talk about those as well. and i told you at the beginning of the case that on this first question on the verdict form that we would agree that ms. naugle is entitled to compensation for her medical bills. i said that in opening statement and i say it again today. and i said the only issue is how much, what is the amount. and plaintiff has put in evidence of the medical bills. and we agree, we agree on the past medical bills, line a there, that she should be awarded what they are asking for, $466,389.66. so when you go in the jury room, that is an issue you can take off the table. and if you write that down that is what you can put on the verdict, both of us agree. now, the future damages, when i was here in opening statement i spent a lot of time on it because i told you they would be asking for millions and millions of dollars in future medical costs. and you saw last friday that was an issue that was hotly debated between the parties and you saw a lot of what was being debated was ms. naugle's life expectancy. and that is because her medical records showed as the trial began that she had been taken to the hospital with the flu, influenza virus, she was in critical, guarded condition. she had been intubated. she was on a ventilator, and she came off for a day, but she went back on. and that is what the evidence in the medical records, which are in evidence, will show you over that period of time. that was a hotly debated issue, now it is not an issue because of her current condition and plaintiff withdrawing that claim for 4 million dollars in future damages. it is not an issue anymore. and what they are asking for is $100,000 to $150,000 for future medical care, and it is not all future, some of it is going a little backward where we do not have the medical bills. and that is an issue now, now that that is the claim that we agree to as well. so when you get to that question b on this verdict form, because she has been in the hospital for almost two weeks and, you know, i think the upper end of that $150,000 has some hope in it that she is going to live a little longer, and if it is fair to have that hope then give them the upper range of that, the $150,000 for future damages. and you can write that in as well. now unfortunately that is where the agreement ends between the parties. because they are asking to award 6 million dollars in pain and suffering. and what has happened is they took that 4 million dollars that they were asking for in future damages -- mr. uustal: i object, your honor, that is a comment on what we -- it is an improper argument on how we have litigated the case, and it is not true. the court: do not make speaking objections. mr. uustal: may i be heard on this very briefly? the court: come sidebar, please. mr. mccarter: i can rephrase, your honor. the court: strike the statement by mr. mccarter. disregard the comments and he will -- i'll sustain the objection and he will restart. mr. mccarter: they were asking for 4 million dollars in future damages, they are not asking for that anymore. now they are asking for 6 million dollars in pain and suffering. so i want to turn to that question on the verdict form here. and i say pain and suffering as shorthand for the list here. but 6 million dollars is an amount that is excessive, unreasonable and not supported by the facts or the evidence. let me start with the future. they are not asking for the 6 million for future pain and suffering. on that one there is no evidence of ms. naugle in pain and suffering right now. she is in the hospital. there is no evidence as to how long she is going to live. so i think the real dispute involves this 6 million dollars for past pain and suffering. there is no dispute that ms. naugle has endured pain and suffering. there is no dispute about that. none of us would want to have emphysema. no one would want to go through what she is gone through in the hospital the last few months. no question about that. but 6 million dollars, 6 million dollars is an excessive amount to request and to award for pain and suffering in this case. and let me start with telling you why. because counsel repeatedly referred to the fact that she is gone through two decades of this pain and suffering. it is true that she is had emphysema since 1992, so that would be 21 years, but she is not had the level of pain and suffering during that time period that she is had more recently. in fact, you saw this on one of counsel's slides. if you take the period from 1992 to 1996 [sic], so the first 14 years of her having the condition, she was able to go about her daily activities. and i'm not trying to minimize her condition at all, but when you are asking for 6 million dollars for two decades of pain and suffering the facts are important. so for 14 years she was able to go about her daily activities. she did not have any restrictions on what she could do. she was not on supplemental oxygen. she could work a full-time job, 43 hours a week. and she could drive herself around and do everything else she was doing before. the last 7 years or so after 2006, from 2006 until june of this year when she went into the hospital with her infection she still was able to work a full-time job, but she was on oxygen. so she was on supplemental oxygen since 2006, but she still could go about her normal daily activities. she did have the hospitalization in 2009, but she -- and she needed more help recently with groceries, heavy things like that. but if you remember what dr. singer said, he said, well, she really was fine during that period with the exception of that hospitalization. her condition did change this year because in june 2009 -- i'm sorry, june of this year she went to the hospital with a nocardia infection in her lungs, and that caused pneumonia. and she was in the hospital for 30 days, which weakened her greatly. and then she went into the skilled nursing facility where she was for two months. they thought she was doing better and she came out and then she wound up getting the flu, and then went in the hospital and got the mrsa infection that you saw yesterday that gave her mrsa pneumonia. and so the period of time we are talking about for pain and suffering, it is not a 21-year period of time that she is been in this condition. it is really since june of this year. let me also talk about what the law is on pain and suffering, and you are going to get a jury instruction on this. and this is important because the principle here, this applies to all the money they are requesting in damages, but the principle here is that you should award an amount of money which fairly and adequately compensates ms. naugle. so this is about compensating ms. naugle. it is not about compensating anyone else, only about ms. naugle. and also what you are told in the instructions is to be fair and adequate. 6 million dollars, you should ask yourselves, would that compensate ms. naugle? that is not compensation for ms. naugle, that is more than compensation for ms. naugle. nobody would want to go through what she is gone through but 6 million dollars is excessive. now, counsel talked about pulmonary rehabilitation earlier. and in my opening statement i talked about pulmonary rehabilitation because i said it is an issue for you to consider on this question of pain and suffering. now, counsel talked about it in the context of the medical expenses. and while i agree you could consider it in the context of the medical expenses, i'm not asking you to reduce those medical expenses that we talked about earlier in any way because of her failure to go to pulmonary rehabilitation. but when you are asking for 6 million dollars in pain and suffering, it is fair to ask were there things that ms. naugle could have done, reasonable things that might have avoided some of her pain and suffering, might have reduced, mitigated what she went through, and so we put in evidence on pulmonary rehabilitation on that question. and it is something that i would ask you to consider on this question of pain and suffering. and that is because, you heard this from dr. singer and dr. coopersmith, but what dr. singer said was something along the lines of, this is the greatest thing we have going for us for emphysema patients. we showed you the medical records. this was during dr. singer's video. you saw the medical records where he had been urging ms. naugle to go to pulmonary rehabilitation since 1999, so for 14 years. and i want to make clear i'm not being critical of ms. naugle for not going, because we all have the right to decide to do what we want to do. doctors tell us things all the time that they say we should do or we should not do, and i bet there is none of us in this courtroom who ever has followed our doctors advice all the time. she was free to make her decisions. the reason i'm raising this is because they are asking for 6 million dollars in pain and suffering. and what the evidence is from both dr. singer and dr. coopersmith, it is really undisputed, that pulmonary rehabilitation -- singer wanted her to go for two hours a week. it would have improved her quality of life, reduced her symptoms, increased exercise tolerance, reduced anxiety, reduced the risk of exacerbations. exacerbations are those infections that put her in the hospital and really caused the problems she was having. reduces the risk of hospitalizations and increases life expectancy. that is not disputed. this came from dr. singer and dr. coopersmith. and you are entitled to consider whether, if ms. naugle had done as her doctor asked, she could have avoided or at least lessened some of the problems that are leading to the request for 6 million dollars. now, there was a statement earlier, and i think they played a clip from dr. singer where he was saying, well, he thought it was great that she was going to work, and nobody is criticizing her for that, but you remember what dr. singer said in the medical records was that it would be nice if she could take a couple hours off work to go to the pulmonary rehab. so obviously the work was not enough. he wanted her to do a little more. and i'd ask you on this issue of pain and suffering, not in relation to the medical bills, but on this issue of pain and suffering that you consider this issue of pulmonary rehabilitation. so on this question 2 what i ask you to do, i'm not asking that you fill in a specific amount, but the $6,000,000 request is excessive and unreasonable. i'm asking you to look at the evidence and use your best discretion to award an amount that is reasonable in light of the evidence and in light of the purpose of this award, which would be to compensate, to compensate ms. naugle, not compensate someone else. now, on this question, this is, as you know from being here, the next question on the verdict form relates to punitive damages. and i think when you saw at the end of counsel's argument that they are asking for 24 million dollars, i told you what this case is about from their perspective; it is about a big punitive damages award, that is what they want. and that is why dr. cummings was here for two and a half days to testify and all their other witnesses were whisked in and out as quickly as possible, because what is important to them is punitive damages. now, this is where the real dispute in this case lies. this is where dr. cummings' testimony comes in and mr. jupe's testimony. and you know from my opening statement i am going to ask you to award zero for punitive damages because by your answer to the first two questions you will have fully and fairly compensated ms. naugle for her injuries. and for the reasons i explain in the rest of my time it is simply not necessary or appropriate to award more money in the form of punitive damages. now, i want to talk about dr. cummings for a minute because he is their punitive damages case. remember dr. cummings came for about two hours after opening statements. he was here the entire next day and the entire next day after that. dr. cummings goes around the state telling juries like you the same story over and over and over again. it does not matter who the plaintiff is to him. it does not even matter who the defendant is. he shows the same old ads, the same documents and the same videos in every case. dr. cummings, you heard he is been paid more than 1 million dollars to testify in these cases. he might be doing his testimony here for free, but he got paid for his testimony in 2009 in that trial. and he is been paid in scores and scores of other cases, more than a million dollars total. dr. cummings told you he believes he is in a war on tobacco and that he takes his war to the courtroom because his hope is to deplete the tobacco company's funds through litigation. that is his goal. he told you he is rooting for a punitive damages award in this case, as he does in every case. and he admitted that he is a biased witness. he admitted that he is biased in favor of the plaintiff so he is not coming in here as someone neutral. and i submit to you that you can tell that from his demeanor and the way he answers questions on cross-examination. he is visibly perturbed and angry by the questions. he often does not give straight answers and the question has to be asked repeatedly of him. and he changes his testimony from trial to trial when he is under oath. that is why we get those transcripts out from his prior testimony to show that what he says is different in different cases in which he testifies. and you saw when dr. cummings was here, he got impeached, that is what we call it, impeached, at least 15 times where what he said to you at first was different from what he said under oath to a different jury sometimes in as few as two weeks ago. that is dr. cummings. he is their punitive damages case. he was the only one who addressed that issue for him. one of the things you get to do is to evaluate the credibility and bias of witnesses. you have the right to accept their testimony or reject it or do something in between. you have the right to look at dr. cummings' testimony and his demeanor on the stand and how he behaved and answered questions on cross-examination and the inconsistencies in his testimony from trial to trial and say, you know what, i'm going to reject dr. cummings' testimony. that is your prerogative as jurors because you are sitting here and you get to evaluate the witness. so i'd ask you to keep that in mind when you think about dr. cummings' testimony, think about how much he is been paid, that this is a second job for him, and how often he was trying to change his testimony from what he said before. now, there are a lot of rules that apply to punitive damages. you heard those in the jury instruction. so what i want to do is go through some of them, because i think what you will see is you have all the evidence plaintiff has shown you in the case, particularly through dr. cummings. what you are going to see is that the rules are really going to narrow down what you can consider for punitive damages. that is what the instructions do. they are going to narrow down to specific conduct that harmed ms. naugle. and the rest of it, the rest of what you have seen is going to be gone. so let me start with the first one. and you have seen this before, but this has the complete instruction on this particular issue, and that is, a prior jury found that punitive damages were warranted against philip morris for the conduct that harmed ms. naugle. that is the first reference to the first restriction here, which is to the conduct that harmed ms. naugle. you are in some ways taking a baton from the first jury and you are looking at the conduct that harmed ms. naugle and should you award punitive damages, more money for punitive damages in this case. but the important part from my perspective is that it is in your discretion to decline to award punitive damages. so this is not a finding that requires you to award punitive damages. it is up to you. it is up to you to decide the amount, and that amount can be zero. let us go to the next one. this refers to the findings that resulted from the florida supreme court 2006 decision. this is what you were told about in the instructions. there was a reference to that. and it is important to distinguish between the findings made there and the findings made by the first jury in this case, and i'm going to do that. but you were read those findings, but here's the thing, for punitive damages those findings are completely irrelevant. you are instructed you must treat those findings as if they do not exist. so those findings are taken off the table for punitive damages. here's another rule, and that is, this talks about the findings the jury made here in 2009. remember there were findings on negligence in a design defect. those findings are off the table for punitive damages. so again, what we are seeing here is it is getting narrower and narrower and narrower. so what is left after the design defect and negligence? well, the concealment, the finding of concealment is eligible for punitive damages and the finding that philip morris did acts in furtherance of an agreement to conceal, that is also eligible for punitive damages. but negligence and issues having to do with the design of the cigarettes are off the table for punitive damages. here's another important instruction, because if you disagree with me and decide to award some amount of punitive damages you should know that any award must bear a reasonable relationship to the amount of compensatory damages. and they are asking for an enormous amount of money, 26 million dollars for punitive damages. but the evidence in this case is in terms of her medical bills. the medical bills add up to roughly $600,000. now, you also can consider pain and suffering as compensatory damages whatever you award, but the amount they are requesting is off the charts. it is not a reasonable relationship at all to any of the damages that would compensate ms. naugle. and so this is an important factor if you disagree with me that zero is the appropriate number. so talked about what is left. what is left is the concealment claim and the conspiracy to conceal claim. and this is the further limitation here. there is two instructions on this; that is, "you may not impose punitive damages to punish philip morris for conduct that was not shown by clear and convincing evidence to have caused ms. naugle's emphysema." so in other words, conduct that had nothing to do with ms. naugle, statements that she did not hear, advertisements she did not see, things that did not impact her at all cannot be considered for punitive damages. so right away you have to focus on, for punitive damages, what was the conduct that harmed ms. naugle, because that is the only thing that may be considered for punitive damages. and there is evidence in this case that, you know, other people have been harmed from smoking and counsel talked about numbers of people who have been harmed from smoking. "any award of punitive damages is solely for the injury caused to ms. naugle and should not," should not, "include punishment for harm suffered by other smokers." and i'd submit to you that that is only fair because ms. naugle is the only smoker in this case whose facts and circumstances are before you. any other smoker who is harmed and has a claim can file their own case and they can seek punitive damages in their own case. so this is only about the harm to ms. naugle. it is only about the specific conduct that harmed her. it is not about anything broader than that. so if i could sort of summarize what the rules are. the first jury found concealment by philip morris and they found that philip morris did an act in furtherance of the agreement to conceal which harmed ms. naugle. those are the two findings by the first jury. both relate to ms. naugle and both are specific to philip morris. and to be eligible for punitive damages it is not enough that philip morris did it, it has to have been shown to harm ms. naugle. and so conduct that did not injure ms. naugle cannot be the basis for punitive damages. that is sort of a summary of what the rules that we have just gone through show. now, you have seen in this case a lot of evidence, a lot of evidence of conduct that really had nothing to do with ms. naugle. you saw it again this morning, although it was whittled down from what dr. cummings showed you. you saw that frank statement from december -- january 1954 when ms. naugle was 5 years old. she obviously did not read the newspaper and understand it as a 5-year-old. there is no claim she did. even after i cross-examined dr. cummings about this they still came back and showed you advertisements from 1948 about doctors smoking camels, before ms. naugle was born or when she was an infant. that obviously did not harm her. they showed you advertisements for the philip morris brand of cigarette from the 1940s. she never smoked the philip morris brand and she was an infant or not even alive yet at the time. they showed you videos from people from the tobacco institute. there is no evidence ms. naugle ever heard any of those. they showed you the rj reynolds executive on the ted koppel nightline show. there is no evidence that she saw that. they showed you again that testimony from 1994, the tobacco executives testifying before congress, that also could not have harmed ms. naugle because she already had emphysema by then and she had quit smoking. she did not start back up after hearing that testimony. so that has nothing to do with ms. naugle as well. so i submit to you that the questions you need to ask yourselves in regard to this claim for punitive damages to really figure out what is at issue are things like, well, what was it that was concealed from ms. naugle? when was it concealed from her? what are the facts and circumstances relating to it? and we are in 2013 now. it is not the 1950s or '60s or '70s or '80s or '90s. is there a need today in 2013 to award additional money in the form of punitive damages? and so the first thing we need to talk about is ms. naugle's smoking, because you have to figure out, again, what was it that impacted her. and we have gone through this in the case, but here are some important points to consider on ms. naugle's smoking. the first is that she started smoking as an adult. and that is on there because it was legal for her to smoke and it was legal for philip morris to sell cigarettes to her. it was legal for philip morris to sell those longer cigarettes to her as well. all of that was legal. you heard the story about how she started smoking that one night in a nightclub when she was 20 years old with her friend and they wanted to look older and more sophisticated because they were underage at the time for drinking and they went to the vending machine and bought benson & hedges. well, what was it about that purchase of benson & hedges that had to do with something wrong that philip morris did? is that what caused her to start smoking, the fact that there were benson & hedges in the machine? submit the answer is no, because if there were not any benson & hedges she would have smoked something else then. and she would have smoked anyway. well, why did she smoke benson & hedges? because they looked elegant and they were feminine, that is it, that is why she picked that brand. remember dr. cummings went through some marketing memos with you in which the people said, hey, our advertising is working. people view this as elegant and feminine. well, there is nothing unlawful or illegal about that. it was legal for philip morris to market cigarettes in a way that may have appealed to women, that they were feminine or elegant. there was nothing illegal about that. when she started smoking, ms. naugle also knew it could be hard to quit. now, we have her testimony here. this is what you heard read in when dr. cummings was here. "setting aside 'addicted,' that term," because she said she had not heard it was addictive at the time. talk about that in a few minutes. "before you started smoking in 1968, did you already have an understanding that smoking could be a hard habit to break?" and she said, "i did not know." and then she said, "oh yes, i did." and she knew because she had watched her father try to quit smoking, so she knew that once you get started it could be hard to quit. she knew that before she had her first cigarette. by 1970, so for 23 of the 25 years she smoked, ms. naugle believed, she believed smoking was harmful for her. again, this is her testimony. "you said about 1970. we have established that back in 1970 you knew smoking was bad for your health. "yes." that was her testimony. she may not have known it the first two years of her smoking, but for the next 23 years she testified she knew it. she also had personal family experiences that educated her about the risks of smoking. you heard this from her brother jim naugle. jim naugle was here going through some of the things she has to deal with in her copd. and you remember he said he is friends with mr. uustal. and mr. naugle, jim naugle, was the guy who suggested to his sister that she file this lawsuit. and even he admitted that by 1976 it had become family knowledge that smoking was harmful as a result of his father's heart attack. so that is family knowledge that ms. naugle had as well. and finally, ms. naugle was warned of the very disease she would get, emphysema, seven years before she got it. and you may recall that when she was diagnosed with emphysema by dr. molinet she was not surprised about it because she had seen emphysema on the pack seven years earlier. so that has to do with ms. naugle's smoking. and the question is in light of the facts and circumstances of the evidence in this case, after you have already compensated her fully and fairly is it necessary to award more money in the form of punitive damages? and i submit the answer is no. and there are several reasons for it. the first is that it was, i mentioned this earlier, but it was legal for philip morris to market benson & hedges to an adult like ms. naugle in a way that made the cigarettes elegant and feminine. and there is going to be a jury instruction you will get on this, but this is it. "the manufacture, advertisement and sale of cigarettes are lawful activities." so what philip morris did in regards to the benson & hedges in 1968, the ones she smoked, philip morris advertised the cigarettes, marketed them and sold them to an adult, perfectly legal to do. and that is in the jury instructions. you will also see in the jury instructions that after 1969 they cannot claim that the advertising somehow neutralized the cigarette warnings by making smoking look glamourous. you heard a lot about that from dr. cummings, that the companies continued to advertise their cigarettes, not philip morris, philip morris does not advertise in magazines anymore. but dr. cummings talked about this and you should know there can be no claim in this case for punitive damages because philip morris advertised the cigarettes as glamourous or elegant or anything like that after 1969. second, and i'd submit to you this is the most important piece of evidence relating to punitive damages. i submit to you it is the most important, and that is the warnings. now, i think the size of my boards were made fun of this morning, but obviously i was not suggesting to you that the warning on the cigarette pack is this big. this is so you all can see it. this first warning was on the pack of cigarettes ms. naugle got that night from the vending machine when she was 20 years old. "cigarette smoking may be hazardous to your health." it was on every cigarette she smoked up until 1970. now, there was a suggestion this morning that ms. naugle, you know, the warning is so small she might not have seen it. there is no need to speculate about this because ms. naugle testified that she knew this warning was on the first pack of benson & hedges she purchased. she knew the warning was on there. she did say it said may be hazardous and so that caused her to question it, but she knew the warning was on there. there is no doubt about it. and philip morris followed the law and put this warning on the packs of cigarettes it made from '66 to '70. now, it is this next warning from 1970 to 1985 that led ms. naugle to say, you know what, starting in 1970 when the "may be" was taken off, that is when i knew, that is when i believed smoking was bad for my health, starting in 1970. and this warning was the one she said gave her that message. this warning, philip morris put it on every package of cigarettes ms. naugle smoked from 1970 to 1985. they followed the law and put the warning on as the law required, in the language, in the language congress required. so the suggestion that philip morris by the way that this message was intended to convey, this warning was intended to convey philip morris' message, congress is the one who sets the language on the warning, not philip morris. congress set the warning in 1966 and again in 1970. and then from 1985 on, including today, these four warnings have been on, one of them has been on every package of cigarettes philip morris has sold in the united states. i know you know this, but there is the reference to emphysema on there. ms. naugle is being warned of the disease she would get seven years before she would get it. this is why she said to her doctor when she was diagnosed, i'm not surprised that i have emphysema because i saw it on the pack seven years ago. these are important in the case because what they are asking you to do is to impose millions of dollars in punitive damages because philip morris concealed information from ms. naugle while at the same time philip morris put these warnings on every pack. that is why it is important. every package of cigarettes she ever smoked in her life had a warning on it. and this is important as well, this is another instruction; that is, after july 1st, 1969 philip morris had no obligation under the law to put different or additional warnings on its cigarettes than these. so by putting these warnings on its pack and it is undisputed philip morris did it at all times, philip morris had no obligation to put something different on there or something more on there and that is the law you have been instructed on. the other thing is, while information -- the jury found information was concealed from ms. naugle, information about nicotine and addiction and the health risks of smoking have been common knowledge for decades. and plaintiff's counsel seemed to agree with this point this morning; and that is, there is been a lot of information out there for a long, long time about nicotine and addiction and the health risks of smoke. i spent some time going through this with dr. cummings. and i'm not going to spend nearly as much time on it today. but here are some of the things you saw during the cross-examination of dr. cummings, going all the way back to christopher columbus and the fact that his shipmates could not quit tobacco even when their captain was telling them to stop, ordering them to stop, they said they could not do it, they were unable to quit. so that is the first european experience with tobacco, and coming out of that experience is the message that once you start on tobacco it is hard to quit. john quincy adams talked about being addicted to smoking and also i think chewing tobacco. and he talked about smoking, if people just stopped using tobacco there would be an increase in longevity, a recognition that tobacco use cuts short people's lives. you heard about mark twain quipping about quitting smoking is the easiest thing he is ever done, he is done it thousands of times in the 1800s. the florida health notes talked about cigarettes being the very worst form of addiction. reader's digest over the years talked about nicotine being a drug and the reason why people smoke and smoking being addictive. that is all in the public domain, not scientific journals, in the public domain. now, i've put on here the '64 surgeon general's report and the 1988 surgeon general's report, and that is because you, as you know from the evidence, there was a scientific debate starting in 1964 about do you call smoking an addiction or do you call it a habit? in 1964 the surgeon general said it is not an addiction, it is a habit. and the surgeon general said that because at the time intoxication was part of the scientific definition of addiction. remember that? and then in 1988 the surgeon general said, we are going to use a different definition of addiction, it is not going to include intoxication and therefore they changed the ruling from '64 and said it does meet the scientific definition of addiction. before 1988 even dr. cummings admitted he is not aware of any statement by philip morris disputing that cigarette smoking was addictive. it just was not an issue. and he is not aware of any statement at any time by anyone from philip morris denying or disputing that it can be hard to quit smoking. they never did that. the debate on addiction was limited to 12 years after 1988, and the debate was over the scientific definition of addiction and whether cigarettes should be lumped together with heroin and crack cocaine. and philip morris took the position that it was not fair to lump their product and their customers together with people who use those hard illegal drugs. that was the nature of the debate at that time. now, that was on nicotine and addiction, what was out in the public. remember with dr. cummings we started with the vincent van gogh painting up there, and again the florida health notes referred to cigarettes as coffin nails back in 1912. and you may recall that dr. cummings made statements about this american blend cigarette that was invented in 1913, and he suggested to you that it was the american blend cigarette that really made cigarettes inhalable, really made them addictive, made them harmful. but he had to admit that even before then, when cigarettes were made out of turkish tobacco, they caused cancer, and people knew that, they were inhalable and they were addictive. and there were references historically to all of those facts, so much so that even before the american blend is invented the florida health notes are calling cigarettes addictive and coffin nails. you heard about the reader's digest articles, the reference in time magazine to coffin nails based on a study showing that smokers were dying earlier than nonsmokers. life magazine, down in the lower right corner, that is the mouse skin-painting studies you heard about by dr. wynder. and then of course you have the '64 surgeon general's report, the coverage of that report right here in fort lauderdale. and the warnings on the pack. all of that information plus was out in the public domain before and during ms. naugle's life. and so the question is, well, it is out there, did people get the message? and you heard this when dr. cummings was here. by 1954 ninety percent of the american public had heard or read that smoking may be a cause of lung cancer. that is 1954. 1969, you remember dr. cummings said, you know, there is a difference between hearing and believing and he gave the example of aliens ufos. but by 1969 71 percent of adults believed, they believed, not just hearing it, but believed that smoking causes lung cancer. 81 percent believed it in 1978. by 1985 95 percent agreed with the statement. and even on emphysema, when the warning went on the pack, 91 percent of people agreed that smoking causes emphysema. did people act on that message? was it an important enough message to folks that they acted on it? the answer to that question is yes as well. 1965, this is after the surgeon general's report, 17 million smokers had quit smoking in 1965. in the four years after that 13 million more people quit smoking. and by 1985 more than 40 million smokers had quit. and the importance of that, the importance of that is it means the message is getting across to such an extent that people are acting on the message. and by 1985 when those warnings, the last set of warnings went on the pack, more than 40 million americans had acted on that public health message and quit smoking. and you have seen this a couple of times, i think actually three times during trial. this is the year ms. naugle started smoking. and dr. daniel horn, working for the national clearinghouse on smoking and health said, "you could stand on a rooftop and shout 'smoking is dangerous' at the top of your lungs and you would not be telling anyone anything they did not already know." that is the same year ms. naugle started smoking. another factor to consider on this issue of punitive damages is, well, you heard the public statements by philip morris, but what was philip morris trying to do, what were they doing. were they just standing pat, or were they going out there spending money, devoting resources to try to make cigarettes less hazardous? and you heard about those efforts when dr. cummings was here on cross-examination and you heard about it when mr. jupe was here as well. the fact is is that philip morris tried for decades and continues to try to reduce the health risks of smoking. i want to stop there for a second, because you heard testimony about where does the harm from smoking, where does the addiction come from. and the answer you heard in the evidence, well, the nicotine in the cigarettes comes from the tobacco as it is growing in the filed. as the tobacco ages and gets manufactured, there is actually less nicotine in the cigarette that philip morris sells than was in the tobacco growing in the field. it evaporates, it gets cut out and other things. the nicotine comes from tobacco naturally and that is why christopher columbus' sailors had a hard time quitting. they were not using manufactured cigarettes. they were using natural tobacco. what about the harm from smoking, where does that come from? well, you have heard that there are thousands of chemicals in a raw tobacco leaf growing in the field and that when that leaf is burned, in fact, when any organic matter is burned, the act of burning causes chemical reactions that produce even more chemicals, thousands of chemicals. and among the chemicals that are produced when you burn tobacco are dozens of carcinogens. so the harm comes from the burning of tobacco. now, philip morris, you know, uses additives in their cigarettes. and a lot of people might come into cases like this, i think you heard discussion in jury selection where people think it is the additives, not the tobacco, but the additives that are causing the disease. mr. jupe described how philip morris has tested all of the additives they use. they have disclosed the additives to the federal government. they have put the additives on their website. and they have published all the research they have done on additives. and their research shows that additives do not add to the harm caused by burning tobacco. it is the burning of tobacco, not the additives. we showed you a copy of the journal where philip morris published its research on that issue. how about these allegations that ammonia is used to make the cigarettes more addictive? that is what dr. cummings said, but he did not actually talk about any studies that showed it. mr. jupe described a study that philip morris, his colleagues there have recently done where they had people smoke cigarettes with ammonia and cigarettes without and they had the people hooked up to something taking their blood from their arteries every second and what the research showed was ammonia has no impact on the speed of which nicotine is delivered to the body. and that stands unrebutted. there are also issues relating to reconstituted tobacco you heard about in trial. dr. cummings referred to it as adding nicotine to the tobacco. what you heard is that the process, the tobacco is put in liquid, those stems, and some nicotine remains in the solid part, some nicotine goes in the liquid part and then it is all recombined at the end. but no nicotine is added, it is just the nicotine that was in there before. and there was a question about, well, can you put in less nicotine? can you take nicotine out that way? right. can you take nicotine out? and mr. jupe said, yes, when we combine it, we do not have to put in all the stuff that was there originally, but it has an impact on the taste of the cigarettes. it has an impact on the taste of the cigarettes. i mean, an example would be the difference between the taste of alcoholic and nonalcoholic beers. alcohol has an impact on taste of beer or wine. nicotine has an impact on the taste of a cigarette. so mr. jupe explained how that works. so i started off talking about philip morris' efforts to reduce the health risks of smoking over the years, and it is gone on for 60 years. it started in the 1950s and you saw this that dr. wynder in 1957 recommended that the tobacco companies reduce the tar levels of their cigarettes. and he hypothesized that doing so would reduce the risk of lung cancer. and we showed you this, and mr. jupe described for you how philip morris responded to that. philip morris responded by implementing all these design changes, the filter, expanded tobacco, reconstituted tobacco, ventilation, porous paper. he walked through that with you. and this chart shows the really massive effect those design features have had on reducing tar and nicotine. if you go back to 1955, before cigarettes were filtered or before filtered cigarettes were popular, the tar was 38 milligrams. and it is down to about 12 as of the mid '90s. and nicotine has been reduced as well. so these design features had an effect on reducing tar and nicotine just like dr. wynder recommended in the 1950s. i'm going to -- i brought our timeline that we showed during the direct examination of mr. jupe just to give you a sense as to some of the things that were happening during the next 40 years with regard to filtered cigarettes after dr. wynder made that recommendation. and you have seen all of these. but you saw the public health service talking about filtered cigarettes being safer in the 1960s. you heard in 1968 about the first real study that came out from dr. cummings' former employer, scientists there, finding that, just as dr. wynder had predicted, if you lower the tar by forty percent you are going to lower lung cancer by forty percent. and they found that people who smoked filtered cigarettes had a forty percent less risk of lung cancer. so the filters were working. we saw references where the public health is recommending that people smoke filtered cigarettes. that is the cartoon with the guy walking over the circling sharks. you know, yesterday mr. jupe was cross-examined with a document that supposedly showed philip morris' internal knowledge, that philip morris knew in 1973 that the filters were not working. talked about the moral obligation. and i got to show you other parts of the document on my redirect. and what you saw was that philip morris scientists were saying, we do not need to tell the ftc that people are not getting the same amount of smoke the ftc test is measuring because we told the ftc that and they knew it a few years earlier when they were adopting the test. that is what that was about. it was not about some secret knowledge by philip morris that filters and low tar were not working. and you saw that yesterday. you saw how philip morris worked with the national cancer institute in 1976 to find ways to reduce the risk of smoking and that the national cancer institute's group recommended all of those design features that philip morris used over the years. you saw the 1981 surgeon general's report where they talked about filters reducing the risk. you saw that again in 1996. but we also showed you where the public health community started to change their mind in 2001. 2001 the national cancer institute said, you know what, filters may not be reducing the risks. it does not appear that filters and low-tar cigarettes are any safer. and we showed that to you as well. and then you saw that was not the last word on it because the world health organization weighed in afterwards. the surgeon general did as well. and the last -- one thing we showed was in 2012, this is the world health organization monograph, their conclusion was that the risk of smoking was higher among men and women who smoked high-tar nonfiltered brands. that is what they concluded in 2012, that filters were, in fact, reducing the risk. now, there is a scientific debate on this. there is no question about it. there are credible, respected organizations on both sides of the issue. you have the surgeon general on one side, the world health organization on another. and this issue whether filters really, really, really are safer, may be it will not be resolved for a number of years as the science evolves, but the point is that when philip morris was marketing filtered cigarettes and marketing low-tar cigarettes the science was showing that they were, in fact, reducing the health risks. and what did philip morris do when the national cancer institute suggested maybe filters are not working? what did philip morris do? what would you want them to do? what would you expect them to do? you would expect them to give that information to their consumers, and that is exactly what philip morris did. you saw this when dr. cummings was here. starting in 2002, a year after that nci monograph, philip morris put these onserts on every pack of low-tar and light cigarettes and they told philip morris customers that low-tar cigarettes may not be safer, that you should not assume they are safer. philip morris gave its consumers, not philip morris' message that filters are safer, which is the company's belief, they gave the more conservative public health message that you should not assume they are safer to make sure that people were not keeping smoking under something that could be a miscomprehension. philip morris provided that information to all of its low-tar and light smokers in 2002. you know, there was testimony and a question from one of you about e-cigarettes, and so when mr. jupe was here we got into that. and he explained that philip morris has a sister company who markets e-cigarettes today and how that is really a new developing market. but he also talked about what philip morris tried to do starting in the '80s, to develop a cigarette, an alternative to a conventional cigarette that would reduce the health risks. and the cigarette was accord. you got to see what it looked like. it looked like a '90s cell phone that you put a cigarette into and you have to hold it up and smoke. and, you know, i guess at the time people thought somebody would like that, but i think it is pretty clear in retrospect that that is just not something people are interested in. accord did work to reduce the hazardous chemicals in the smoke, and it took 20 years of research and development to do it and millions and millions and millions of dollars. and philip morris test marketed and it was a flop. but that is what happens. not every research is going to lead to success. philip morris also tried making these brands of cigarettes without nicotine. when dr. cummings was here, he fought me on the issue of, well, philip morris started this process after they bought general foods. i think i was standing right over here. and i said, dr. cummings, they bought general foods, they got the technology to develop sanka and they took that decaf coffee technology and applied it to cigarettes. and he fought and fought and fought and then we read him what he had actually testified to just earlier under oath in a different case. you heard from mr. jupe this story that they did take that process for making decaf coffee and they saw, can we apply it to tobacco? because what they had tried earlier, removing nicotine by putting ammonia on there or other heavy chemicals, is that it shredded the tobacco and you could not use the tobacco. it ruined the taste. so this was something new and they spent 400 million dollars on it. they built a new factory. and they put these cigarettes in test market. dr. cummings said, well, these were highly successful products. that is what he said. they were a flop. they tasted awful. people did not want to smoke them. and ask yourselves, does it make any sense that philip morris would spend 400 million dollars to develop a cigarette without nicotine and it is highly successful, meaning they are selling it and making money off of it, does it make any sense that they would then take it off the market? why go through the trouble in the first place? the fact is is that people did not want to smoke those cigarettes. whether it was because they did not want to smoke a cigarette without nicotine or whether it was because they tasted lousy, no way to tell. they certainly reported that the cigarettes tasted lousy. and philip morris also -- eventually had to take them off the market. but they tried. they spent 400 million dollars trying. this is the criticism, one of the criticisms for what philip morris is doing today. one of the criticisms is, hey, you ought to sell cigarettes that do not have nicotine in them. philip morris tried that. they put in a lot of money, put in a lot of research, they put those cigarettes in test market and nobody wanted to smoke them. they tried it, it did not work. now, on this issue of reducing the risks of smoking, i do want to talk about this flip chart, which is admittedly, and i'm partially to blame for this, it is admittedly become a sideshow in this trial. so there is an article earlier this year in january, does not cite any tobacco company documents, you are not talking about things that philip morris had knowledge of before january of this year, that shows that the risk of cigarettes -- risk of emphysema, copd from smoking has increased over time, the relative risk. that is what the article says. and then the author says, well, we cannot explain it, but here's a plausible explanation. it may be because of the change in the design of cigarettes. may be, plausible, unexplained. that is the language in the article. dr. cummings then comes in here and says, not that it is plausible, not that it is may be, not that it is unexplained, he says, yeah, it is the change in the design of cigarettes. they added filters and it is making more people get copd today than before. that is not what the article showed. but that is how this became an issue is dr. cummings went beyond the article and expressed his view that my client and the other tobacco companies are making cigarettes more dangerous. and so you saw this. but remember, this is -- cdc says there is no increase from death rates from copd over the last 10 years, during that 10-year window. now, it is been said, well, that 10-year window is after the 10-year window the plaintiffs are talking about. the point is dr. cummings' theory, if dr. cummings is right that it is the cigarettes that are making copd rates go up, they should keep going up, right? people are still smoking those cigarettes. that is the point. the fact that copd rates are not increasing most recently shows that what dr. cummings is saying is just wrong. and that is why the authors did not go that far. they said it was unexplained. we even got to the point of talking about what dr. thun had written before he wrote that article. of course in 2004 he said filters reduce the risk of lung cancer, and we showed you that article. and then when mr. jupe was here on redirect you heard what dr. thun has been saying even since he wrote that article. now, if dr. cummings is right that the study shows that filters make the cigarettes more dangerous, that is what dr. thun would be saying after he wrote the article. but what dr. thun said after he wrote the article in april of this year, so three months after the article, he said he still believes filters reduce the risk of lung cancer. so what you have, i have 2004 on here, you can put the same statement for 2013, and the point is is that it brackets, those two statements bracket this january 2013 article. so it is obvious that even the author of the article does not believe filters have made the cigarettes more dangerous. now, i went into roll-your-own cigarettes with dr. cummings because roll-your-own cigarettes tend to be cigarettes that do not have a filter on them, right. so if you want to know are the filters making cigarettes more dangerous, like dr. cummings said -- he is the only one who said it, not the authors -- compare factory-made cigarettes to roll-your-own cigarettes and see which have higher rates of lung cancer. you know who is done that? dr. cummings. just last year he did that research. and you saw his article. and in his article dr. cummings said, if anything the roll-your-own cigarettes are more dangerous than factory-made cigarettes. and so he is written as recently as last year that the things philip morris and the other companies have done have made the cigarettes less dangerous. less dangerous compare to roll-your-own cigarettes that do not have those design changes. that is why that was important. and of course we showed you what the world health organization says. and here's the -- you know, if you want to know what dr. cummings really believes on this issue not what he said here, what does he do when he makes cigarettes? what does he do when he makes cigarettes? and he makes them for people to smoke in experiments. he puts a filter on them. he does not make people smoke unfiltered cigarettes. and whose filter does he put on there? he said he puts a philip morris filter on there. that tells you all you need to know about dr. cummings' claim, which the authors of the article did not make that my client is making cigarettes more dangerous. and that is why we spent so time on it because it is an outrageous claim and it is not supported by dr. cummings' research and the authors of the article do not believe it either. you know, dr. cummings also testified and you heard it this morning, you heard about this smoking cessation newsletter that merrell dow put out when they were selling nicorette. i think the allegation has been that smoking cessation newsletter would have told doctors about nicotine replacement therapy. well, i asked dr. cummings this, this was on recross i was allowed to ask a couple more questions. i asked him, does that newsletter, the one philip morris supposedly suppressed, does it even mention nicotine replacement therapy? and he said, no, it does not discuss nicotine replacement therapy. that is their own witness' testimony who is making this claim about dow nicorette gum being suppressed and information about it being suppressed. well, was the newsletter suppressed? did philip morris keep that newsletter from reaching doctors? i asked dr. cummings that too, because he wrote in the surgeon general's report not what he testified here until i asked him, he wrote that that newsletter was sent out to 450,000 doctors. how many doctors are there in the united states? 450,000? whatever it is, that newsletter got out, it got out to hundreds of thousands of doctors. so the testimony you heard from dr. cummings and the claim that there was some suppression of nicotine, this newsletter talking about nicorette is just false. the newsletter did not talk about nicorette and it went out to hundreds of thousands of doctors. the last thing i want to talk about is this. and this is -- i'm going to show you some jury instructions on this. this is common sense, i submit to you this is common sense. the question whether today in 2013 you need to impose punitive damages and award additional money in punitive damages for things that happened a long, long time ago. and this is the last thing i want to talk about. one of the instructions you got is that you are allowed to take into account mitigating evidence when considering punitive damages. mitigating evidence is evidence that may demonstrate that there is no need for punitive damages today in 2013 or that there is not as much a need as the plaintiff is saying. that is what mitigation evidence is. and this board right here goes directly to that issue. because you have heard in the testimony that -- you heard the evidence that by 1970 -- by 1968 ms. naugle knew it could be hard to quit smoking and by 1970 she personally believed smoking was bad for her health. and so concealment about the health risks of smoking and addiction we do not know exactly what the jury found, but the evidence is that it was a long time ago with respect to ms. naugle and it was in the 1960s. and when you think about whether punitive damages are necessary or appropriate today in 2013 keep in mind that we are 40 or 45 years later. and keep in mind please, please keep in mind everything that has happened since then. that there is been no television or radio advertising for cigarettes for 42 years. for 42 years. there is some of us in the courtroom here who have never seen a cigarette advertisement or radio advertisement. it was a long time ago. there is been warnings on the print ads for 41 years. the same warning on the packs have been on the advertisements. ingredients have been disclosed to the federal government since 1986. philip morris has put the ingredients on its website for people to see since 2000. in 1998, and i'm going to spend some time on this, there were all those lawsuits by the state attorneys general. everyone, every attorney general was going after philip morris and the other tobacco companies. and that led to a monumental shift in restrictions on cigarette advertising and, quite frankly, it led to a monumental shift in the behavior of the tobacco companies. because when you have every state attorney general suing you, it sends a pretty strong message. and philip morris and the other tobacco companies settled those lawsuits. and you heard about how those settlements restrict the cigarette marketing. you heard about all the documents that got disclosed and still are on the philip morris website. you heard about how much money philip morris has had to pay to the states because of it. and let me just -- these are the restrictions on philip morris' marketing and advertising before the master settlement agreement, then the restrictions in 1998. and here's something philip morris has done above and beyond what they are required to do. people are concerned about magazine advertising for cigarettes. they are concerned kids can see those ads. and starting in 2005 philip morris took its ads out of magazines voluntarily. its competitors continue to advertise in magazines, but philip morris does not do it. at some point, at some point enough is enough, is not it? because philip morris settled those lawsuits and they have paid an enormous amount of money. since 1997 they have paid over 62 billion dollars to the states. florida alone has received 4 billion dollars. this has been going on from 1997 forward. and it is going to continue forever, philip morris has to continue paying this money and having those restrictions on its advertising and marketing for as long as philip morris exists. and so in terms of mitigation i'd ask you to consider the restrictions on philip morris today and also just the incredible amount of money philip morris has been required to pay to the states in these cases. and you know from other testimony, other lawsuits out there, you know dr. cummings has testified more than a hundred cases. so at some point enough is enough. in this case you are going to, you will fairly and fully compensate ms. naugle for her injuries. and on this claim for additional money on punitive damages i'd submit to you the answer should be zero. it should be zero for all the reasons talked about, all these restrictions on the company's business today. but just as important as the master settlement agreement is what philip morris has done to change itself. starting in the fall of 2000 there was no more fighting, there was no more debating, no more disputing that smoking caused lung cancer. philip morris aligned itself with the public health community 13 years ago and put on its website an agreement that smoking causes lung cancer and other serious diseases. philip morris also stopped fighting about addiction. there was the 12-year fight on addiction and philip morris stopped that as well. that we agree. and now you heard philip morris speaks, even where philip morris disagrees on issues like filtered cigarettes with the surgeon general, philip morris defers and says to the public, listen to the public health community. we are not going to say anything publicly that disputes the public health community message. if that is not a change, that is not a change from what you saw in the '50s, '60s, '70s, that is as big a change as you possibly could make in terms of the information that you are providing. it is a shift 180 degrees. it happened in 2000 and we are 13 years later now. philip morris also supported regulation of the cigarette industry by the food and drug administration. for a decade before the law was passed philip morris supported it. and you heard the law grants regulatory control over cigarettes, regulates advertising, marketing and labeling. the fda gets to look at the tobacco company documents. they do surprise inspections of philip morris. and mr. jupe told you about that, how the fda came unannounced and did its inspection and how he worked with the fda answering questions and guiding their inspection of the facilities. they looked at the factories. they looked at the filters. they looked at the additives. and they did not find any noncompliance with the regulation. even during the government shutdown the fda continues to operate because it is paid for not by taxpayers, but it is paid for by the tobacco companies. and you heard -- this ads up to, i think, roughly 1.7 billion dollars or so and about half of that has been paid by philip morris. so in addition to the billions and billions of dollars philip morris has spent settling lawsuits with the states and paying to the states, they also are funding the cost of their regulation because that is what congress required. and this is not empty regulation at all. the fda has enormous powers. if philip morris is to violate the law and violate the regulations, they can shut down their plants; they can seize their products in their warehouses; they can go into the store and tell retailers, you cannot sell this cigarette because philip morris violated the law; they can impose massive fines and penalties. and none of that has happened to philip morris because philip morris has complied with the regulations and restrictions, just like they have complied since 1997 with those settlement agreements and all the restrictions on their advertising. there is been no violations by philip morris. and on this issue of mitigation you are allowed to "consider the extent to which philip morris' conduct has changed from the conduct that harmed ms. naugle and the extent to which circumstances have changed." and i'd submit to you that everything the plaintiff is saying philip morris continues to do today there is nothing illegal or wrongful about it. philip morris continues to sell cigarettes and it is legal for them to do that. philip morris continues to have nicotine in the tobacco in the cigarettes and that is also legal for philip morris to do. philip morris markets cigarettes, although you have heard about the restrictions, and that philip morris does not advertise in magazines that is legal for philip morris to do. even dr. cummings admitted -- they talk about a conspiracy nonstop, even dr. cummings admitted the conspiracy stopped in 1998. fifteen years ago. what is there that remains to be deterred and punished that would warrant awarding more money in punitive damages? given everything you have heard in this case, i submit the answer is no, nothing. and as i've indicated, you should fully and fairly compensate ms. naugle for her medical bills not the amount of pain and suffering they are asking for because it is outrageous, but on punitive damages there is just no need right now in 2013 for additional money in the form of punitive damages. one more instruction and one more point i want to make. you are entitled to conclude that misconduct that occurred in the distant past and involved actors who are no longer associated with philip morris need not be punished or that should be punished less severely than recent misconduct. you know, i do not get to go last. mr. uustal gets a chance to go after me. and i do not know what he is going to say, but maybe he is going to show you things that you have seen in the trial that might have a tendency to make people angry. and you might think, well -- maybe he will get you worked up and you will say, i want to get in my car and drive up to richmond, virginia and i want to get my hands on some of those people i've seen in the documents. you drive up to richmond, virginia today and you knock on the door and say, i want to see joe cullman, i want to see george weissman, i want to talk to helmut wakeham, they are going to say, who? those people have been long gone from the company. and what you are going to get is you are going to get richard jupe and you are going to get a new generation of management. the people who did the things that they have shown you are long gone from the company. any punitive damages you impose today would be punishing the wrong people. and it is easy to think of philip morris as a person, it is a company. it is easy to think of philip morris as a person because it is a name, it sounds like a person, but the fact is that there have been generations and generations and generations of management through that company during the 60 or 70 years we are talking about. and the people who are there today are not the people who are in the documents you have seen or the videos you have seen. and you can tell that it is a different company from the different message it puts on its website. you can tell that it is a different company because they are putting that onsert on cigarettes giving people the public health message about low-tar cigarettes. you can tell it is a different company because they supported fda regulation. you can tell they are a different company because they publish all their research, the public has access to their documents. do not be misled, please, by the fact that it is named philip morris and the company has had the same name for the last 70 years. it is not the same people. it is not the same people at all. and that is something you are entitled to consider. and i ask you to consider on this issue of punitive damages. this is the philip morris today in 2013. people whose names you have heard are gone. philip morris today supports a single consistent message, the public health community's message. philip morris supported fda regulation and operates in a highly restricted and regulated environment today in 2013. and it is a different company run by a different group of people. for all of these reasons that i've spent a lot of time on, because that is what this case seems to be about, it is a question of punitive damages. as i did in my opening statement, i ask you to award zero on this question. because you are going to fully and fairly compensate ms. naugle and there just is no need to award additional money in the form of punitive damages. i mentioned a minute ago that mr. uustal gets to go last. and this is my -- this is my last minute or two with you. and i do not know what he is going to say. i do not get a chance to respond. and so i think you have seen through the trial that there were two sides to every story. this is the one time i do not get to present the other side of the story. so i'd ask you to keep that in mind when you are listening to the rebuttal closing. and we have asked a lot of you so far in this case -- we have been here together if you go back to when people volunteered for the jury, we have been here together almost two weeks. we have asked you to step out of the courtroom, come back in, step back out. the first day of trial we said, go home, we are not ready. you have had to sit there listening to a lot of evidence. and i would ask one more thing of you when you go back in that jury room. i would ask you to award ms. naugle the medical bills compensation she is requesting in the amounts that both sides agree to. i would ask you to be full -- fair on pain and suffering compensation and not award the excessive and unreasonable amount of money they are requesting, but to think about in terms of what would compensate ms. naugle, because the amount they are asking for goes well beyond compensating ms. naugle. and lastly on the issue of punitive damages, the last thing i'd ask you to do is when you get to that question to fill in a zero on that line on the verdict form because there is just no need to award additional money in this case. and, again, i thank you very much on my behalf and ms. arnold's behalf as well for your time and attention. you have been great. i've been up here for a while. and the case is going to be in your hands soon and the job will shift from me and mr. uustal to you. and i thank you very much for it.