mr. monde: if it please the court, mrs. o'hara, counsel. ladies and gentlemen. first, i want to say thank you. thank you for your time. thank for your attention. thank you for your patience. and we had to deal with legal matters in front of the court. your service here today is very important. thank you. as i told you in opening, this case, although you will hear and you did hear a lot of evidence, it really boils down to something simple. it is about one smoker, and one smoker only: garry o'hara. and that is what we are going to focus on. mr. o'hara, as you know, quit smoking in 1981, cold turkey. no withdrawal. and he never picked up another cigarette. now, mr. o'hara was a responsible, hard-working man. he served our country for 30 years in the air force. he started as an airman basic, and rose all the way through the ranks to that highest enlisted man post. while doing that, somehow he found time to get a college degree, earning a bachelor of science. he accomplished his missions, and he achieved his goals at work, at home, and when the time was right for him, when it came time to quit smoking. now, look, by all accounts, garry o'hara was a good, man, a good father, a good soldier, and a good husband. it would be human nature for you to feel sympathy towards mrs. o'hara and her family for their loss, but judge jones will tell you that under the law, you cannot base your decision here in the court on sympathy. can we see that, please? this will be final instruction 27: in reaching your verdict, do not let bias, sympathy, prejudice, public opinion or other sentiment for or against any party influence your decision. now, remember back in voir dire, jury selection, you all were sitting out there in the audience, and one question i asked, i asked if anyone had a doubt or concern about their ability to set aside feelings of sympathy and decide the case just on the evidence and the law, please raise your hand. i told you that because mr. o'hara died of cancer. his loved ones would come in and talk about his final days, and i asked, please raise your hand if you have any question or doubt about being able to set aside sympathy and just decide the case on the facts. and you all did not raise your hand. maybe others did, but you did not. and that -- that commitment is part of your solemn bond and your solemn oath that you took when you swore to be jurors, not to let sympathy influence your decision. and this is a court of law. and as you have heard, the plaintiff is seeking millions of dollars. and under our law, the plaintiff has the burden of proof on many issues. and i will explain to you why the evidence in this case does not show that she is met her burden. and your job, your job will soon be to decide the case based on the facts and law, and based on the evidence about mr. o'hara and his life and the choices that he did make. now, the engle class action that you have heard about, heard about it in closing, heard about it in opening, heard about it in the jury selection, that is over. this case is not about other smokers or about tobacco companies in general. you will get the verdict form in a few minutes. notice, when you look at it, look for this when you get it, all of the questions are about garry o'hara, not a class of smokers or tobaccos in general. i expected that -- i said this in opening, i expected that the plaintiffs would present a lot of evidence about things that just did not have anything to do with garry o'hara. and you heard hours and hours of testimony and saw a lot of documents, a lot of ideas from reynolds and other tobacco companies; and many of them, many of those documents that you saw, they were from a time before mr. o'hara was born, and many were from a time after he quit smoking. and i asked you to please ask, when you saw those documents, and i ask you again when you look at the evidence back in the jury room, ask yourself: what does his have to do with garry o'hara? you heard about organizations that mr. o'hara never heard of. you saw documents from companies, philip morris and others that are not in this courtroom, and you heard about things that people wrote and said. mr. smith: may i approach? the court: approach, please. (thereupon, the following proceedings were had at sidebar:) mr. smith: your honor, objection. your honor, that is a misstatement of law for two reasons. number 1, rj reynolds, brown & williams and american tobacco, you also instructed they are here, and you also gave an instruction that they were responsible, every co-conspirator, talking about philip morris. the co-conspirators, they are here. you cannot say that. mr. monde: i said that they saw documents from companies that are not in the courtroom, including philip morris, liggett & myers and other examples. it is not a member of the conspiracy. the court: okay. i understand -- i understand that this is the beginning of this statement, okay? and not his conclusion. and so his preparatory statement that they did hear from things, if it appears that he is going to be denying the agreement theory, that they cannot find that -- then i -- you can revisit it. i do not find that to the case. mr. monde: i assure the court that i'm not going there. the court: thank you. (thereupon, the sidebar was concluded and the following proceedings were held in open court:) mr. monde: ready? as i was saying, you saw documents from companies that are not in the courtroom. you heard about things that people wrote and said that never reached mr. o'hara, things that did not influence his smoking decisions. make no mistake, the testimony, the documents that were presented to you, much of it was done for the purpose of getting you angry, getting you upset, distracting you from the issue in this case about garry o'hara. in spite of all of those documents that they showed you, our country has decided that cigarettes are legal. they are legal to make. they are legal to sell. and they are legal to advertise. this case is not about whether people should smoke cigarettes. it is not about whether smoking can cause disease. it can. it is not about whether smoking can be addictive. it can. there may be other smokers out there who did not know about the risks of smoking. there may be other smokers out there that tried and tried desperately to stop smoking, but never were able to succeed. there may be other smokers out there who were tortured about their smoking, that hated their smoking, or continued to smoke because they relied on statements that they heard by tobacco companies. this is not that case. now, before i get to the verdict form, let me talk about those engle findings briefly. there is no debate that none of those findings tell you how to answer the questions that you will need to answer about garry o'hara. and the judge instructed you on that. those findings do not establish that mr. o'hara was a member of the class. those findings cannot be used to help establish that he was a member of the class. that is jury instruction 9. right there. they -- those findings, those findings -- you can take that down. thank you, will. those findings did not establish that mr. o'hara had primary lung cancer. they do not establish that mr. o'hara was addicted. they do not establish that any addiction to cigarettes was a legal cause of mr. o'hara's cancer. and they do not establish that mr. o'hara relied on any statement by a tobacco company. so let me turn to the verdict form. the first question: did garry o'hara have primary lung cancer? and we have talked about what that means. did his cancer start in his lung? or some place else? the plaintiff has the burden of proving to you that his cancer started in the lung. it is not reynolds' burden to prove where it started. it is plaintiff's burden to prove it started in the lung. now, they spent a lot of time during the trial on this issue. they brought you four witnesses. and we brought dr. sowers. but remember, it is not the number of witnesses called that matters. we presented our evidence through the cross-examination of the plaintiff's witnesses, just as i told you that we would do in opening. the facts that came out in cross-examination, those are our witnesses. and remember dr. sider. i had those big large boards because i wanted to walk him through all of the -- those reports. not just some, all of them. and we did that. and we respected your time by not calling additional witnesses that just would have said the same thing. here is why plaintiff has not carried her burden on this first question. reason one: there is no sign of cancer -- there was no sign of cancer in mr. o'hara's lung. let us start with the radiology: the x-rays, the cts. now, dr. sider admitted, for a radiologist, the answer is on the film. now, he tried to say, well, i was just talking about a different case. that is not what he said. he said, i'm a radiologist. my expertise, the skill that i bring to the table, is looking at these films, the images, and seeing things that people not trained to do what i do cannot see. the answer is in the film. but there are no films here. dr. sider told you that his opinion was based on what he called radiographic appearance, and then he had to admit, well, i did not have any films to look at to tell you about radiographic appearance. so what we do have are the reports of the radiologist, the one radiologist who did look at the films when they were still available, colonel james watson. and those were the boards that i went through with you. dr. sider had to admit that there was no discernable visual nodule in the lung. in plain english, it was not there. dr. watson looked at the chest x-ray -- do you remember that was june 13th, and then the ct report, june 14th? he looked at those films, and he noted some things along the trachea. he had an enlarged right hilar node. all of that was in the area outside of the lung, between the lungs. dr. watson's report says something about a nodule, lesion, tumor in the lung. and dr. ledbetter, dr. strauss and dr. marsh, they each admitted they are not radiologists. they rely on the radiologists to interpret the films, and they did not disagree with dr. watson's report. here is what dr. ledbetter said: paratracheal mass, not in the lung. hilar node, not in the lung. neither of those findings by dr. watson showed primary cancer in the lung. dr. marsh: hilar node, not in the lung. hilar node, not the primary site, not where the cancer started. and he said: none of the radiology reports identify a lung tumor. dr. ledbetter, when he was looking at the films back in 1995, june 19th, 1995, what did he write? what did he write? lungs are clear. lungs are clear. and then there was another x-ray. remember, after they -- they did a biopsy procedure, and this is july 25, and dr. loughlin read that. what does he say? the lungs are clear. and i remember what i asked dr. sider. i said: dr. sider, given your background and training, if this radiologist, loughlin, had seen something in the lung, a nodule, tumor, something suspicious for cancer, would you have expected him to put that in his report? you remember his answer. he said: yes. it is not there. the answer is in the film. and the radiologist who reviewed the films never identified anything in the lungs. and they agreed with the radiology reports, except for dr. sider. remember, he wanted to rewrite colonel watson's ct report. he wanted to say -- the witness who says that the answer is in the film wanted to rewrite it to say that that description of the paratracheal mass meant there was a mass in the lung. he wanted to say, after saying the answer is in the film, that he was right and the guy who actually did see the film was wrong. please consider that, the credibility of that testimony, when you are dealing with this first question. and then the pathology. remember, the pathologist is the doctor who looks at material under the microscope. and several of plaintiff's witnesses told you that pathology samples are often able to identify the primary site of the cancer. not here. just like there were no films to show you, there was no pathology samples to show you. just like the radiology, we have to rely on the reports written by the pathologist at the time. we have two of them. dr. elliott at eglin, he reviewed the pathology under the microscope, and he could not determine in this case where the primary location was. origin is uncertain, but would consider gi tract, lung and urogenital tract. the next page. that is okay. and i'm not going to play games with you that he listed gi tract first and lung second. for one thing, the afip report that we are going to get to in a moment, they reversed those. but the important thing in this situation, the pathology could not identify the primary site of the cancer. and, again, it is plaintiff's burden to prove it was the lung. dr. elliott's report does not help plaintiff carry the burden. you did not hear anybody disagree with dr. elliott's report. in fact, what did dr. ledbetter do, the oncologist, when he got this? he sent it up to the afip, the armed forces institute of pathology. he wanted to know if they could use their expertise to see if they could tell where the cancer started. and what happened? well, it was reviewed by the afip. and remember dr. sider? remember what they told you about the armed forces institute? several of the other doctors had described it as a world-renowned institution. but dr. sider, he went one step further, and remember, he had worked there, he said that afip is the arbiter of all things pathology. and the arbiter of all things pathology brought all of their know-how, all of their expertise, to the question: can we tell where mr. o'hara's cancer started from this pathology sample? their answer was no. the same possibilities: lung or gi tract. and, again, no witness disagreed with that pathology report. now, everyone is in agreement that the cell type was adenocarcinoma. that is important, because adenocarcinoma, as several of the doctors explained, not just dr. sowers, on cross-examination several of the doctors explained that there are several places along the gi tract where adenocarcinoma can start. now, this is important. the plaintiff's witnesses, their medical witnesses, they explained that there were additional tests that could have been done to determine the primary site of the cancer. and they explained that those tests were not done. and they were not done because it would not have mattered to the care and treatment of mr. o'hara at that point. and we do not argue with that. there was no reason to put mr. o'hara through additional tests that were not going to make a difference in his care and treatment. we do not criticize that. in fact, we are the ones that brought that out on cross-examination. but now we are in a court of law, and plaintiff has the burden, and the fact that those tests were not done is additional reason that plaintiff has not met the burden in this courtroom. what about dr. ledbetter? he saw mr. o'hara for one time, one hour. and in his report, he wrote probably lung cancer, and if lung cancer, and he admitted that those words lack certainty. and his actions speak louder or echoed his words, because what did he do? he is the one that sent that pathology up to the armed forces institute. he was not sure. but 20 years later, plaintiff's counsel contacted him, and he spent more time meeting with the lawyers than he did ever seeing mr. o'hara. and he told you he did not recall mr. o'hara. he admitted that all of this testimony was based solely on the medical records, those same medical records that led him to use these words reflecting uncertainty 20 years ago, but 20 years later, now he is one hundred percent absolutely certain. that is the same man who conceded that there is no evidence of any actual cancer in mr. o'hara's lung. dr. marsh. he had just one record. and it says primary lung cancer, sure enough. but what is the rest of the story? dr. marsh saw mr. o'hara one time, one hour. he never treated mr. o'hara. he generated one record, a disability letter. he admitted that this was not a medical record. it did not go to any doctors. it is a letter that mr. o'hara asked him to write to say he was disabled from cancer so he could apply for disability. and dr. marsh admitted that the primary location of the cancer of mr. o'hara did not matter for the purpose of the letter. he was totally disabled at that point and not curable regardless of where the cancer started. and dr. o'hara -- dr. o'hara -- dr. marsh in his letter said that the lung cancer was documented on ct scanning on june 14th, 1995. that is the same radiology report that you all have seen several times, the same radiology report that all of the doctors, including dr. marsh, say does not show anything in the lung. tumor boards. heard a lot about those. here are the facts: there are no records of them. and both dr. marsh and dr. ledbetter conceded that if, in fact, the tumor boards discuss mr. o'hara's case, it was after the documents that they wrote. dr. kit kuss. now, he is the doctor that filled out the death certificate. and each side showed you records from dr. kuss. some say lung cancer, some say widely metastatic adenocarcinoma, without identifying a primary site. but the last record that mr. o'hara -- i'm sorry, that dr. kuss wrote about mr. o'hara ways the death certificate. and it said widely metastatic adenocarcinoma. he did not identify this as a lung cancer. he did not say where the cancer started. and if the radiology reports showed cancer in the lungs, maybe that omission is not important. if the pathology report showed that the cancer started in the lungs, maybe that omission is not important. but they did not, and the omission here speaks volumes. not identifying the primary site in that death certificate is completely consistent with the radiology reports; it is completely consistent with the pathology reports; it is completely consistent with cancer of unknown origin. metastatic pattern or the spread of cancer. we brought you dr. sowers. now, look, he does not sit in an ivory tower writing articles. he works every day interpreting films of patients with cancer. and he told you just how rare it is to have a primary lung cancer that has spread to the degree that mr. o'hara's spread, but not to see anything in the lung. three percent, he said. dr. strauss conceded that most cancers of unknown primary are poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma, which is the cell type mr. o'hara had. and so the question for you is whether plaintiff has carried her burden in proving it started in the lung. and for the reasons i have described, the answer should be no. and you do not have to decide where the cancer started. you do not have to all agree that it started at any of the various places that we have shown you through the evidence it could have started. the question is simply: has plaintiff carried her burden that it started in the lung? and look at plaintiff's experts. they cannot even agree where the cancer started. they cannot agree. one last point on this question. mr. o'hara was diagnosed with cancer when he was 35 years old, 14 years after he -- 14 years after his last cigarette. and dr. strauss agreed that if a smoker quits by age 35 -- i may have misspoke. let me say that again more slowly. mr. o'hara was diagnosed with his cancer 14 years after he quit at age 35. now, dr. strauss agreed that if a smoker quits by age 35, it is unlikely that they ever will develop a smoking-related cancer. he did quit at 35. that is completely consistent with mr. o'hara never having a tumor visible in the lung. now, there are a lot of places that the witness has told you this cancer could have started, and they did not look there. and again, we -- we have talked about why. there was no good medical reason to do those tests. but where is the one place that those doctors did look and look and look? it was the lung. it was the lung. and there was nothing there. so based on the evidence, the answer should be no to this first question. now, let us talk about addiction, question 2: was garry o'hara addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine? the answer is no. and i'm going to talk about why. there is no dispute that smoking can be addictive and hard to quit for some people. the fact that smoking cigarettes can be addictive, that has been known for over 100 years. you remember the florida department of health saying that back in 1906. dr. cummings admitted that it has been known for hundreds of years that nicotine is present in tobacco; that it occurs naturally; that if you take a tobacco plant from the field, chop it up and smoke it, there will be nicotine in it. now, there is no dispute, as i said, that some smokers are addicted, but this question is not about some smokers; it is about garry o'hara. and yet, those first two witnesses, dr. cummings and dr. hurt, they spent hours and hours talking in general terms, generic topics, things that do not have to do with garry o'hara. in fact, i asked somebody to go back and check. those two witnesses were on the stand for five days. the direct exam of dr. cummings lasted about nine hours. do you know how many times dr. cummings mentioned mr. o'hara in that nine hours? seven. about seven. the redirect lasted over an hour. mentioned mr. o'hara twice. the direct and the redirect exam of dr. hurt lasted almost five hours, and he mentioned mr. o'hara five times. that is why i said during opening, please keep your eye on the ball. ask yourself: how does what i'm hearing have to do with mr. o'hara? now, there are experts. some experts that come into court and give you the benefit of their expertise in an unbiased way. no agenda. no rooting for one side or the other. just my opinion, and here are the reasons why. then there is dr. cummings. he is testified for 20 years in lawsuits just like this. the last two and a half years, he is testified over 144 days. that is nearly five months of time. made well over a million dollars just since 2009. he is a self-appointed general in the war against tobacco. he admitted that he is rooting for the plaintiff to win. dr. cummings taught in the conference we told you about. it is the same conference that dr. hurt went to. remember, dr. hurt, he showed you or we asked him about that powerpoint presentation that he made, where he said the witness' job was not to give up any points, and to avoid yes or no answers. and i respectfully say he certainly practiced what he preached there. and you will hear -- you have heard already the court's instruction on the believability of witnesses. the long story short is that you are entitled, in evaluating the believability, the credibility, to look at the interest that the witness has in the outcome, and there are other expressions of bias. well, dr. cummings and dr. hurt, they showed you document after document, and they tried to suggest that the only reason people smoked is for nicotine, that nicotine controls them, prevents them from making choices. but remember i told you in opening that we would present our evidence through the cross-examination, at least a lot of it. let us focus briefly at some of the things that they said on cross-examination. dr. hurt agreed that not all smokers are addicted. dr. cummings agreed that there are 60 million former smokers in this country, more than the number of current smokers. dr. cummings agreed that many of those former smokers were addicted and quit anyway. dr. cummings agreed that anyone can quit smoking. that is what they told every smoker at his clinic through his smart move pamphlet. so let us look at mr. o'hara and what we know about his smoking, to answer that question: was he addicted? now, you have seen this. it is the medical record. it shows that he smoked for 18 years, two packs a day. started in 1963, the year he joined the air force. there is no evidence -- you heard no evidence that mr. o'hara wanted to quit or tried to quit in the 1960s. and from the 1970s, there was ample evidence that mr. o'hara was able to control his smoking at any time that he chose to, and to quit when he chose to. 1971. remember, we heard the testimony about their son frank. mrs. o'hara goes to the doctor. the doctor says that smoking is bad for frank's lungs and mr. o'hara cannot smoke around frank inside. mr. o'hara said, i will not smoke around frank inside. i will not smoke inside at all anymore. he did not disagree with the doctor. he did not say, i have some doubt or confusion about whether smoking can be bad for folks' lungs. he did not say, well, i've heard there is some doubt or controversy by tobacco companies, so no, i'm going to keep smoking inside. he did not say any of that. he just went outside and smoked. he controlled his smoking. he never smoked in the house again. and you heard testimony that he would go outside in the rain and in the snow to smoke. guess what? he did that his whole career. that was part of his duty at work, was long nights on guard. he smoked outside, smoked to stay awake, smoked to relieve the boredom, smoked because it helped him concentrate. and remember that i asked mrs. o'hara, when she explained this to her husband in 1971 when she came home from the doctors, did he try to quit? the answer was no. now, she testified that later in the 1970s, he would talk about cutting back and quitting. but actions are what matter. and mr. o'hara wanted to continue smoking at that point in the '70s. remember, she told you that she never actually saw him try to quit smoking that whole 10 years, that whole 10 years from the doctor's appointment with frank and '81 when he did quit for good: even during the 10 years, i do not recall anything. the person who spent the most time with mr. o'hara during that decade, the person who knew him best, the person who was most concerned about his smoking, she told you he never tried to quit in the decade of the 1970s. she never saw him try to quit in the decade of the 1970s. and you heard other evidence that, in fact, in 1977, mr. o'hara quit for at least two and a half months when the family was over in belgium. and what happened during that time? did he go through withdrawal? was he irritable? was he unable to concentrate? unable to do this job at home or at work? no. no evidence of withdrawal symptoms. now, at some point, after at least two and a half months, mr. o'hara went back to smoking. mrs. o'hara told you that she does not know when or why. and dr. hurt told you after two and a half months, that nicotine, it is out of the body. no nicotine receptors. remember that fancy animation he showed you? they are back to normal. addiction did not make him go back to smoking after two and a half months. it was his choice. and in 1981, at the age of 35, he made the choice to quit for good. and you remember that story. his daughter, valerie o'hara, went to grab his hand. he burned her. he felt terrible. and he said: you know what? this is it. i'm done. i quit. i promise you, i quit. and he kept his promise. that is garry o'hara. he kept that promise. that is not addiction. it is control. it is choice. and cold turkey. no cessation aids. no trips to the doctor. and no withdrawal. again, each of the family members, they agreed that when he quit smoking, there was no changes in his personality. and when he quit smoking in '81, he did not gain weight; he lost it. got into running, got into shape. and dr. hurt, he agreed -- remember, i asked him those series of questions. you know, did you see evidence of job performance? evidence of depressed mood? evidence of sleep disturbance? difficulty concentrating? those are withdrawal symptoms of an addicted smoker. not here. not here. dreams. you heard that he dreamt about smoking. but those dreams, they did not cause him to go back to smoking. valerie o'hara testified that 10 years later, he was still talking about dreaming. but he did not smoke. he never picked up another cigarette. that is control. that is not addiction. now, dr. cummings and dr. hurt told you he was addicted, so let us talk a little bit about that. you will not be given a definition of addiction in the instructions that judge jones gives you. you heard from dr. cummings and dr. ticknor that there is no consensus on the definition of addiction and that the definition has changed. you will need to decide based upon the evidence what it means to be addicted. and you will need to decide whether the plaintiff carried her burden on that. but consider this: dr. hurt acknowledged that the dsm is a valid tool. they use it at the mayo clinic. he said: well, i did not use it here because i only like to use with people that i speak to. but dr. ticknor explained to you that the dsm can be and is used in forensic settings. that is like where we are here, provided you have other information available. that is where all of those depositions came from. and he explained to you how, based on the family's testimony, he provided the information that he needed to do that assessment under the dsm. but ask yourselves this when you think about dr. hurt: why did not he tell you on direct examination that the mayo clinic had a definition of tobacco addiction? remember he talked at some length and with some pride about the mayo clinic, no. 1, no. 2, in us reports, been around for decades, patient-centered approach. but he did not tell you anything about their definition of tobacco addiction until we asked on cross-examination. and dr. hurt admitted that the mayo clinic does have a definition. they prefer the term "dependence" rather "addiction," but he told you those things meant the same thing, so we asked: what is the definition? nicotine dependence, also called tobacco dependence, is an addiction to tobacco products caused by nicotine. nicotine dependence means you cannot stop using the substance, even though it is causing you harm. mr. o'hara could stop. mr. o'hara did stop. mr. o'hara never smoked when he had a medical condition related to his smoking. he does not meet the definition of the mayo clinic. so what did dr. hurt and dr. cummings do? well, they used a two-question test, heaviness of smoking index. five days of testimony, but when it comes to addiction, a two-question test. and you know what? that heaviness of smoking index test is not designed to say whether a person is addicted or is not addicted. it is designed to tell you how heavily they might be addicted. it assumes addiction. the test assumes addiction. you can literally score zero on that test and you are deemed addicted. how is that going to help you answer the question of whether he was addicted or not? the court: mr. monde, one hour. mr. monde: now, dr. cummings and dr. hurt talked about smoking and nicotine addiction being this hugely complex behavior, and yet they boil it down to a two-question test, a two-question test that is rigged to give you the answer. you cannot be not addicted under that test. and what did he score on that, by the way? five or 6, he said. that meant if you get a 5 or 6, the person could not quit smoking. it would be highly unlikely that they could quit. and what do we know here? he did it. he did it without withdrawal. he did it cold turkey. he did it without assistance. so we brought dr. ticknor in yesterday. an ivory tower type? no. does he have 50 articles published? no. is he a member of four different organizations? no. he practices medicine. he deals with people and addiction every day, including nicotine addiction. and when you consider those various witnesses, you are just going to have to decide what is more important, the number of diplomas on that witness' wall or the experience under their belt? that is dr. ticknor. and he applied that dsm, and he walked you through it, those 11 criteria. he told you where he thought mr. o'hara's smoking behavior did meet the criteria, and he told you where it did not. and he showed you that rainbow graph, and he showed you why he found mr. o'hara not addicted. and he was cross-examined, but he did not say in that cross-examination that he found criteria that he did not tell you about in direct exam. and as i said before, there was -- there is no evidence that mr. o'hara used or needed to use any aid to help quitting. now, addicted smokers, heavily addicted smokers, those folks can quit, but they need aids. now, look, today, we have chantix, we have nicotine patches and gum. those were not available. but there were things like hypnosis, group therapy, you could go to the doctor. and folks did back in the '60s and '70s, but not mr. o'hara. he was in charge. he was not addicted. he was in control. and all of those medical records that you patiently watched and looked at, how many said mr. o'hara is addicted? or was addicted? not a single one. the evidence in this case is that the first time someone diagnosed mr. o'hara with addiction was 34 years, after he gets in this litigation. now, what about the fact that mr. o'hara smoked two packs a day for 18 years? is not addiction -- is not addiction the only thing that would explain that? absolutely not. the evidence is clear. not all regular smokers, not all daily smokers are addicted. not all two-pack-a-day smokers are addicted. the dsm says that about half of regular smokers are addicted and half are not. and remember what dr. hurt told you: nicotine is not the only reason that people smoke. he told you in cross-examination: some people for the pleasure. that was garry o'hara. the evidence is clear, mr. o'hara was not addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine. the next question, if you get there, and i do not believe that you should, but if you do, it is my only opportunity to talk to you, and that is question 3: was addiction the legal cause of his cancer? the question does not ask whether smoking caused his cancer; it asks whether addiction did. now, a way to think of that question is this: was mr. o'hara so powerfully addicted to cigarettes that he was compelled to smoke, powerfully addicted to nicotine? and was he unable to quit and prevent his cancer? to answer that question, you have to think about whether addiction prevents all smokers from quitting. we already know the answer to that. it is no. now, addiction can only be the legal cause -- that is the instruction you are going to get -- it can only be the legal cause if it directly, and in natural and continuous sequence, produced or contributed substantially -- and i want to focus you on that word "substantially" contributed to causing his cancer such that but for addiction, the cancer would not have occurred. now, mr. smith showed you the concurring-cause language farther down, but that does not change the fact that addiction must substantially cause the cancer. dr. cummings and dr. hurt, as you saw, they both agreed that there are 60 million former smokers in this country, and the vast majority would have been addicted as they defined it. addiction did not prevent those people from quitting. millions and millions of americans quit in the '60s, '70s and '80s, and when mr. o'hara decided that is it, i'm putting these things down, he did the same. and think about that during this time that dr. hurt was telling you and showing you these documents that cigarettes were more addictive, and that people could not quit them, and that reynolds was making its cigarettes more addictive and not telling people that. all of these people quit. but what is important here is that mr. o'hara quit. that did not keep him from quitting. it did not keep him for quitting for over two and a half months in 1977. it did not keep him from quitting forever when he said, i'm done. dr. hurt said: well, i mean, only 3 percent of smokers quit a year. mr. o'hara is there. so on this question, was mr. o'hara so powerfully addicted that he was compelled to smoke and not able to quit? or did he have the ability to quit any time? based on what you already know about mr. o'hara, the answer is clear, he was able to quit when he wanted to, and he was completely in control of his smoking. no one forced mr. o'hara to light up a cigarette and smoke. and no one forced mr. o'hara to light that last cigarette and put them away. he made that choice. those were his choices, not addiction. those choices were the substantial -- the only substantial cause of his smoking-related injury, any injury that he had. now, there is no evidence that the cigarettes that mr. o'hara were smoking were any different from any other cigarette on the market. no evidence that his brain was affected differently from any other smoker who quit. no evidence that he was exposed to different advertising or different company statements when all of those folks quit. in fact, there is no evidence that he saw or heard anything from rj reynolds. every smoker is responsible for their behavior. even dr. cummings admitted that a smoker has to choose to try to quit. and mrs. o'hara, she testified that it was mr. o'hara who needed to decide for himself when he was ready to quit. mr. o'hara was fully in charge of that decision. now, mr. o'hara, as i said, the evidence shows he did not want -- that he wanted to smoke until he quit in 1981 when he had that event with his daughter. and just like that, he joined all of those other millions of americans who quit. no withdrawal. he made the choice. he followed through on it. addiction did not control mr. o'hara. mr. o'hara was in control of his smoking. your answer, if you get to no. 3, should be no. let me turn to question 4, please: was smoking cigarettes for which reynolds has legal liability a legal cause of his cancer? now, you heard testimony that mr. o'hara smoked five brands, including marlboro. reynolds does not make marlboro. reynolds is not responsible for marlboro. plaintiff cannot carry her burden by showing that marlboro was the cause of mr. o'hara's injuries. and there was testimony about those five brands, but she never was able to tell you how much or when she bought those brands. we went through that chart. remember i had that chart of the different places where they lived? and she was not able to say how much or when. and that is not surprising, because she was not buying brands based on the brand; she was buying based on price. mr. o'hara never asked her to buy any of those brands. reliance? reliance? by mr. o'hara? he did not do most of his buying of cigarettes; she did. and the few that he bought, she does not know why or what. cigarettes were cigarettes to him. now, they -- plaintiff's counsel talked about filtered, the illusion of filtration. some people, he says, were induced to smoke filters, thinking that they were safer. well, while all of that was going on, according to plaintiff's counsel, what was mr. o'hara doing? he was smoking filtered and unfiltered, interchangeably. there is no reliance. your answer on no. 4 should be no. now, the next two questions on the verdict form, 5 and 6, ask about fault and percentage of responsibility. this is important. on this question, no. 6 and 5, you are not comparing conduct in general. the question is not about a comparison of conduct in general. it is a comparison of conduct that was a legal cause of mr. o'hara's cancer. reynolds cannot be assigned fault for actions that were not a legal cause of his cancer. and so we talk about those documents. the evidence is that mr. o'hara was a willing smoker. he made the choice to start smoking in '63. reynolds did not force him to start smoking. we do not know what brands he smoked then. mr. o'hara made that decision. and remember what dr. cummings said: even before mr. o'hara started, smoking was a normal lifestyle choice. and then in 1966, two, three years after he started, every pack of cigarettes that he smoked carried the warning required by congress. and he smoked from 1960 -- from that warning in 1966, and every pack he smoked until he quit in '81 carried the warning. we know from what we talked about the visit, from frank's doctor, he knew that smoking could damage his lung. we know in 1977 he made that decision to quit, and then in 1981, he made another choice to quit for good. and we respect mr. o'hara's choice to smoke, and we do not criticize him for that. we are not criticizing him for that choice. those are his decisions. he had right the make them. with the right to choose comes responsibility. now, those company documents they showed you, and they try to suggest that that beared on the percentages of fault. there was no evidence in this case -- think about it, think about it, there was no evidence or testimony in this case that mr. o'hara ever saw anything from a tobacco company, much less made decisions based on it. again, he did not even buy most of this cigarettes. he never asked -- think about this: the testimony is that he never once asked his wife to buy a particular brand. mrs. o'hara could not make smoking decisions for him. reynolds could not make those smoking decisions. he alone. and she has admitted, and we saw counsel here today admit some responsibility. he was responsible in his career. he was responsible at home. he made those choices. not in reliance on things that companies said. and on no. 6, i submit the answer should be one hundred percent responsibility for mr. o'hara. that is what he assumed in his responsibilities at work. let us go to question 7 and 8: concealment and conspiracy to conceal. i'm going to deal with those at the same time because they are based on the same core facts. the burden that plaintiff has assumed in this case is to prove to you that mr. o'hara developed a smoking-related cancer because reynolds either concealed information from him or agreed to conceal information not otherwise known or available. here is what these questions are really asking you: did garry o'hara develop cancer because he did not know that smoking was dangerous? because reynolds hid it from him? that is what these questions ask about. the answer has to be no. he knew that smoking was dangerous, and he chose to smoke anyway. now, material. mr. smith said that means, in simple english, did it matter? he showed you documents that mr. o'hara did not see. but did it matter? no. because mr. o'hara knew enough that smoking was dangerous, and he chose to smoke anyway. and dr. cummings, he testified to you that smoking and health, it is one of the most widely covered issues in the media. and why is -- why does all of this evidence about what was in the public domain matter? it is this, it is this, folks: you cannot conceal what is known. yes, reader's digest was the no. 1 magazine in the country for decades. yes, reader's digest was a magazine that the o'haras got. yes, reader's digest was a magazine that mr. o'hara read. and they covered decade by decade, long before mr. o'hara started smoking, the dangers of smoking, the fact that you could get cancer from smoking. all of this widespread publicity, let us -- let us look at the 1957 clip, please, from surgeon general burney. what did the surgeon general say was the effect of this smoking coverage by newspapers and magazines? "our position is that we have informed the public through the excellent coverage of the press, radio and tv." dr. heller, from the national cancer institute, said the same thing. but it did not stop there. 1964, within months, maybe weeks of when mr. o'hara started smoking, front page news. biggest public health story, dr. cummings said, including coverage here in pensacola. and the air force. the air force was educating its airman even before the surgeon general came out in '64. remember the three articles i read to you, the articles talking about what the air force was doing, the air force talking about the posters that were being put up at the base exchanges? all of that information was out there. now, as i said, does that mean that mr. o'hara knew all that reynolds knew? no. but look at the question. it has to be material. it has to matter. he knew, and he knew when he quit for good. advertising. plaintiff spent a lot of time talking about advertising. there is no evidence in this case that mr. o'hara bought any cigarettes because of advertising, nor mrs. o'hara for that matter. she explained to you that she wanted to buy the cheapest cigarette available because she did not want to spend any more money on it. and in order to be a legal cause of cancer, plaintiff must show that mr. o'hara reasonably relied to his detriment on statements by reynolds. now, mr. smith showed you part of the instruction about plaintiff not needing to provide direct evidence, that you could infer reliance. you can infer reliance. keep reading. the instruction goes on to say: you can infer only if the evidence as a whole supports such an inference. the evidence does not support that inference. the evidence is that mr. o'hara knew the risks, saw the warnings on the packs, made the decision to smoke. mr. o'hara -- we heard a lot about the tobacco institute, the tirc, the council for tobacco research. no evidence that mr. o'hara saw or relied on anything they said. there was no evidence that he mentioned any statements by reynolds. not once. i mean, there is no evidence that he was smoking particular brands because of things that they were saying. he did not ask for brands by name, and he did not care what she brought home. now, plaintiffs showed you documents and interview clips from people like anne browder in 1983; ed horrigan, 1984; surgeon general koop in '88; the ceos in congress. folks, those were all long after mr. o'hara quit smoking. the flintstones. the ads with celebrities. not one piece of evidence that mr. o'hara saw those, relied on those, mentioned those. now, plaintiff spent a lot of time talking about manipulation of nicotine. what was happening with mr. o'hara during the same time period? he was quitting smoking for good. they showed a document, a so-called secret document that actually established that levels in -- nicotine levels in cigarettes were going down. from 1960 to 1963, to 1972, nicotine levels were going down. and dr. hurt showed you a few documents from dr. teague suggesting an increase in nicotine level. but on cross-examination, dr. hurt was forced to admit that at the same time reynolds was looking at that, members of the public health community were -- who had no connection to reynolds, were advocating that reynolds look at a cigarette with a medium nicotine content and lower tar as a way to try to make a safer cigarette. dr. teague's 1972 memo: nicotine was the sine qua non of smoking. dr. hurt told you that that meant nicotine was essential, nicotine was essential to smoking. look what reader's digest said 22 years earlier: nicotine is the essential ingredient in tobacco. they showed you documents about marketing to youth. what does that have to do with mr. o'hara? there is no evidence that he started smoking when he went into the air force because of advertisements. you heard his best friend say that folks in vietnam, he said there was one person that he knew that did not smoke. what does that have to do with mr. o'hara? they showed you documents from the 1920s before mr. o'hara was born. those did not affect smoking decisions. and we showed with dr. cummings, that when it came to the credibility of sources of information -- i will not go through all of these that we showed with dr. cummings, but people were taking their information about smoking from groups like the american cancer society and the government, not the tobacco companies. so back to the verdict form, please. seven and 8. there is no evidence that mr. o'hara reasonably relied on statements by reynolds, or any tobacco company for that matter, or that reynolds concealed or conspired to conceal information that but for the concealment, mr. o'hara would not have known and would not have developed cancer. so i'm close to wrapping up, but before i do, i need to address some of the last questions on the verdict form, and i want to spend a moment on damages. for the reasons i've told you, i respectfully believe that the plaintiff has not carried her burden of proof that the law imposes here. and while i need to talk about damages because it is my job, i -- i say, again, i do not think that she is proven her case, and i think the evidence -- it does not matter what i think, the evidence does not prove that. but one of the strengths of our jury system is we put folks like yourselves in the jury box, and we ask you all to use your common sense to evaluate the evidence. now, you heard from dr. raffa last week, and he gave estimates of mr. o'hara's financial loss, and he told you that before mr. o'hara stopped smoking -- he told that before mr. o'hara stopped working, he was making about $37,000 a year. and here, they are asking for $10 million. it is an extraordinary amount of money, and i have thought about a way to try to put that in context. at $37,000 a year, it would take 270 years working to earn that money. now, mr. -- dr. raffa told you that he spoke to mrs. o'hara, who told him they had planned to retire early, at age 55. he gave an estimate of lost wages and support of about $500,000. now, soon the judge will send you out after he is instructed you that any award of damages must be fair and just in light of the evidence. and there may be cases, as i've said, where the evidence makes it clear that damages are warranted. that is not here. cases where the evidence shows the smoker was heavily addicted, cases that show that the smoker could not quit, cases that show that no matter how hard he tried or she tried, he could not quit, cases that show that the smoker was unaware of the risks of smoking, cases that show that the smoker kept smoking even with a health-related condition. that is not this case. you have heard the evidence. that is not this case. but if you do determine that damages are appropriate, i respectfully submit to you that the damages should be in the hundreds of thousands of dollars, not 10 and 12 and 14 million. use your common sense. use your common sense. now, there is a question about entitlement to punitive damages. it is the last question on the verdict form. and they are asking you to answer yes to the question of whether punitive damages are warranted. now, if you answer no to the other questions preceding, you do not get to that. and for all of the reasons that i have talked about, i do not think the evidence allows you to get here. i do not think that the burden of proof has been carried by the plaintiff. but if you do get this far, the damages that you award, if you choose to award them, have fully compensated mr. o'hara. punitive damages are not about compensation or making someone whole. punitive damages are about more money, more money that would go not to the cancer society, not to stop smoking prevention, to mrs. o'hara. and judge jones instructed you, remember he told you the burden of proof on entitlement here is different: it is clear and convincing evidence. that means the evidence must be clear. it means the evidence must convince you without hesitation. the engle findings themselves do not establish entitlement to punitive damages. the decision is you, based on the evidence in this case, if you do say yes, as the court instructed, we will come back for another part of the trial, where the plaintiff will you ask you for more money. but for all the reasons that we have talked about, the answer should be no. there is just no connection between those documents that the plaintiff showed you and mr. o'hara. there has to be a tie between that evidence and mr. o'hara for you to check yes on that question, and it is just not there. and consider this, you heard about the council for tobacco research, the ctr. the ctr no longer exists. it was not perfect. it does not exist any more. they funded millions of dollars in research. that was undisputed by dr. cummings. over 6,000 publications. some were on basic research. dr. cummings admitted that research still related to the issue of smoking and health. and that research you heard was done by highly respected scientists. the ctr did not -- did not pay for folks that got their diploma under a shade tree. these were nobel-prize-winning people that they funded, highly respected scientists at highly respected institutions. the tobacco institute, that is gone. it was disbanded in 1998. all of the people that wrote the documents that they showed you - dr. teague, dr. rodgman, dr. senkus, mr. johnston, mr. horrigan -- they have either all passed away or they have not been at reynolds for more than two decades. today, reynolds publicly admits that smoking causes disease and that nicotine is addictive. and all of those documents, all of those documents that they showed you during that five days of dr. hurt and dr. cummings, it is all known to the government. and the government has decided that cigarettes are legal. we talked about premier. remember premier, we talked about it with dr. cummings, an attempt to make a cigarette by reynolds that delivered less tar and that smokers would smoke. unfortunately, the public did not like it, and the public health community wanted to stop it before it could get started. but reynolds was trying. reynolds is now regulated by the federal food and drug administration, the fda. been that way since 2009 under the tobacco control act. reynolds is a different company today, operating under different regulations and guidelines than the company that they were, even back from the documents that they showed you. and so if you get to this last question, the answer should be no. i appreciate your patience. i have explained to you the best that i can why the evidence in this case -- why the evidence in this case justifies a verdict in favor of reynolds. and so i want to leave you with one final thought. plaintiff has the burden of proof on her claims. in order to meet that burden of proof, you have to do more than put on a slide show with dr. cummings and dr. hurt showing documents that had nothing to do with garry o'hara and his smoking decisions. as i said at the start of opening, this case is about garry o'hara and the choices he made. as i told you, he was an accomplished man. he met his goals, and when he was motivated to quit smoking, he quit. now, mr. smith will get another chance to talk to you after i go sit down. i do not get another chance to talk to you. it does not mean i would not want to respond. but those are the rules. and so i simply ask this: if you hear things that i have not had a chance to respond to, please ask: well, what would mr. monde have said in response to that? ask that now. ask that when you go back to the deliberation room. last thought before i sit down. despite everything that the plaintiff has shown you, even dr. cummings agreed that cigarettes are legal and that in the united states of america, smokers like garry o'hara are given the freedom, the freedom to choose to smoke or not. even after all of the documents that you have seen in this case, that is a right to choose that our country still honors. all of that information about the risks of smoking, all of that information about the addictive nature of smoking, some folks still smoke, and that is their right. and it was mr. o'hara's right. we do not criticize him for that right. but those were choices that he did make. and as mrs. o'hara testified: i ask now, in your mind, all you could do was advise your husband to quit, correct? she said: yes. he needed to decide for himself to quit when he was ready to do so? and she said: right. that is what this case comes down to. thank you so much for your patience. again, thank you so much for your time. and on behalf of reynolds, thank you.