mr. smith: may it please the court and counsel. ladies and gentlemen, i want to start by, on behalf of colette, her family, thanking you for the work and effort that you have put in thus far. you have been an amazingly attentive group, and i want to say that absent only military service, there is no greater expression of citizenship in our country than the willingness to do what you have just done, and that is, sit as a jury, and what you are about to do, and that is, to decide a verdict. i had decided to follow a series of remarks, but as you note, he was hitting a timer, and that tells you i'm on a time clock just like everybody is today. for you all, that is really good news. what i want to do is i want to go back and tell you how i'm going to proceed and how this case is going to unfold for you. first of all, there is the verdict form, and that is going to be the work that you have to engage in late this morning or this afternoon. as you heard, the first three questions are central questions to the outcome of the case because they are the ones that deal with the engle issue, whether or not garry o'hara was a member of that engle class which was decided by the florida supreme court. those first questions are critical. if we do not win on those first three questions, the case ends. we believe the evidence is overwhelming in support of our position there. we will first talk about that. secondly, there is the issue that will come up, and that is, what are the other matters that we must prove on the individual counts? and then finally, the damages that you ought to render. i would like to start out, because it is been a while since you have heard of some of this, the first question that you are going to have in front of you on the verdict form will be the following. let me tell you -- back up just for a moment. i want to tell you what a class membership for a moment is not about. do not be confused on this. class membership is not about fault, awareness, who knew what when. it is not about the fault of either party. it is not about whether someone can quit smoking. it is not about whether smokers may share some of the responsibility. it is not about reliance on statements of the tobacco industry. that is not what the first three questions are about. they are very specific, and they are the ones that get us to class membership, because, remember, when we get to class membership, you then are guided and you are bound by the instructions that were given to you from the engle court, which the court has read again for you this morning. the first question: did garry o'hara have primary lung cancer? question no. 1. on this, we think the evidence is not the more persuasive, it is preclusive of any other conclusion. let us go back for just a moment and take a look at the evidence that we have regarding this. first of all, remember dr. rene ledbetter, going back now 21 years ago, dr. rene ledbetter was the oncologist at the military base here in eglin who made the initial diagnosis. he had at that time, we know, the radiology. he had the pathology. he had the records. and he performed the examination. he also, you need to recall, at that time had the radiography available and showing -- and the reason why is because, if you remember colette's testimony, she said when they went in the office, he actually put it up on the screen, and he showed it and he pointed out. now, that radiology is gone. we all know that. but this is what rene ledbetter said back then. he said it is primary lung cancer and it is adenocarcinoma. this is what he said before you in this trial. answer: chest x-ray and the ct to me indicated that mr. o'hara had primary lung cancer. question: what kind of cancer did the pathology studies indicate to you? answer: adenocarcinoma. question: for mr. o'hara, did you diagnose a primary site for his adenocarcinoma? answer: yes. lung. question: would it have been the business practice of eglin hospital to present mr. o'hara's case to the tumor board? answer: yes. question: how confident are you today, doctor, that when you saw mr. o'hara in the summer of 1995 that he had adenocarcinoma of the lung? answer: i'm absolutely one hundred percent confident." now, remember the tumor boards. there were actually two. tumor boards are where you take to a group -- it is made up of radiologists, pathologists, surgeons if they are necessary, and other clinicians are present. we know from what all of the radiologists have told us for both sides that it is the clinician who makes the final call. he was the clinician. he went before the tumor board. twenty-one years later, he is absolutely certain that his diagnosis was correct. but the family is clinging to hope, that we all would do under similar circumstances, and said we are going to get a second opinion, and they went to md anderson. you will recall from their witnesses that md anderson is one of the renowned cancer centers in the nation, and they have an orlando location, at which time they saw dr. robert marsh. now, this two months later, 400 miles away, and this is what we have from dr. marsh. question: to what degree, if any, did smoking play in his lung cancer? answer: i think this is a smoking-related cancer. he had a smoking history. question: after all these questions about the pathology tests that we reviewed or that you reviewed with opposing counsel, and the radiology films, is there any doubt as you sit here today as to whether garry o'hara's cancer was primary to the lung? answer: to my mind, no. question: explain to us one last time, doctor, to your mind why not. answer: clinical live history, former smoker, presentation with bone pain. adenocarcinoma in an adult is often from a primary lung cancer. he did not have other signs or symptoms to suggest other primary cancer elsewhere. biopsies were done. i consider the cytokeratin stain to confirm a lung primary and be consistent with that. question: any question in your mind that he had non-small cell cancer? answer: no question in my mind. question: no question that it was primary to the lung? answer: no question in my mind. beyond that, what did we do in this case? we brought in a radiologist. a radiologist, dr. sider. dr. sider testified -- and let us back up about him for a moment. dr. sider has taught at some of the major medical schools in this country: northwestern, ucla. he has been so recognized for the use of radiology in the diagnosis of lung cancer that he was invited to present to the world -- as a presenter to the world health conference in -- in the netherlands on that very issue. he is published hundreds of articles on the subject of diagnosis of lung cancer. we brought him in and had him take a look. remember what he said: i do not normally testify in cases where i do not have radiology. i'm normally brought in -- i promise you, they will get up and say, you know, he is the guy that said the truth is in the film. that is right. that was another case where there was film. i asked him, why is it that you are willing to come down in this case? and his answer was, and you recall from your notes, because this case is so clear. what did he say at the time? question: do you have an opinion as to a reasonable degree of medical certainty whether mr. o'hara had primary lung cancer, metastatic to the mediastinum, to the brain and to bone? answer: yes. question: you know that there were diagnoses from the medical records by a doctor at eglin and then a doctor at md anderson. you were aware of that? answer: yes. question: and from those records, these clinicians at the time diagnosed him with primary adenocarcinoma -- adenocarcinoma of the lung, the primary site being the lung. do you agree that they got the diagnosis right at that time? answer: absolutely. but just to be sure, we had it taken to another doctor. the files were reviewed by another, dr. gary strauss, the tufts medical center, a man who has been published in the literature time and time again in the new england journal, in the american journal. the preeminent medical journals, he is been there, he is published, he is done the research. this is what he said. question: do you have an opinion, dr. strauss, as to where mr. o'hara's primary site of this adenocarcinoma was? answer: yes. question: and within a reasonable degree of medical certainty, where was mr. o'hara's primary site in your opinion? answer: well, i think it was -- it was primary lung cancer. addiction would have caused his death because if smoking caused his lung cancer, addiction caused his smoking. you only smoke because you are addicted to nicotine. so you have to get that next cigarette that provides the substance to which you are addicted to. and it is the carcinogens in tobacco, it is not the nicotine in tobacco, but it is the carcinogens in tobacco that are related to the development of the lung cancer. four doctors testified primary lung cancer. two of them were -- gave their testimony about decisions they made before there was an engle case, before there was any litigation. they were not working for either side. they were treating a patient. and that was their decision then, and that is the one they stick by today. and when i asked their radiologist, dr. sowers: do you contend that they fell below the standard of service that you would -- professional standard you would expect of them? no. it is an easy question. it was primary lung cancer. but what are they going to jump on? they will jump on, well, let us talk about, there was a -- there were some other people treated, there were some other doctors' notes at different various points in the -- in the diagnosis process. let us take a look at how many doctors. dr. persons, june 23rd: lung cancer, diagnosis last week. dr. kit kuss, the person who signed the death certificate they will inevitably try to make so much of, what did he call it? lung cancer, metastatic. dr. christopher jefferson: 49-year-old with adenocarcinoma, that should be, of the lung. dr. kit kuss, again, in november: lung cancer. go again. dr. kit kuss, on november 20th, less two months before his death: terminal lung cancer. dr. thomas mcknight: metastatic lung cancer to the bone with relief from toradol. that is the medical records. that is the only organ that is been identified. now, they come forward and say, well, we think it is unknown cancer. of course, you have heard the statistics on that. their person says it is about 5 percent are unknown. our person says about 1 percent are unknown. it does not matter. the fact is that 95 percent of them are from known sites, and every doctor, every doctor ultimately reached the same conclusion: it was lung cancer. i want to go back and remind you, because it was brought up in opening, obviously they have a -- reynolds has a right to defend in any way they want to their case, and they can do what they want to in the way they present their defense, but i want you to note, remember back in 1968, under the tobacco health and research memo. this document, in 1941, was a memo that was designed to tell people how to prepare the white papers, what kind of stories they were looking for. mr. monde: your honor, excuse me. may we approach? the court: you may. (thereupon, the following proceedings were had at sidebar:) mr. monde: i object to tying this document to continuance efforts today to defend this lawsuit. the only purpose for using that document is to suggest that and infer the conspiracy continues and that the conspiracy continues to this case, in the defense of this lawsuit here. that is not permissible. the court: thank you. mr. smith: your honor, i prefaced, they can defend any way possible. this is in evidence. it goes directly to the point. these are themes that this company has used for years. it does not go to their defense. they can defend in this case. i made it very clear to the jury. this is in evidence, and those are the themes that they were -- as far as 1968, saying these are the kinds of things to look for. the court: you did preface by saying they can defend any way they want; let us look at what they have done. i think you can distance from the defense of this lawsuit. again, you need to restate that separation if you are not talking about the lawyers or the defense of this lawsuit, but that you are talking about the conduct that has led up to this lawsuit. you need to clarify that. mr. monde: your honor, on that point, so that i do not need to interrupt again, i anticipate there is going to be some argument that the witness that the defense called claims that there was a remaining controversy about these issues, there was remaining doubt about the primary location of mr. o'hara's cancer. he is going to use those terms of controversy, doubt, further research needed, to argue an inference that a conduct continues to this day. i object to that line. the court: okay. you can make fair comment on the witness' testimony. again, he can make fair comment based upon inferences reasonably drawn from the evidence. you are correct. you cannot -- he cannot -- to the extent that you are saying that the -- that he is speaking about the defending of the lawsuit, no. but their testimony, if one of them makes a statement that there is still a controversy about a finding, whether cigarettes cause addiction, that is fair game. mr. monde: agreed. as long as it is not tied to defending the lawsuit. the court: correct. thanks. (thereupon, the sidebar was concluded and the following proceedings were held in open court:) mr. smith: again, i want to make sure you understand. i'm not arguing that they cannot defend themselves and their defense in this case is not based on the evidence that they have found in this case and what want to argue in the case. i think it is evidence that we dispute. i think on the issue of lung cancer it is easy. i also, however, want to go back and remind you that the themes of the tobacco and health research memo back in 1968, some of the themes, these were the stories that you should be looking for. they were going to put out the health and research documents, if you recall, those documents, they said: criteria for selection. and they said: first report should be on new research, if possible. then it drops down and says: stories, other examples, one in which death certificates or classifications of such disease are questioned. one showing that many lung cancers may be metastatic from some other organ. those were what they were talking about as the theme that they were looking for their health and research in 1968. they also said in this document that what they were looking for is: the important type of story is one in which casts doubt on the cause and effect theory of disease and smoking. they were also looking for headlines in those days of controversy, contradiction, other factors and unknowns. ladies and gentlemen, as it relates to the lung cancer in this case, it is not by the greater weight of the evidence; it is by the overwhelming weight of the evidence. so the next question that we -- oh, and skip that for a second. i'll get back to it. i want to go back just for one second to question no. 2. question no. 1 is primary lung cancer, four doctors, and every doctor who treated him said it was lung cancer. they said it back then when all of the evidence was there, and they were the clinicians. number 2: was garry l. o'hara addicted to cigarettes causing nicotine? another question. one of the things the judge read to you and you will take back with you, and you came into this courthouse with and no one can take away from you is your common sense. and in this case, apply your common sense and experience to the evidence. you are allowed to do that. play the evidence on addiction for a moment. question: have you -- have you reached an opinion as to whether or not garry o'hara was an addicted smoker during the time period that ended in 1982? the witness: yes. it would belie common sense to suggest that mr. o'hara was not addicted. i mean, he was an over-a-pack-a-day smoker for over two decades. he certainly meets the criteria of being heavily addicted. based on the heaviness of smoking he was addicted, which is a well-validated measure of the strength of addiction to the cigarettes that has been tested many times in large studies following people for decades. so it is my opinion he was addicted. he was heavily addicted. this is dr. cummings from the roswell center, one of the preeminent cancer research centers in the country, ran the largest quit line in the nation, has been published throughout the world, has been featured in the surgeon general's reports. his opinion: he was heavily addicted. and this is why. he used what is the heaviness of smoking index. he told you why they used that, because it is the greatest predictor, greatest predictor of whether or not someone is heavily addicted. does he smoke in the morning within the first five minutes? answer to that from everybody in this case, during the period of time he smoked, it was the first thing he did. even he had to go outdoors. it was the first thing he did. number 2, did he smoke 21 to 30 cigarettes? well -- 31 or more, rather. the answer is he smoked two packs a day for as long as we had them measured for you, which goes back to 1967. he smoked, in fact, sometimes three packs a day, because his wife, colette, was not necessarily aware of all the health problems. what she was aware of is they were on a budget, and it was an expensive process. she was the one who did the shopping. she went to the bx. she went to the commissary. she bought the cigarettes, and she says he was smoking at a rate of two to three packs. we have a medical record in here that is supportive of that, which they have -- everybody has seen it. it said -- his record at the time was that he had 18 years of smoking two packs a day. now, that would make it 18 years or thereabouts when he started. he was 17 when he went into the military. we have pictures of him smoking then. but what we really know is nobody becomes a two-pack-a-day smoker overnight. if you just assume, if you just assume two packs a day, that is 36 pack years of cigarettes he smoked. that is more than the heaviest part of the index. dr. hurt, who ran the mayo clinic nicotine-dependence center; dr. hurt, who has been the lancet -- published in the lancet, the new england journal of medicine, american medical association, this is what dr. hurt said. question: have you formed as opinion as to whether mr. o'hara was addicted to the nicotine contained in cigarettes manufactured and marketed by rj reynolds and other cigarette manufacturers? answer: i am. question: and what is that opinion? answer: it is an opinion based on the valid criteria that has been validated both in the way of producing outcome whether a person stopped smoking or whether or not they relapsed to smoking. question: for purposes of my next question, i want you to assume that there has been a medical opinion that mr. o'hara died from adenocarcinoma of the lung. will you make that assumption? answer: yes. question: based upon your opinion that mr. o'hara was addicted to the nicotine contained in cigarettes manufactured and marketed by rj reynolds and others, are you able to give an opinion to a reasonable to degree of medical certainty regarding whether mr. o'hara's addiction to nicotine substantially contributed to his death from lung cancer in 1996? answer: it did. so the addiction to nicotine leads to continued smoking, and it is the continued smoking that delivers the 7,000 chemicals, 60 carcinogens, which ultimately ended up in this case with lung cancer, and other diseases as well. two world renowned experts evaluated and said he was addicted, and in the case of dr. hurt and in the case of dr. strauss, both medical doctors, it was his addiction that led to this death from lung cancer. it is the addiction that leads to the death. now, i do not want to leave this for a moment to mention dr. ticknor, that they brought in. dr. ticknor. they brought in an expert who used the dsm. you had it explained by dr. hurt why the dsm was really not appropriate for diagnosis. you heard -- read from the dsm the problems with using it but, honestly, if you applied your common sense to the facts that you have heard in this case, and as i was watching him put up the things that he was saying no, no, no to, the obvious answer for most of us was yes, yes, yes. he met almost every one of those criterion. but dr. ticknor, this is the expert they bring before you, he -- and you can evaluate experts any way you want to. he is never published an article that had the word "smoking" in it. he is never done any research on the issue of the brain and nicotine. beyond that, he says he is an addictionologist. there are four various types of medical or professional psychiatric associations that certify people in addiction medicine. he is not certified by any of them. he is a self-described addictionologist. he is actually a general psychiatrist whose practice is primarily things other than addiction. and that is what reynolds brings to you to offset the testimony of people who have spent their entire life in research, in writing and handling nicotine dependence; and in the case of dr. hurt, the largest nicotine-dependence center in the nation. now we go to the third question. the third question is whether or not the addiction caused disease. go ahead, put it that. question: we should also give priority to one addiction, tobacco addiction, that is killing more than 300,000 americans each year. that was the surgeon general of the united states, c. everett koop, telling you what we now know from the -- what is called the hecht chart, the first step in the progress to lung cancer. the first step, when you are traveling the road that ends in lung cancer, is nicotine addiction. that is the finding of the surgeon general of the united states. and how much did he smoke? well, we have done some calculations. he smoked 18 years or more, but we are going with the 18 years. that is in the medical records. he smoked two to three packs per day. that would be 18,250 cigarettes a year. look over here at how much actual time he would have spent -- by the way, dr. ticknor said he did not spend substantial time. he would spent about 12 years in the practice of smoking, because to smoke at that rate, if you sleep seven to eight hours a day, you are smoking at a rate of 64 percent of the time that you are awake, you are smoking a cigarette, and that is what he did during the time that he was addicted to the nicotine contained in their cigarettes. now, folks, the first three questions are easy. garry o'hara started smoking as a teenager while the brain was developing in adolescence. even their expert says that is why younger people who start smoking become more addicted and more heavily addicted, because the brain is formulating. you remember the -- the biology, the neurobiology that dr. hurt told us about. when they met, meaning colette, in 1965, he was smoking all the time. by 1967, when she began to make the purchases, she says he was smoking three packs per day. he smoked first thing in the morning, within five minutes. he smoked two to three packs per day for 18 years or more. he had made multiple quit attempts. he made multiple quit attempts and he relapsed. multiple quit attempts and relapsed. you heard his children talk about, as young as they were, they can remember dad was always in the process of trying to quit smoking. he dreamed of smoking after he quit. he smoked outside. he would go out in the rain and snow because he wanted to not be around frank, the oldest boy, who had lung problems, asthma. he would go outside and smoke. he would smoke for long periods of time. he left his family inside to do so. he had 400 to 600 doses of nicotine to his brain every day, and he said to his wife at one point, when she was chastising and admonishing him and he was trying to quit, that he could not live without them. and finally, valerie recalls that 10 years, 10 years when they were running together, after he had quit smoking, after he had the last cigarette that we know of, this is what happened. (thereupon, a video clip played as follows:) question: you were about to relay a story. this is about 10 years after your father was smoking? answer: correct. question: you would have been by that time about 20 years old? answer: yes. question: go ahead and relate that which you were about to relate of what he told you that. answer: okay. he was -- we were running, and he was telling me about a dream that he had the night before about smoking. and i said, well, it is so crazy that you are still thinking and dreaming about it after all these years. and he said to me, i'm addicted and i will always be addicted until the day i die. question: why is it that you remember that conversation so well? answer: well, it just affected me so intensely because i -- just the fact that something could have so much power over someone. you know, he told me he would think about smoking a cigarette and want a cigarette every day for the rest of his life. it was that powerful. that ought to be enough to suffice any requirement that he was an addicted smoker. now, remember this, the fact that he quit smoking, by their expert, and all of the experts, the fact that he finally overcame that, the fact that after many failures he made it, he was a success story in that sense, albeit it was too late to save his health, does not mean he was not addicted. in fact, what he know is he struggled with addiction for years and years afterwards. reynolds knew that the chemical nicotine they kept in their -- kept addicted smokers smoking, it was no secret to reynolds. they were not telling the public this. they would not tell the public this. they would not even admit it in 1994 under oath. let us go back. remember, they were in the business of selling nicotine, effective in the release of stress mechanisms. in designing any cigarette product, the dominant specification should be nicotine delivery. nicotine, a potent drug, our industry is based upon design, sale, manufacture of attractive dosages forms of nicotine. we provide a product that is an essential commodity in a habitual act. that is four documents of which there are stacks of documents you will take back. you remember them. you saw them. they talked about their product as a pharmacological product. tobacco products contain and deliver nicotine, a potent drug. our industry is based upon it. it is an essential act. and i want you to see how they actually felt about this behind closed doors. they never told anybody else. put a hungry rat in a cage, put a lever in a cage, the rat will push the lever and smoking is the cigarette -- and smoking is the cigarette -- is the lever pushed. smoking the cigarette is the lever pushed. that is it. that is what they thought. they got them young; they kept them hooked. addiction is not free choice. you have heard doctor after doctor say that. it is not a matter of free choice. if it was, they know themselves they would be out of business, because, remember, the nordine study, where claude teague said: guys, we would be out of business if they really could quit. there is no indication in any advertisement that after a person smokes cigarettes regularly for a while, this is from the ftc in 1967, smoking is no longer a matter of choice for him, but becomes a matter of need. this is a document, 1980: cigarette smoking is more addictive than using heroin, hooking two-thirds -- that is the ctr. a letter, the ctr: we cannot defend continued smoking as free choice if the person was addicted. in 1980, they knew that. the two factors refute the argument smoking is a matter of free choice. this is from the surgeon general, 1989. most smokers start smoking as teenagers and then become addicted. to the extent -- this is brown & williamson, '73: to the extent the argument revolves around free choice is being negated on the grounds of addiction. they knew their business was built on addiction. their business was addiction. it sustained them. so we have the first three questions. these were the major conclusions of the surgeon general in 1988. tobacco did not agree with it. reynolds did not agree with it. reynolds would not even testify to it in congress in 1994. this is what they said: cigarettes and other forms of tobacco are addicting. nicotine is the drug that causes addiction. that is it. it is like heroin and cocaine. that is what the surgeon general found in 1988. and this is what the surgeon general found more recently: nicotine addiction is the fundamental reason that individuals persist in smoking and using tobacco products. that is what they said. without the chemical compound, the cigarette market would collapse. we would all lose our jobs and our consulting fees. and this is what claude teague at rj reynolds said in 1982: that is to say, if the exit gate from our market suddenly opened, we would be out of business overnight. we cannot ever be comfortable selling a product that most of our customers, most of our customers, would like to quit. legal cause. legal cause is -- a legal cause of cancer is if it directly and in natural and continuous sequence produces or contributes substantially to producing such cancer so that it can be said that but for the addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine, the cancer would not have occurred. that is easy in this case. he had prime lung cancer. he was addicted. you saw the sequence that was drawn by the surgeon general. in that natural sequence, he had it, he quit smoking, but he had done so much harm that the fuse had been lit, and in 1995, he was diagnosed with lung cancer attributable to cigarette smoking. now, what -- where does the put us? that puts us at the -- by the way, you will hear this several times today: in order to be a legal cause of cancer, addiction to cigarettes need not be the only cause. such addiction may be a legal cause, though it operates in combination with the act of another, his own acts, or some other cause, if such cause occurs at the same time as the addiction and the addiction contributes substantially to producing such cancer. it is not -- it does not have to be the only cause. it does not have to be -- it has to be a substantial contributing factor. that is it. so the answer to no. 1 is yes. the answer to no. 2 is yes. the answer to no. 3 is yes. and that brings us to the engle instructions. the engle instructions are critically important to us. the engle instructions show us, and you had them read, you are going to take them back with you, these are binding on you. these are binding on you. reynolds concealed or omitted -- reynolds was negligent. reynolds placed cigarettes on the market that were defective and unreasonably dangerous. reynolds concealed or omitted material information not otherwise known or available, knowing the material was false or misleading, or failed to disclose a material fact concerning the health effects and the addictive nature of smoking cigarettes, as reynolds entered into an agreement of conspiracy with others to do the same. and of that, there can be no question, because we have seen that they met in 1963; we saw all the documents in 1953; we saw all the documents that have been produced since, all of which was about the cigarette controversy when none existed; all about doubt of the scientific and medical consensus, long after it was there. much like dr. ticknor, reynolds was in those days out of touch with the scientific community and consensus. now, the fourth question, because now you have the benefit of the -- of the instructions, the fourth question on strict liability and negligence really is not about strict liability and negligence, because strict liability and negligence will be found if they have class membership. but to do that, we have to answer one further question: was smoking cigarettes for which rj reynolds has legal liability -- mr. monde: excuse me, may we approach? the court: yes. [#deleted sidebar#] mr. smith: now, where i was. i want to show you question no. 4, because this is under strict liability and negligence, and if you are taking notes, i will tell you the instruction on this is instruction no. 10 that the court has already read to you, if you want to look back on it. strict liability and negligence, question 4 is: was smoking cigarettes for which rj reynolds tobacco has legal liability a legal cause of mr. o'hara's cancer? that is equally an easy question to answer. number 1, the only -- there have only been five brands of cigarettes identified by mrs. o'hara. she bought cigarettes between 1967 and 1981 for her husband. she was in charge of the budget, and she bought them by the carton. i'm not saying he never bought any cigarettes on his own. you heard what she said. she did not care for that to happen because she bought and budgeted the cigarettes. the brands of cigarettes were lucky strike, pall mall, camel, winston. and marlboro later, is what her testimony is. "i think you gave us five brands. five, lucky, camel, pall mall -- "correct. "during the entire time that you and your husband were married and he was smoking, were those the brands that you would purchase for him when you were buying the cigarettes? "answer: yes." so from the time of -- now, there is no reason to suggest that somehow his brands before that were different, but we do not know that. we cannot know that. he is not with us. he died from lung cancer. but from 1967 to 1981, there were five brands smoked; marlboro at the end. all of the other brands, and your instructions tell you this, were brands for which rj reynolds is responsible. that is all you have to do to answer question no. 4. were those cigarettes from those four brands substantially contributory to his legal liability? yes. they were the overwhelming amount of cigarettes that he smoked, and he died from being addicted to the cigarettes that he smoked, including those cigarettes, and predominantly those cigarettes. number 5 is: was mr. o'hara himself negligent, and was his negligence a legal cause of cancer? my partner will talk to you a few minutes about it, but that really is comparative. we talked about that all the way back at voir dire. what this means is if you should decide that mr. o'hara has some degree of negligence, it is your job to determine that and say yes. all i would say is remember what he did not know and why he did not know it. remember what he could not have known and who could have told him in determining whether he was negligent. now, at this point, what i would like to talk to you about is the next couple of questions. they are called the path to punitive damages. the next couple of questions deal with two issues: one is concealment and the other is conspiracy to conceal. concealment, it would be that reynolds concealed or omitted material information not otherwise known or available, knowing that the material was false or misleading, or failed to disclose a material fact concerning the health effects and/or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes, or both. in other words, did they know something that nobody else knew, or did they and their co-conspirators know something that nobody else knew, and would -- and did not tell them that -- and failed to disclose a material fact in a way that mattered? you have material fact that was defined for you in about two sentences. what it basically means, it was something that mattered. let us talk about what the concealment was. well, no. 1, this is an engle finding. we know that. we start off with an engle findings. that is the engle findings as a class member. that binds you. they did do that. now the question is: did they do that in a way that was material or a legal cause for the cancer in this case? that is, did they do something that did not disclose something, did they conceal something, did they hide something that mattered? and then conspiracy to conceal. conspiracy is simple. it means that they decided, as my partner said in opening statement, to lock arms, walk hand in hand as an industry, with all of these participants, that they would all agree that they would conceal or omit disclosing information, and that they would hide certain information, and when they did it, and this is from engle, they did it with the intention that smokers and members of the public would rely upon it to their detriment. that is a finding. that is binding if he is a member of the class. the question now is: did it matter? would it have mattered to mr. o'hara? now, we know some things about the ability that this company had to conceal. this is a document in 1969: we do not foresee any difficulty in the event a decision is reached to remove certain reports from research files. once it becomes clear that such action is necessary for the successful defense of our present and future suits, we will promptly remove all such reports from our file. this is a company that knew about concealment. that is correspondence between research and legal in rj reynolds, saying we will remove something, we will invalidate something if it will help our legal position. that is concealment. reynolds is legally responsible for every act committed, not just by the companies it is responsible for, but every act committed by a co-conspirator in the course of about a 50-year conspiracy. so all of them were in it together. that is what we have to prove, and that is what the evidence completely establishes. if any one company had decided to come forward and tell the truth, the whole thing would fall. if one of them decided, let us tell them what we know about how addictive nicotine is. if one of them had said, do you think after 1958 we ought to tell them what we told the british american tobacco, that we know that at least we are sure that it is a cause of lung cancer? no. nobody could break away. the conspiracy was a conspiracy of silence and to hide the truth from the american people. they form their conspiracy in '53. they hired the test scientists, the best doctors. they hired the best witnesses. they hired the pr firms. they hired the ad men and gave them enormous budgets. there was nobody who could overcome the impact. this is what -- this was a memorandum in evidence that you might remember with -- it was one of the lawyers talking about the interview of dr. dimarco. he also said, and i cannot recall his exact words, that our medical scientific witnesses will say whatever we want them to say, clearly implying, if not stating, that they lacked credibility and integrity. that is what one of their research people were saying about the scientific witnesses that they were producing back then. what the industry concealed. well, they concealed that they studied nicotine and that they knew it was a highly, highly addictive drug. they concealed that they studied teenage smokers and that they knew that ninety percent of the people they were targeting were between the ages of 14 and 20. that is when you had to get them, when the brain is most vulnerable, when their judgment is least mature. they got ninety percent, and guess what, they kept them, because once they got them drink -- once they got them smoking, they got addicted to nicotine. they knew that fifty percent of all smokers would die from a smoking-related disease, and they knew that hundreds of thousands, as many as 500,000 americans would die every year. it does not matter. what mattered was the profit. what mattered was the stock dividends. what mattered was at the end of the year, the executive bonus; at the end of the year, keeping the paycheck and keeping the job going, and if a few hundred thousand people had to die to support it, it did not matter to reynolds. they never told anybody. and i want to ask you this: every time you hear this, say, would it have mattered? would it have mattered? they never told people that their co-conspirators were manipulating the levels of nicotine to keep smokers buying their cigarettes. they were trying to get into a contest about who could find the exact level that was the most effective to give the nicotine a, quote, kick; their word from their documents. they were trying to impact the kick. because why? because they thought it would equal a greater market share. it was always about the bottom line with them. they knew that there were 70 cancer-causing agents. you remember in 1961, they listed the carcinogens. they told people publicly. they told people that they would take away, filter out, get rid of, if they ever found anything harmful, they would get rid of it. they said that in the '50s, they said that in the '60s, they said that in the '70s, they said that in the '80s. they had one little problem, the biggest secret that they kept: they could not do it. they did not make a safer cigarette. they made the illusion of safer cigarettes, but they did not make a safer cigarette. it always had carcinogens in it. it always had the chemicals in it. and it was always a deadly product. they purposefully mislead the public about the safety of filters. and by the way, remember, two of the -- ms. colette said it did not matter to him, but in the end, he smoked his favorite, was winston, and the latest brand, winston, marlboro, both of which were no. 1 and no. 2 filtered cigarettes in the country. why? because they were the most promoted. how did they promote them? we saw the documents from dr. cummings. they promoted them directly in -- she said, she said: we buy by promotion. we brought -- what was the best buy? who gave you the best buy? the companies did. they promoted directly on the bx, and they gave prices nobody could beat. they targeted the military. it was an easy audience. that is why there were some many smokers in the military, including garry o'hara. they met in 1953. that is when the conspiracy began. they lied to the government. they gave this limitation of their authority. we are going to use strict research. they used it for public relations; they used it to front; they used it as a shield. those are in the documents. you saw those. it was never the real deal. it was always an illusion of compliance with the law. so what did they say the very first time? it is fortunate for us that cigarettes are a habit they cannot break. would not it be wonderful if our company was the first to produce a cancer-free cigarette? think about what that means. why would a cancer-free cigarette be such value unless you already knew you already had a cigarette that had cancer in it? and they did. they did the frank statement. you have heard that. they promised -- what they promised was that they would cooperate in the future. they never did. we will make -- the products we make are not injurious. and they said: we put people's health as our paramount responsibility. it never was their paramount responsibility. next. 1958, batco. the individuals we met, those were the individuals at tirc, those were the individuals at rj reynolds, those were the individuals at the ctr and tirc. the individuals we met believe that smoking causes lung cancer. would it have mattered in 1958 if the tobacco industry had said about their cigarettes: we know that they do contribute to causing lung cancer? we know that. would it have mattered? carcinogens are found in practically every class of compounds in smoke. would it have mattered if they told the public: we have identified carcinogens, cancer-causing agents in our cigarettes. would it have mattered in 1962 if they had admitted: the amount of evidence accumulated to indict cigarette smoke as a health hazard is overwhelming? and then in 1963, before the surgeon general's report: cigarettes have certain unattractive side effects. they cause lung cancer. would that have mattered if they had stood up in 1964, when the surgeon general came out with his report, and said: our -- we support the surgeon general, but our research shows the same thing. would that have mattered? of course it would have. that is all you have to show for a material fact. question: do you agree that it would be wrong to use confusion to the advantage of the tobacco industry to the detriment of the smoking public? answer: i would. question: and if the tobacco industry is talking about using confusion to their advantage, you agree that would be highly improper? answer: i do not think it would be proper, no. that is what they did. that is what dr. figlar said now. of course it was not proper. and it mattered. let me kind of wrap that part up quickly. here is how simple it is: if somebody goes down to rent a car, and that rental car agency knew that there was something wrong with the car, the brakes were not working, and maybe there is been a recall out on the brakes, but they rent the car, and they know the brakes are not working, and they do not tell you, when you drive down the street, put on the brakes, and go into a crash, is anybody have any second that they would say: they had an obligation to tell you. they knew the brakes were no good. they had an obligation to tell you what the safety hazard was. they had an obligation to do that. they chose not to. they chose to let you rent the car, drive down the street, and then say, oh, by the way, there was a recall, you should have known about it. the recall, i did not know about the recall. i just know you rented me the car. do you remember the guy who testified, the elderly african-american gentleman who said, i would not think they would sell a product, i do not think they would sell a product that was not safe. they would not do that. but they did it. and it worked. doubt was their business. confusion and deceit. this is what they said: obviously, the key word is confusion. doubt. the most important story is one that which casts doubt, and doubt is our product. it is the means of establishing the controversy. some factor or factors other than smoking may be involved. they were always looking for doubt, confusion, unknown. that is what they have always been about. and they were throughout his entire life. they -- they were, even at the time he was laying on his deathbed, they were lying about the addictiveness -- they just finished lying about the addictiveness of their product. go ahead. this is what they told people, though, on national tv. >>: we want to be the detective just as much as the surgeon general and the ama. we will cooperate in every way. well, obviously, a filter takes out certain tar and nicotine. i do not think the industry admits there are any bad elements. if there are bad elements, through our laboratories, through the surgeon general, through the ama, through acts of god, luck, we hope we may find them, and if they are found, they will be removed. >>: we do talk to the question of whether or not cigarettes are hazardous. we do not believe that cigarettes are hazardous. we do not accept that. because when, as and if any ingredient in cigarette smoke is identified as being injurious to human health, we are confident we can eliminate that ingredient. >> do you believe that cigarettes are safe? have they been proved to be safe, mr. cullman? >>: i believe they have not been proved to be unsafe. that is it. both of those men, national tv, national audiences. those were absolute falsehoods. they were covering up the fact that they already knew from their own reports, reports that you saw from their own scientists, documents that you saw that they could not take something out, and they did know that injurious things were in there. they knew it before '64, and they certainly knew in the '70s. they just chose thought to tell anybody. why? because they know it mattered. they know it would have mattered to a garry o'hara. they know it would have mattered to a garry o'hara, a man who was already trying to quit. they talk about motivation. think about the motivation that might have been there for smokers if -- including garry o'hara, what about the motivation if they said: we agree with the surgeon general, our cigarettes cause cancer? what if they had done that? well, what if they had, in '58, said the truth? what if they had not come up with the gimmicks in 1953? what if they had not called their scientists -- blamed their scientists for finding the truth? do you know what would have happened? take a look at this. this did not happen. right here is when garry o'hara quit. sadly, though, we know because of the lag time, right here is what got garry o'hara. but we know this: there were times when the market looked like it was going to go down in '53 and '64 and other times, when they first -- every time, every single time they came back with another story. every time they kept the truth. every time they put a quarter of a trillion dollars into advertising. they kept the yellow line going up and the red line going up, and it was the red line that got garry o'hara. if they had told the truth sooner, it would have mattered. it would have mattered to him and everybody else that is on that red line after the '50s and the '60s and the '70s, when they chose profit over people. go ahead. doubt and confusion. after 20 years, the industry has employed a single strategy, to defend itself in three major fronts: litigation, politics and public opinion. it was brilliantly conceived and executed. it was a holding strategy, creating doubt about the health charge without actually denying it. why? because every time they came up with one more figure; we are not sure; more people, we are looking for that rationale, that self-rationale, psychological crutch; there is doubt; it is not clear; we are not sure. they could smoke another cigarette, buy another pack, buy another carton. and that is all reynolds cared about. go to the next one, please. next one. you want to know about concealment? do we really want to tout cigarette smoke as a drug? it is, of course, but there are dangerous fda implications. inside they are saying: we know it is a drug, but we cannot say it because if we do, the government will regulate. we will not tell anybody we know it is a drug. in the cigarette controversy, there are -- the public, especially those who are present and potential supporters, heavy smokers, which in 1972 would have been garry, must perceive and understand, believe in evidence to sustain their opinions that smoking may not be a causal factor. that is all they wanted. all they have to do is: if we can plant doubt, addicted smokers will have a rationale. they can keep smoking. well, it is not clear. it is not sure. it is not over yet. >>: i certainly would not be in the business if i thought cigarettes were harmful to people. i think it is important there be a lot of us around who are trying to keep the research honest and open. >>: take the controversy about cigarettes. in the 91st congress, a house committee heard from leading experts on smoking and health. the record shows that many of the country's most respected doctors openly challenge anticigarette claims. >>: and i have to disagree with you in that we do not know what causes the ailments that have been attributed to the cigarette smoking. >>: cigarette smoking does not cause cancer, yes or no? >>: it is not known whether cigarettes cause cancer. it has not been causally established. >>: cigarette smoking, no causal relationship between cigarette smoking and emphysema? >>: despite all of the research to date, there has been no causal link established. >>: okay. the jury has not come in. >>: it may not be harmful, you are not convinced. >>: it may be or it may not be. we do not know. >>: do cigarettes cause cancer? >>: i do not know if they do or not. >>: i'm not able to give you a "does" or "does not" answer. >>: okay. they agree that smoking causes lung cancer. do you agree? >>: it may. >>: do you know whether it does? >>: i do not. we do not know what causes cancer in general right now, so i think that we may find out what causes cancer, we may find out some relationship which is yet to be proven. that was in 1994. now, they are going to get up and say that garry should have known all of this. how would he know? apparently, the executives of the company did not know. of course they knew it. they had the lab reports. they knew what was going on. they have known it since 1958. they certainly knew it since the early 1960s. but they were, 35 years later, saying: we do not know. maybe. may cause all of these deaths. (thereupon, a video clip played as follows:) question: and you want people to be able to believe that and rely upon them, did they not? answer: i believe in general, yes. question: and as late as '88 or '89 or '90, the tobacco institute was saying they still did not know whether smoking causes cancer, correct? that is what they were telling the public, correct? answer: they did not know. they could not make that determination, is what they said in the video. question: and they wanted the people to believe them, correct? answer: i would say they would, yes. our basic -- this is their own words: our basic position in the cigarette controversy is subject to the charge, and may be subject to finding, that we are making false or misleading statements to promote the sale of cigarettes. i want you to think about something, folks. in the last 10 days that you have been here, it seems longer, in the last 10 days that you have been here, you have learned more about what rj reynolds knew than garry o'hara's entire generation could have known, that garry o'hara would have ever known. you have learned more in the last 10 days in this courtroom than generations of americans would know, because rj reynolds and the rest of the companies decided not to let them know. they always say they wanted free choice. they could not have wanted free choice, because if they would, they would have just put the information out there and let people make a choice. that would have been an informed choice. they wanted smokers to make their decision not on the facts but on the facts that they pretended were true. not the facts that they knew were true. those were the facts they never told anybody. and there their answer is: well, yeah, but they could have gotten reader's digest. reader's digest did not know they were manipulating nicotine. well, they might have found it in consumer reports. consumer reports had no earthly idea what they were doing in their lab, such as making sure that an antagonist, something that would have blocked the effects of nicotine, did not get researched and did not get implemented. because why? because the company said, we are digging our own grave if we do that. they did not care about how many graves got dug, just as long as it did not dig their financial one. this is what they did on the manipulation. you know it. they were in a contest. brown & williamson, philip morris and rj reynolds, they were in a contest. they were after nicotine. it is the reason they existed. it is the sine qua non. if we move toward the reduction or elimination of nicotine, they said, we would have to liquidate our business. our nicotine levels were not obtained by accident. we can regulate fairly precisely the nicotine. this is where they were trying to come up -- you remember freebasing, the testimony of dr. hurt about freebasing. nicotine occurs in free form, which is volatile, rapidly absorbed by the smoker and believed to be instantly perceived as nicotine kick. methods which may be used to increase smoke ph and/or nicotine kick include ammoniation. we know, you saw the documents. they were in an ammonia derby. it was brown & williamson said the soul of marlboro is ammoniation. and it was camel and winston, that in the 1970s jumped on board and they ammoniated -- in fact, you saw some documents about how much urea was used in just the state of north carolina by certain companies. they knew what they were doing. they were manipulating the nicotine. we put a document in front of you, manipulating nicotine. do you think they would have ever told someone? they want to say, it is natural, it appears in tobacco. not the nicotine that garry o'hara smoked. that is not the one that naturally appeared in tobacco. that is the one they finally engineered for the result they wanted. remember when murray senkus said: how low can we go? he was not worried enough about how low can we go to help people. they wanted to make sure they could make it look like they were making a safer cigarette; at the same time they were sustaining the habituation, they were sustaining the addiction. and this is the one -- you remember this document. this is the one in which they talk about the antagonist, something that would have blocked the effect of nicotine: you have to stop that project right now. this is what they said after all of this. this is what they told congress. >>: let me begin my questioning on the matter of whether or not nicotine is addictive. let me ask you first, and i would like to just go down the row, whether each of you believes that nicotine is not addictive. i heard virtually all of you touch on it. just yes or no, do you believe nicotine is not addictive? >>: i believe nicotine is not addictive, yes. >>: mr. johnson. >>: congressman, cigarettes and nicotine clearly do not meet the classic definitions of addiction. there is no intoxication. >>: we will take that as a no. again, time is short. if you can just -- i think each of you believe nicotine is not addictive, but we would like to have this for the record. >>: i do not believe that nicotine for our products are addictive. you remember all of them: i, too, do not believe it is addictive. every one of them. now, it was a different time, you know that, when he started, when he grew up. they dominated the airwaves. he does not have to prove that he relied on a particular statement. what we know is that he smoked the most advertised brands at the time. he smoked the brands that were most promoted on military bases. dr. cummings put those documents in front of you. we know that rj reynolds dominated the military for a number of years. we know that they spent a quarter of a trillion dollars in the industry advertising their product, and we knew that he smoked the products that were the most popular for the various times. in the early days, it was more lucky, camel. as it got later -- he smoked them all, but later it was marlboro and winston primarily, and those are the -- at the very end. why? well, those were the no. 1 and no. 2 cigarettes that were sold in the market, promoted in military bases. that is what it was. it is that simple. that is all you have to show. you can infer reliance. by infer reliance i mean you can figure reliance on how he conducted himself in light of the information that was available and what they were putting out. now, we know it is not free choice. and we know -- we know that what we have is two questions that get us to punitive damages. number 1 is: was the concealment or the omission of material information -- material information being would it matter -- regarding the addictiveness of the health effects of cigarettes -- or the health effects of cigarettes, or both, by rj reynolds a legal cause of mr. o'hara's death? the answer is yes. it does not have to be the only cause, but the fact that they hid this information, did that affect? did that matter? would that matter? the answer is yes. conspiracy? did they agree to this? of course they all agreed to do that, is what the whole thing is about. that is why you saw them in 1953 in the hotel, and in 1994 swearing that they did not know about the addictiveness of their cigarettes, when, at the same time, they were researching whether levulinic acid could bind their nicotine more appropriately to a smoker. and then the question is: by clear and convincing evidence, have we shown that we should receive punitive damages in this case? the answer is yes. 500,000 people died. you can consider that. more people died from cigarette smoking than in all the wars. more people died from cigarette smoking than automobile accidents, aids, suicide, homicide combined. 500,000 people a year. one of them was garry o'hara. in considering to award these, you may consider whether or not -- and they are to be awarded to punish and deter. punish and deter. to keep people from doing this ever again. to punish them from what they did, but also to deter this ever happening again in the future, by this company or any company doing this kind of work. finally, no. 3: when you are considering an award, you may consider any harm arising from mr. o'hara's cancer. you may also consider harm suffered by other persons not parties to the lawsuit. that is a fact. in punitive damages, it is more than just about mr. o'hara. he is part of it. but you could go to the reprehensibility of what they did. they lied in the '50s, they lied in the '60s, they lied in the '70s, they lied in the '80s, they lied in the '90s, and 20 million americans died. they talk about 60 million quit? garry quit. garry was a success story on quitting. he did it. but he died. how many more of that 60 million? well, we know that 20 million died. you do not try to addict high school students. you do not try to recruit people in the 10th grade. you do not call them a crop. you do not refer to our next crop as 14 to 20 year olds. that is reprehensible conduct by these companies. they were going into the high schools. they were targeting because they needed replacement smokers. why did they need replacement smokers? why did they need a new crop? they knew how many they were losing by either quitting or dying. realistically, if our company is to survive and prosper over the long-term, we must get our share of the market. and that was the 14- to 20-year-olds, the ones most vulnerable. my ladies and gentlemen, my partner is now going to talk to you about numbers, and i will come back to talk to you again after the defense presents their case, but i want to tell you something: this case begs punitive damages. this case shows the damages done by just not telling the truth. they showed that it mattered. there is every reason to believe that he would have never -- if he had known in the '50s about cancer, if he had known about the manipulation of nicotine, if he had known what they were doing, if he knew that they could not do what they said they could do and make a safer cigarette and remove the carcinogens, would it have mattered? it would have mattered to anybody. it would have saved this life, and his family would still have him. that is what this case is about. mr. avera: just one second here to reset. it is been a few days since we last chatted, ladies and gentlemen, and i've been given a very short amount of time to talk to you about a couple of issues in this case. one of them is the issue of -- i'm sorry -- the damages suffered by the o'hara family. and to do that, what i need to do is take you back to a time 50 years ago when a young airman, garry o'hara, met and fell in love with a young girl from the french countryside, and he married her. he brought her to the united states, someplace that he had never visited before, to raise a family. and they had three babies, and they created a family and raised them. and colette o'hara followed her husband through all of his assignments in the united states and across europe. they devoted themselves to the -- to each other and to their family. and as many newlyweds do, they envisioned a life together, raising babies and working towards a retirement one day. and if you wanted to know how special their relationship was, colette and garry's, you just have to listen to the testimony of mr. donnie wood, who told you that their relationship was so special they were a yin and yang; that she provided those things that he could not do very well, she was good at and provided for him. and those things that she was not very good at, he provided those things for her. but because of what reynolds did to him, what they had concealed from him and all americans of that generation, in 1995, that family, happy family picture that you see there, sometime in the mid 1970s, when mr. o'hara was still smoking, those memories changed, and garry o'hara was diagnosed with lung cancer, was lying in his bed with his wife and children by his side, and cancer ravaged his body, with garry soon to become one of that statistic of 20 million. there cannot be any greater grief than watching someone you love suffer, watching a husband, watching a father go through the ravages of lung cancer as it metastasized to his bones and to his brain, and again waiting and watching that transformation of the gentleman that we see in this photograph with his family, and change and morph into someone they really did not recognize as a result of cancer. those memories that you see there, those memories now are intruded upon. those happy memories are now intruded upon with the memories of watching garry go through cancer and dying, watching him go to the doctor, watching a husband and father cry about dying. not because he was afraid of dying. certainly not. not someone who would serve so honorably for so long. he was not afraid of dying. he told michael that. what he was afraid of and what he was sad about was not being there for colette, not being there for his children. he had devoted a lifetime to her and to his family, and now, because that fuse had been lit and he was dying from lung cancer from all of those exposures to the carcinogens, over almost two decades of smoking, he was going to not be able to win that battle and was going to die. that memory that they have, you can consider that. next paragraph, please. there is the transformation, with the hand of his best friend on his shoulder. that is a period of time when the realization is coming to garry, as colette and his children watch, that he will not survive this. the elements of damages that you are to consider are the damages that are allowed for by law. his honor judge jones has instructed on them. i'm going to go over with you the verdict form. one of the questions that you may have as you listen to mr. smith talk about the evidence in the case and listen to me talk about the damages in this case: well, what is it that you want us to do? what do you want us to do here as jurors in this case? and the best way i can do that is to walk through the verdict form with you, as mr. smith has somewhat already. i'm going to do it a little bit differently, though. i'm going to put some information here in front of you, and one of the things that mr. smith has asked me to address is this question 5 on the verdict form: was mr. o'hara himself negligent, and if so, was his negligence a legal cause of his cancer? and judge jones has already instructed you that negligence is the failure to use reasonable care. and you might find that garry o'hara, who grew up in a cigarette culture, who started smoking when it was normal for everybody, when it was glamorous, sexy, cool, hip, you might find that he could have tried to quit harder, he could have tried to quit more often, and you might find that he was negligent. and if you do, if you check yes to question 5, that takes you to question 6, where there is an allocation of negligence with a percentage. that percentage must total one hundred percent. that is an allocation of fault between the corporation, reynolds tobacco company, and the citizen, garry o'hara. when you come to that question, if you do, there is one thing you have to keep in mind. you remember when i talked to you in opening, i tried to make the point emphatically that they would make an issue of garry o'hara's choices. it is all about garry o'hara's choices, and i told you, i think, that they were going to put a spotlight on mr. o'hara, and i told you that we were going to turn that spotlight around, and we were going to turn it into a floodlight and shine it on them, and we were going to talk about their choices and what they did. and that is what we put on in terms of the evidence over the last two weeks, and that is what mr. smith has talked about this morning. and when you come to this question, i want you to think about the nature of the choices, because garry o'hara, growing up in the cigarette culture, his choices were innocent choices. they were not informed choices. never did they have the information they did, they always had. far more information than garry o'hara did. they never once asked him to quit. they never once told him to quit. they concealed that from him, and never once told him that what we have been telling you is wrong, that it is addictive, and it does cause cancer. those are evil choices. that is a different character of choice than the choices that garry o'hara made once he became addicted to nicotine. and so if you reach question 6 and there is an allocation of fault, i'm going to suggest that you allocate no more than ten percent to mr. o'hara, and the reminder to reynolds. you consider the evidence, and as jurors, you consider what is fair. that is the amount. next are the economic losses suffered by mr. o'hara's estate by mrs. o'hara, and these are the numbers that dr. raffa gave you, the loss of earnings in the past, and he gave you two summaries, if you recall. the two summaries that he gave you were one for age 55, if he retired at age 55, and then you recall the other summary, age 66. and what i'm giving you here are the numbers from age 66; but i think our common sense leads us to the conclusion that folks have an age that they hope to retire, but the reality, as dr. raffa said, is that most folks continue working more further in the future than they had planned. so the loss of earnings from the time he became ill and no longer worked until the time of his death, the lot of net accumulations that is already discounted -- because you remember dr. raffa telling you he has to discount the future amounts? if you took notes on that numbers, that 168,822 represents the discounted amount. and then finally, no. 10 includes the damages sustained by mrs. o'hara for her husband's loss for support and services. that includes military pension, that includes the offset, that includes reducing the number with a future amount, it includes the loss of services, and it includes the money lost from the private sector job. it is all of those numbers into one, reduced for present value, and then reduced again for any benefits that mrs. o'hara has already received, because, you remember, she has received benefits; she just receives less benefits because he is passed. if he were with us, they would have received more benefits. the next three questions, 11a, b and c, have to do with pain and suffering damages. i say pain and suffering damages. that is a category of damages that are non-economic. they are the human loss, what mrs. o'hara has been through for the last 20 years, and what she will go through for the next 14 years, her life expectancy. ladies and gentlemen, i would love to speak to you for an hour about the quality of these people, the quality of garry o'hara and his wife, but i do not have time to do it. but you do get to judge the family, mrs. o'hara and the children; and the measure of the man that we have not met, and will not meet, is measured by the quality of the people that you heard from on that stand. i'm going to suggest to you a sum of $10 million for mrs. colette o'hara, you should not award more, you should not award more, for the past 20 years, a lady who says that no one will measure up to her husband. she is never remarried, and she never will, because no one will measure up to her man. for valerie and michael, garry's daughter, his little girl, his youngest son, who were young enough at the time, at the time in their early 20s to watch their father die from cancer, you should not award more. let me finish today by echoing the comments of my partner regarding the punitive damages aspect of this case, and that question, which will be the last question, and i'm going to tell you in closing that you have a power that no one else has, and you have a power to make them financially feel for what they did. their victims were americans, good people like garry o'hara. he lived and he served with honor and integrity. and there is not one thing in this record that you can point to that reynolds did that you could characterize as honorable. and there is not one thing in this record you can point to that reynolds did that anyone could characterize as having integrity. what they did was evil. it was a scheme. it was a trick. it was a lie, deny, conceal campaign. they believed in hooking them early and hooking them for life, and it succeeded. justice, shall you pursue. our job is about to be over, and your job will be to consider this evidence and reach answers to these conclusions. but justice today cries out louder than the wails of colette o'hara, as her young children looked on when garry o'hara breathed his last breath. justice requires that you do your job and the answer to this question. and we all know the old saying: you shall know the truth, and the truth shall set you free. and they knew the truth. they would not honor the truth. they embraced a different saying, and that saying for them was: you shall know the money, and the money will make you conspire against your fellow citizen. you shall know the money, and you shall lie to your fellow man. garry o'hara deserved better. in 1861, abraham lincoln said in his first inaugural address: "why should there not be a confidence in the ultimate justice of the people? is there any better or equal hope in the world?" you, ladies and gentlemen of the jury, american jury, you are the ultimate justice in our society, in our civilization. he was speaking to every american at that time. he was speaking to every american to come. he was speaking to all of us in this courtroom about justice. and he was speaking to you. thank you. mr. smith: the good news is this is the last lawyer you are going to hear from in this case. the better news is i have just 28 minutes. the bad news, i still talk this fast. i want to show you a couple of things in direct response. you were just told: it is an american, it is free choice. rj reynolds' position today is it is free choice. it is just a free choice. i want to remind you of what the surgeon general of the united states said about that. this was already in your evidence. play that, please. >>: surgeon general c. everett koop issued two major reports on smoking; one on the dangers of secondhand smoke, the other on nicotine addiction. the tobacco industry disputes both reports as more political than scientific. >>: we have been told so frequently that smoking is a matter of free choice, you start when you want and you quit when you want, but anybody who is ever smoked knows that is not true. >>: what does the record, the long-time record say is the most dangerous age to get hooked on tobacco? >>: indications are very clear that the people who are most heavily addicted to nicotine and have the greatest trouble quitting are those who began smoking when they were 14 to 16. i think the studies all over the world, in every country, in every culture, the younger you start, the greater the addiction and the more difficult it is to quit. >>: now, you said that you consider tobacco as addictive as cocaine and heroin. is not that an overstatement? >>: no. i think the evidence is very clear if you understand what we are talking about. addiction is a specific physiologic problem, and the manner in which you become addicted to nicotine is exactly the same manner in which you become addicted to cocaine or to heroin, and that even after you have quit and you think you are clean, there is a tremendous tendency to relapse. >>: there is no such thing as a safe cigarette. there is no such thing as a quality death. that is exactly what the surgeon general of the united states said in 1988, but, of course, you know that rj reynolds disagreed with that decision. they talk about free choice. before i leave it -- and he talks about not a quality death. that is not a quality death. just a few months before, just a few -- a year before, this was a man whose future was right ahead. he had just -- he had been honorably discouraged. he was decorated by the service. he had gotten a job. and cigarettes caught up with him. that is what this case is about. do not forget for a moment that they talk about free choice. think about this: it goes to the materiality. if they really believed in free choice, would not they have just given people the information? if they did not think that concealing information made a difference, why would not you just tell the truth? no. they knew the truth. the truth was that if they told people what they knew about nicotine addiction, if they told people what they were doing to manipulate the nicotine, if they told people that they had found 60 carcinogens, if they had told people that they had been lying to them because they really could not remove it, they knew it would not make a difference, if it was really about free choice, you just tell them all of the information. that would have been a free choice. it would have been an informed choice. it is not a free choice when you get in that car and they do not tell you the brakes are defective. they know it, and they do not tell you, and they are responsible for the outcome. that is how simple it is about concealment. they said, you know, there might be another case where this all applies. there might be some case somewhere else where these facts did apply or engle did apply, but not this case. do not forget this which was in evidence. this was 1987. this is what brown & williamson said: lest some lawyer be looking over our shoulder, i do not concede that even one person dies of a chronic disease that is caused by smoking cigarettes. sauce for the goose is sauce for gander. that is all i'm saying. they do not really believe there is some other case, because they will never admit. now, in this case they start out -- mr. monde: your honor, may we approach? the court: you may approach. (thereupon, the following proceedings were had at sidebar:) mr. monde: the statement that we never admit goes beyond what is permitted in argument. we are not -- we are not required to the admit responsibility in this case or in any case, and it is improper argument. the court: okay. i'm going to overrule the objection. you have one additional minute. mr. smith: yes, sir. the court: i'm sorry, mr. smith. mr. monde: mr. smith. i need to move for mistrial on that ground. the court: okay. i deny the motion. thank you. (thereupon, the sidebar was concluded and the following proceedings were held in open court:) mr. smith: let us go back and go over some things. the clock scares me. first of all, they talk to you about cancer, the lung cancer. put up rene ledbetter, please, on page 96, if you would. this is what dr. ledbetter said: "is this the type of lung cancer that you have seen frequently in your career as a cancer doctor? "yes." remember what everyone said. there is several parts of the puzzle. there is pathology, there is examination, there is experience, there is radiology. there may be others. the clinician makes the call. this clinician made the call in the military before anybody ever heard of litigation, and when he made the call, remember what happened. there really was radiology right back then. number 2, they talk about -- they talk about causation. go to gary strauss, please, on page 96. yes. remember, he said, "well, it is been 14 years." "well, when he was diagnosed with adenocarcinoma of the lung in 1995, well, was he still at significant risk for acquiring lung cancer? "well, i mean, how do you answer that question when the answer is he developed lung cancer. "the day before he was diagnosed? "sure, yes. "what was his risk after his diagnoses? "one hundred percent." he had the smoking exposure. he had it over years. you have seen the graph we used before. you heard us talk about lag time. that is what happens. you do not get cancer immediately. it takes a number of years. he quit -- remember in the very beginning, in the 1953 document, dr. teague for rj reynolds, he was talking about the wynder and graham study in 1953. they said from cessation until smoking [sic] will probably be 10 or greater years. that is exactly what happened here. they talk about -- they take various tidbits and they want to say this proves or this proves. we put on every doctor that they took a snippet out of the testimony. every doctor we put on ended up with the same conclusion: to a reasonable degree of medical certainty, it was primary lung cancer. not one, not two. two, before there was any litigation. a radiologist who says: i normally do not -- i read the film. i knew they were going to try that. that is what he said: the film usually tells the story. he did not have it. why did you agree to do it in this one case? because it was so clear. he read the reports, and he knew how clear it was. that is a false trail. ladies and gentlemen, this was primary lung cancer. and they would have you believe that every doctor that year who treated him, right up to the end, got it wrong. and, in fact, as they -- they told you, he did not put it on the death certificate. the same doctor said he had terminal lung cancer less than two months before. the same doctor said repeatedly he had lung cancer. they want to pick and choose a few things. they want to pick and choose, try to confuse. i like that. that is exactly what they have been trying to do throughout this whole explanation of the evidence. they talk about addiction. let us talk about dr. ticknor for a minute. they said, oh, he was not up in the ivory tower. i'll say. he is got a practice in which fifty percent of his income is from testifying. he is got a practice in which the majority of his work has nothing do with nicotine addiction. he is never written and published. they know that. he is the one they bring in here to use the dsm, and the first thing he says is he could not give the first criteria on the dsm because he was unable to talk with the patient. what did dr. hurt say why they typically do not use the dsm? because really -- and who teaches the dsm, by the way, in medical school -- he says it is really not good for that kind of diagnosis because there is too many things in there you need to talk to the patient about to understand. remember, he said: well, i really could not say. i did not give him credit for this because when he smoked, i could not tell if he intended to quit or not because i never knew what his intent was. well, you would have talk to the patient. the heaviness of smoking index, their argument is it does not really say that they are addicted. it just says they are heavily addicted. folks, if you are heavily addicted, you are addicted. he was the heaviest of the addiction scores by both doctors. they say, well, we did not talk as much about him during their testimony. the reason why is because in his case, a person who smokes two packs a day for 20 -- for 18 years or more, who tries to quit repeatedly, his children told you they can remember from childhood dad was always trying to quit, he tried successfully for a little while in '77 -- he did just what the surgeon general said, he relapsed. he smoked and smoked and smoked. he went outside to smoke. he understood he had to go outside. he stood in the rain and snow, and that is what he did all the time. i rest my case on that issue. he stood in the rain and the snow to smoke cigarettes because cigarettes were dominating his life. they say, well, there is no proof he ever really tried to quit what did he tell this wife? remember the testimony. when she got on him and he was trying, he said: i cannot live without them. he finally was successful. their own doctors and everybody that has taken the stand has said the fact that you are addicted does mean that you cannot quit. and he was a success story on quitting. by the way, on what day did they ever encourage anybody to quit smoking cigarettes? on what day was that part of their business model, to encourage them to quit? they had -- you remember the great american smoke-out? one day. ed asner testified one day a year. and what did tobacco do? what did they do? they came up with the great american smoke-in and gave out kits to support smokers. they did not want people to quit for one day. they talked about it would not have made a difference what was going on in '72. well, we know he started trying to quit in 1972. i thought i would put out a document of what they were saying in back in 1972. can you put up the implications arising from smoke ph? i think it is dr. teague. thirty-two -- mr. monde: your honor, i'm sorry, may we approach? the court: you may. please take that down. (thereupon, the following proceedings were had at sidebar:) mr. monde: it is not related to this judge. it is just a misstatement of the evidence to say that he tried to quit in 1972. mrs. o'hara admitted right on cross-examination, this is the '71/'72 time period, after she had taken her son to go see the doctor, she admitted that he did not try to quit at that time. that is the only evidence. the court: did not they say there was a two and a half month period of time? mr. monde: '77. mr. smith: before he quit, for a decade, she said, he tried for a decade to quit. from '81, i'm not that good at deciphering, judge, but that would go to '71. several quit attempts. the children said he tried to quit through the '70s. they said during the period of time he was trying to quit. what were we doing? we were not trying to manipulate nicotine? i'm going to show you a document that shows that is not true. the court: there was testimony that they remember him always -- that they remember him always trying to quit. i concede that the two and a half months, the most successful time, was in '77, but there is evidence from which the jury could infer that. but they are to rely upon their recollection of the evidence, and i will be happy to give that limiting instruction, if you want me to. mr. monde: well, what would the limiting instruction be? the court: jury, you shall rely upon your own recollection of the evidence regarding that. mr. monde: all right. the court: okay? mr. smith: it is always true. the court: i understand. that is why i give it. (thereupon, the sidebar was concluded and the following proceedings were held in open court:) the court: before mr. smith proceeds, i just want to remind you, jury, that you are obligated to and you are reminded that you are to rely upon your own recollection of the evidence that is presented during the course of the trial. thank you. you may proceed. mr. smith: thank you. 1972 document. rj reynolds. they said: well, when he was starting to consider quitting, remember she said that the family said it was about a decade he tried to quit, around '71/'72 he tried to quit? let us go back and see what they were doing. this is what rj reynolds was doing when he was trying to quit cigarettes: "in essence, a cigarette is a system for the delivery of nicotine to the smoker in an attractive, useful form. "at 'normal' smoke ph or at or below 6.0, essentially all the smoked nicotine is chemically absorbed as acidic acid. as the smoke ph increases above 6.0, an increasing proportion of the total smoked nicotine occurs in 'free' form, which was described to you as freebase, which is volatile, rapidly absorbed by the smoker and believed to be instantly perceived as nicotine 'kick.' chart viii shows how proportion of 'free' nicotine increases as ph goes higher." what were they doing when he was trying to quit? they were trying to find a way to get a bigger market share by increasing the smoke ph, which they thought translated to getting more people to smoke because they wanted -- that would give them a bigger nicotine kick. they talked about the documents of rj reynolds. many of them, they said -- or most of them, they said, about the nicotine was well known and well known in the public and they used the sine qua non. go to the one, it is called the research planning memo on the nature of tobacco business, pt 04791. this is an rj reynolds document. i believe it bears date '71 or '72. '72. now, they said: sine qua none, now, that was -- they knew about that back in reader's digest, back in 1952 or '57 or some date back there, reader's digest had all of this information. blow up the top. "in a sense, the tobacco industry may be thought as being a specialized, highly ritualized, stylized segment of the pharmaceutical industry. tobacco products uniquely contain and deliver a nicotine, a potent drug with a variety of physiological effects." that is what they said in '72. you heard what they said under oath in '94. "our industry is then based upon design, manufacture and sale of attractive dosage forms of nicotine." that is rj reynolds in '72. that is where they were focused on. that is what they were focused on. "happily for the tobacco industry, nicotine is both habituating and unique, and it is variety of physiological actions. hence, no other active material or combination of materials provides equivalent satisfaction." they knew what they were doing. they knew they were addicting people. they knew they were living on addiction. they knew, when they tried to get people younger -- it was because the younger smoker, the learner, the presmoker, it is in the documents, they knew that as soon as they got them and they became smokers, the no. 1 reason, remember the graph we showed, the no. 1 reason they retained a smoker, kept a smoker, was not flavor, was not love, anything about the cigarette; it was nicotine. that was the most important thing, and that is what rj reynolds knew and counted upon. you were shown some documents on their argument about addiction not causing death. the surgeon general of the united states, we put up the graph, and then later again, the surgeon general and all of the medical people who testified on that subject in this courtroom on that subject, agreed as follows. it is really simple: you get addicted to nicotine, you continue smoking. you stay addicted to nicotine, you continue to smoke. the longer you smoke, the more you have exposure, the dose response. the more exposer you have, the higher the risk is. consequently, he did quit. he was a success story. he did not what they wanted him to do, not what they asked him to do. he finally conquered it. but that got him. it started with nicotine addiction, and it ended with lung cancer. that is exactly the way the question is phrased to you on the verdict form: did the addiction substantially contribute to his death? and the answer to that is yes. the answer to "did he have primary lung cancer" is yes. the answer to "was he addicted," was he addicted? yesterday, they put the chart themselves from the dsm, and you had a chance to see them as you sit there. my suspicion is that every person in this courtroom was going through the same process in their mind: i think he does meet that, i think he does meet that, as their expert said no, no, no, and you are sitting thinking, but he did all of these things. they said you cannot trust dr. cummings or dr. hurt's testimony as much because they do not like the tobacco industry. they have spent their lives at the roswell center for cancer research and at the mayo clinic. they have seen the results of cigarette addiction, nicotine addiction and dependence. they have watched families, just like the family that is here today, family after family after family get the news. they have watched what it does. how do you think they would feel as health care professionals? how do you think they would feel about the industry? but their records, their credentials are unassailable. we did not have to go find somebody somewhere in a private practice that has never written a word that included the word "smoking" in it and had never done a bit of research on the impact of the brain. that is what rj reynolds brought you. they say he was able to control his smoking. there is nothing -- you know, they brought an expert in here yesterday. i'm not sure, but you guys rely on your own memory, if you can remember it, but i think the conclusion was that he would believe there were people addicted, but they had to be mentally ill. they would have to lose control -- i think he said schizophrenics, bipolars and people with organic brain damage. everybody else he thinks, really, as long as you have some control, you are not addicted. not anybody else agrees with this. and finally, in cross-examination, he admitted he is out of step with the scientific community, which is where reynolds has always been. i want to finish with this. i want to finish with just a couple of more things. they do not want to spend any time talking about the fact that -- they want to say that, well, a lot of this stuff that happened, happened after he quit. that is because they know what the punitive damages instruction is. it is damage to him, and you may consider what they did afterwards. in 1981. in 1981, he quit. in 1953, we had a downturn. they got together and the conspiracy began. they told the stories. they attacked the science. they came up with all the literature and press releases that you have seen and heard about. and the number went up. in 1964, it went down again. they came back and said the same thing. they had more advertising than anybody, including general motors. they were the most advertised product in the country. they had the best public relations firm, and they continuously contested the surgeon general. remember, we have to give them self-rationale. the self-rational is not conclusive. and guess what happened? it kept coming up. and someone from the jury asked dr. cummings at one point: what happened in 1981? he said: well, some of it was the numbers generationally in terms of the baby boom impact, and the other was that information began to become more and more available into the '80s. we know that in this case, that they had to release their documents in the late 1990s. right here. i want you to look at what has happened since people had more information. the mountain they climb was when they were climbing one when the information was being withheld and concealed. when the information began to come up, they started down. and when the information actually got out, they have plummeted. what does that tell you? that when they got a free choice, meaning when people actually got to learn the truth and actually got to find out what was going on, they made a choice to get out of smoking. but that was too late for garry o'hara. they say: well, we cannot tell you that anything influenced his brand usage. no. back up to her testimony. go to the testimony. she said: we bought for price. how did you do that? well, her daughter actually said the same thing: you know, we always bought for price. what did she say? we looked for what was the best promotion. now, who does the promotions at the bx? it is not the air force. it is the companies. these were the biggest companies selling the most popular brands. you saw the documents through dr. cummings that they targeted military. they targeted military for promotion because they knew it was a good market, because more than fifty percent of the people still smoked into the 1980s in the military. so when they say, well, we just went by promotion, the promotion is because the only cigarettes they ever bought, with the exception of marlboro light, the only cigarettes they bought were the ones that were promoted by rj reynolds. i want to talk to you a minute about they keep saying about statements. can you put concealment up for a minute? this case is about concealment. they keep wanting us to pick out something they said. the other thing you are going to -- this is about what they did not say. this is what -- that is why you can infer reliance. was is the concealment or omission of material information? it is not what they said alone. the material in concealment is what they chose not to say. the evidence they chose not to reveal. the secrets they choose to keep. was the concealment or omission of material information regarding the addictiveness or the health effects of cigarettes, or both, by rj reynolds company a legal cause? it does not have to be the only cause. it has to be a legal cause, substantial contributing cause to mr. o'hara's developing cancer. well, we know that he quit smoking in '81, and we know he struggled with it, but until he died, he had never relapsed after '81, that we know of. we know he had several relapses, and one after a substantial stop in '77. he was trying. even their doctor admitted he was trying to quit. how much help would it have been, how much would it have made a difference to come out in the '60s, when he was just starting to smoke, or maybe the '50s, when they knew in '58? how about in the '60s? how about in the '70s? how about if they come out and told what they were doing? how about if they just had not done it? how about if they were not manipulating nicotine? how about if they were not trying to get the share of the market, increase their share of the market by doing one thing, one thing only, manipulating nicotine to get more kick? what if they had actually said, our own internal research shows that cigarette smoking causes cancer? it is one thing, we are all natural, we are americans, and we sometimes get suspicious of government. so somebody says, well, the government says this, but the company says it is not true. the government says -- but the company says it is not true. what would have been the impact if they had simply stepped forward and said: we agree with the findings of the surgeon general? what would have been the impact on the health of the american people if they had said: we have confirmed that cigarette smoking causes lung cancer and it is the major cause of lung cancer? what if they had done it in the '60s and '70s when they knew it? what if they had not hidden -- hidden and continued to hide through the '90s the fact that their cigarettes were not just addictive, highly addictive, as addictive as heroin and cocaine? even when the surgeon general finally said that in 1988, what was their response? that is ridiculous. scare tactics. they are trying to -- they are trying to scare people away from cigarettes. they never cared about anything except the bottom line. they never cared about any family except the ones that kept smoking. when you go back today, the first three questions should be easy. and the engle, the engle results will help you a lot with decisions after that. engle is -- has said what it said. it is no less than what it says. cigarettes that were made were defective; that they did conceal; that they did conspire; and that they were negligent. and then you simply have to say: and did that matter? did that matter to mr. o'hara? would that have made a difference? and if the answer is it would have mattered, then the answer to every question is yes. when i started this case, when we started this case, you heard them get up and say this is about mr. o'hara. well, i want to kind of end up about this with mr. o'hara: you know, sometimes we speak a shorthand when we try to summarize a person's life after the fact. it is like an obituary. born in 1945. quit school to join the united states air force, 1963. retired, honorable discharged, and decorated for heroism and devotion to duty, 1993. died a few weeks after his 50th birthday, 1996, leaving behind a loving wife of nearly 28 years, and three children, a close family who loved him well. that is what this is about. he was a strong-enough man to do everything. he got his education; he was a great soldier, a great father, great family man. but there is nobody too strong that they cannot be brought down by one thing: he had a weakness for and was addicted to cigarettes. and even then he overcame, but he overcame too late. i want to show the last -- this is the graph i wish we were looking at. this is the graph that could have happened. this is -- this map, this chart in the way that it could have been. that is the way it is. this is the way it should have been and it could have been if they had just had the courage. that is when he was a boy. if they had done it when they knew that it caused cancer. if they had done it, and they knew it was addicted -- mr. monde: your honor, your honor. mr. smith: -- that could have been the curve. the court: please approach. (thereupon, the sidebar was concluded and the following proceedings were held in open court:) mr. monde: there is no evidence of that. it is rank speculation to manipulate that graph that way. it is rank speculation. there is absolutely no evidence. the court: thank you. mr. smith: it is legitimate based on the evidence that we have, based on what happened when they did get more information in the 1990s. that simply is showing what could have happened, that decline could have happened if they would have told the truth. mr. monde: let us show what actually happened instead of rank speculation. the court: all right. the portion of the chart which was manipulated to draw an artificial line down, that is the part that i think goes to the point of speculation. what you did show and what you argued is perfectly legitimate, that once the information came out, it went down. that is fine, arguing within the bounds of the evidence that was presented. the other, we assume maybe, but that is not going to be good enough. at this point in time, i will simply ask the jury to disregard the last graph. thank you. (thereupon, the sidebar was concluded and the following proceedings were held in open court:) the court: members of the jury, the last graph that was placed up for your view, i'm simply going to ask you to disregard that. and that shall take no place and not be considered by you in your deliberations. thank you. mr. smith, you may continue. you have two minutes remaining. mr. smith: i know. this is the graph i will show you now, and this is the line, if i had a yellow marker, i would be making. that is what could have happened. what is important about the yellow line? because when the yellow line turns, the red line will follow it. and any time it could have turned down, any time they could have told the truth, any time they could have revealed what they knew and what they were hiding, this line could have turned down. that line represents human beings. that line is a line right out here with garry o'hara and a whole lot of people like him. that is what this case is about. you know, there is an old saying: in everything, there is a day of reckoning. it may take a long time, it may take 20 years, it may take longer than 20 years, but reckoning comes around for what you have done. today is the day of reckoning for rj reynolds for what they did to garry o'hara, his generation and his family. we commend this to your justice. mrs. o'hara, thank you.