mr. bass: thank you, your honor. may it please the court, counsel. and good morning, members of the jury. (jury responds, "good morning.") mr. bass: we promised you we would bring you a mountain of evidence, and we brought you a 4155 mountain of evidence. you all got to see the personal diary of r.j. reynolds tobacco company and its co-conspirators for nearly the entire 20th century, the things that juanita thurston never got to see. but it is more than just how much evidence we brought you. it is the source of the evidence; it is the power of evidence; it is the meaning of the evidence. i think i said this in opening statement. but one of the great things about being plaintiffs' lawyer in this case is we get to prove our case with their own words, not mine, not our witnesses, but theirs. these documents -- and you learned this from the evidence. these documents that you saw were so powerful, so revealing, so convincing and so enlightening that the public health community now uses them as a source of information to write up surgeon general's reports to try and get information to the public. but, yet, r.j. reynolds comes in here and says it is all juanita thurston's fault. from this document, from these documents, from these documents you learned everything you need to know about this defendant, this industry, their intentions. and 4156 so now really the only question left is what are you going to do about it? are we going to stand for liars and companies that treat people like that just because they are a corporation in america, just in the name of capitalism? that is going to be up for you to decide today. you see, a jury is a powerful thing. and the courtroom, the courtroom is the great equalizer. it is where a person like gwen odom can come into court and go toe to toe with a company and a corporation like r.j. reynolds. she can put on her case. she can call witnesses. she can trust the members of the community to be fair and impartial, weigh the evidence, have a discussion, listen to the court's instructions and apply those facts to the law and render a verdict. on behalf of myself, miss barnes, mr. garcia, and miss odom, and on behalf of juanita thurston, we thank you all for the patience, the diligence, the attention, the note taking, everything you endured to get to this point, because this is gwen odom's day in court. this is her day in court for her mother. now as the court, as his honor just read 4157 you, you know what this is is opening -- excuse me. let us not go back there. -- closing arguments. it is our chance to sum up what we think the evidence was and how it should be applied to the facts, to the law and the verdict form. you all sat through all the evidence. i'm not going to rehash it all. but as the court said, it is nice to have a roadmap or to know where you are going before we begin. and you are almost there. you are almost beginning what you were selected to do. and that is, deliberate, decide the facts and apply it to the law. so one thing to think about as you navigate the verdict form is what is our burden of proof? right. that concept has been discussed with you all since jury selection and opening statement. you heard it in these instructions. it is important to recall that it is simply, simply a preponderance of the evidence, an ever-so-slight tipping of the scale. it is not beyond a reasonable doubt. it is not some high attainable or unattainable, rather, over-the-moon standard. it is an ever-so-slight tipping of the scale. and we submit to you that based upon 4158 everything that we brought you, their own words, the witnesses we brought you, the testimony we brought you, there can be no doubt that we met our burden of proof by ever so slightly tipping the scales. and so the first question, as the court said, as the court read to you, and you have the verdict form there, is class membership. was juanita thurston addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine? and if so, was such addiction a legal cause of her lung cancer and death? and you can see on this slide everything else is bolded in black except for the word "addicted" and "a." and i'm going to talk about why that is. but before i do, i'm going to talk about the jury instructions and how we submit you should think about the case and what the evidence is in regards to help you answer these questions. but before i do, you all should know about this. whoops. that is off. that question, the first question -- and you will notice there are different questions, right. there are independent questions, okay. class membership, the first question, it is 4159 not about fault. it is not about awareness. people can be aware or have heard of health hazards of smoking but still be addicted. of course, we know that. those two things are not -- those two things, rather, are exclusive and they should be kept apart. class membership is not about fault. it is not about awareness. it is not about whether and when juanita thurston knew or thought that cigarettes might be harmful. it is not whether or when juanita thurston thought she should start trying to quit or should quit. it is not about whether she smoked after the warnings or whether her ex-son-in-law, thad hayes, when he handed her cigarettes told her, "you should quit." it is about none of those things. class membership is about was she addicted and was her addiction a legal cause. and so back in the class membership slide, i simply highlighted "a", the letter "a." and that is because of this instruction. and what you are going to find in the jury instructions, and they will be a nice resource for you all to have in the back, you will find that regarding legal cause there is really two ways in which 4160 plaintiff can meet the legal cause burden, right, two ways. one, in order to be regarded as a legal cause of lung cancer and death, an addiction to cigarettes containing nicotine need not be the only cause. it can be addiction plus other things, right, so that is why we talk about it in terms of a legal cause. it does not have to be the sole cause. it can be, of course. but it does not have to be. so that is the first thing you should know about thinking about the evidence. and that is why i mentioned that class membership is not about the things that i talked about. class membership is about addiction. addiction is the linchpin of this case. it is the thing you should think about and only think about during your deliberations on question one, because it can be a cause of her death among member other things. so whatever mr. furr suggests to you should be the legal cause or causes, addiction can be addition -- in addition to whatever other causes mr. furr suggests. so that is important to know. i believe that there are two ways. of 4161 course, addiction can be the sole cause, right, it can be what we call the but for cause the loss would not have occurred, but it can also be a substantial contributing factor. so really at the end of the day you should ask yourselves in the back, ask yourselves if we were to take away her addiction, if we were to take that away, would she have smoked a pack and a half of cigarettes a day for 35 years? and i think we all know the answer to that question, because nobody smokes 1 1/2 packs a day for 35 years if they are not addicted to cigarettes. nobody does that. because people smoke for nicotine, an addictive drug that the defendants obsessed over, obsessed over getting the delivery of their cigarettes just right. and that is why it is fitting that the focus is on addiction, because, you know what? for the entire 20th century we showed you evidence of the focus of r.j. reynolds on nicotine and addiction. so it is very fitting that for you all today the focus should remain on addiction. nobody lights up a cigarette 30 times a day, takes 300 puffs without being addicted. 4162 remember how dr. burns explained legal cause? addiction is the critical piece in causation of lung cancer because without the addiction, the smoker does not smoke enough to cause the damage to the lungs that it takes to get lung cancer. lung cancer takes years to develop. it takes millions upon millions upon millions of exposures to carcinogens, which can only happen if you are taking millions of puffs on a cigarette. and nobody does that unless they are addicted. and so addiction is the critical piece. addiction is the linchpin. i expect mr. furr will ask you to keep your eye on the ball. and we want you to. the ball in question, one, is addiction and nothing else. some of us are visual learners. addiction causes repetitive smoking which over time causes changes in the lungs, which over time turns into lung cancer which ultimately leads to death. that is how addiction causes disease. so what is the evidence with respect to addiction? well, we start with the defendant's own words. i'm not going to go through all of the documents. i know you all were paying attention. i know you were taking notes. i 4163 know you saw when we put up on the screen. but, for example, recall that in 1963 they are writing internally, we are -- moreover, nicotine is addictive. we are then in the business of selling nicotine, an addictive drug. nicotine is a drug. the defendants knew that. the defendants intentionally engineered their cigarettes to deliver the optimum amount of nicotine. now, the product itself might not matter to dr. samuel. it might not matter to him. and he might not know about it. but guess what we know? we know that is the most important thing, because you do not see nicotine patch addicts walking around. you do not see nicotine gum addicts. you see people addicted to nicotine in cigarettes. why? because it is been delivered to deliver nicotine in freebase form to your brain in 14 to 20 seconds maximum. so the product does matter. and how do we know that? well, when you get into the back, just look at all the internal company documents that we brought to you. we also know that addiction is a brain disease. okay. dr. cummings and dr. burns 4164 talked about when you are addicted, it is no longer a free choice. it is a constrained choice. of course, the smoker has to walk over to the pack of cigarettes and pull it out and light it up. but it is what is driving the smoker to do that. it is the same thing that drives everyone every day, and that is right here, the brain. an addiction is a disease of the things that sends messages to people and tells them what to do. and that is why a long time ago, the defendants recognized that addiction -- remember that document? addiction is the most powerful weapon a prosecuting attorney, a prosecuting attorney can have in a lung cancer case. and that is what this is, because addiction is a disease, and you cannot defend continued smoking as a matter of free choice if the smoker was addicted. who did we bring you to talk about addiction? well, i told you in opening statement that we were going to bring you the best in public health. and we brought you the best in public health. dr. david burns, 35 plus years in nicotine addiction and disease. you 4165 remember dr. burns. he was our first witness. miss baker put him on the witness stand. he is published hundreds of peer-reviewed publications. he is written chapters on nicotine addiction in the most popular medical textbooks, author, editor, senior reviewer of every u.s. surgeon general report since 1975, author and editor of nci, national cancer institute, tobacco control monographs. he is researched nicotine addiction; smoking-related diseases; tobacco companies marketing to children, history of tobacco use in this country and factors influencing smoking initiation and cessation. he is reviewed prestigious journals and the surgeon general's reports as well as consumer product as well as for the consumer product safety commission and the environmental protection agency. he is taught medical students and doctors on nicotine addiction and disease causation. he is treated smoking-related diseases including lung cancer and heart disease, as well as nicotine addiction. he is volunteered, local, state and national lung associations and cancer societies, the nci. he served on multiple state tobacco 4166 boards, control programs, world health organizations. and so he is been involved not only domestically in tobacco control issues but internationally as well. those -- that is an example of the type of witness that we brought you, someone who is sought after, so sought after that he consults with international governments on their tobacco control issues. he is testified for international groups, u.s. congress, state legislatures, judges and juries in florida, and -- and when he talks to you about the attack on public health, and he talks to you about how much was withheld from even the public health community about cigarette products, when he talks to you about the attacks on the surgeon general's report, those things that you saw, the press conference where you saw bill dwyer in front of the bank of microphones, the press conference that called the surgeon general, the number one health problem in the country, the things where they said the surgeon general's misleading, he was a personal witness to that. he was a personal witness to that. he was a personal witness to that. so he knows what he is 4167 talking about. dr. cummings, he testified this monday for a couple days. very similar credentials and experience to dr. burns, except for dr. cummings is not a medical doctor. but he is a ph.d. and like dr. burns, 30 plus years in nicotine addiction and disease. published hundreds of peer-reviewed publications. i think the number was 366 peer-reviewed publications, 95 percent dealing with the issues that we talked about in the courtroom. award-winning addiction research, nci, cdc, national institute of health. again, like dr. burns, reviewed for prestigious journals and surgeon general's reports, contributed to surgeon general's reports. and here's -- there is a few things about him. but here's one that is very interesting. he is not a doctor; yet, he teaches medical students and doctors how to assess addiction. and so i expect one of the things you are going to hear is that only medical doctors can diagnose addiction. well, how, then, is it that dr. cummings is able to teach medical doctors about addiction? see, as we said before, we 4168 hope that you learned a lot about nicotine and what it does to a person. now what it does to a person is very complex. but determining whether somebody is addicted is pretty quite simple -- is rather simple. and that is what dr. burns told you. and i think maybe those were his exact words when miss barnes asked him the question. well, how do you look at addiction, dr. burns? well, it is really quite simple. i skipped over it. it is really quite simple. while there are different criteria that different folks use, right, you heard about the dsm -- and let us make sure there is no misunderstanding about the dsm-5, right, we brought in dr. difranza, not to say that the dsm-5 is not a way that somebody, a psychiatrist can analyze addiction. that is not what the purpose of dr. difranza's testimony was. the purpose was to say that if it is going to be used, it is got to be used in the right way, especially in the forensic setting. the book itself says and cautions that there is the potential for misuse in the forensic setting. and so the reason that i did not ask 4169 dr. samuel any questions is because we had dr. difranza up next to say, well, here's -- here's how you use and here's how the dsm-5 should be used, okay. so that was the purpose of dr. difranza, not to say the dsm-5 is something that can never be used to assess whatever it is called in the dsm-5, tobacco use disorder, nicotine addiction, nicotine dependence, not that it cannot be used, just you got to use it the right way. okay. but no one -- there was no definition of addiction in the instructions. but we brought you the folks that write book chapters on nicotine addiction, dr. burns. he is contributed book chapters in internal medicine textbooks. so he is teaching -- not only does he teach medical. he is teaching every medical student in the country now for years about what nicotine addiction is. and dr. cummings, while he is not contributed book chapters on -- or while he is not written chapters in medical school textbooks, he is still teaching doctors, healthcare professionals how to assess it. and how do they look at it? well, very common sense, right. the age at 4170 which someone starts smoking matters. it might not matter to dr. samuel. but we know from using our common sense that the age at which someone starts introducing an addictive substance into their brain and body has an impact, especially when that person is a child and that person's brain is still developing. and the evidence is juanita thurston started smoking at age 14. now mr. furr is going to say, well, not so fast, not so fast. nobody actually saw juanita thurston smoke at that age. recall her sister, bobbie's, testimony. bobbie was emphatic that even though she cannot remember now, however long it is been, i cannot even do the math. 60, 60 plus years. even though she cannot remember, she is certain because these were -- this was her sister. she was only two years younger. and then, remember, juanita's older sister and bobbie's older sister, christine, two years older than juanita, they smoked together. just because bobbie did not see them or does not have a recollection of it, she is certain in her testimony that she saw it, and she is certain that juanita was smoking her father's camel 4171 cigarettes because he was a camel cigarette smoker and he left his cigarettes around. and we know that that is how kids start smoking. opportunity and access. but what they do not know when they start is that they are still going to be smoking 40, 50 years later. what they do not know is that the cigarettes are intentionally designed to addict them, to make it easy for the presmoker and nonsmoker to inhale, to deliver, in defendant's own words, a moderate amount of nicotine for slower absorption, because as dr. difranza explained yesterday, you cannot smoke a pack of cigarettes the first time you smoke. you might die. so the age matters. we know that she smoked first thing in the morning and regularly throughout the day. the younger you start, the more likely you be become addicted. now it does not matter to dr. samuel, but it defies common sense when you are using an addictive product, like nicotine and cigarettes, that how many cigarettes you smoke a day which directly correlates to how many hits of nicotine your brain gets matters. of course it does. it defies common sense and logic that it does not 4172 matter to dr. samuel. how long you have been using an addictive product, that does not matter to dr. samuel. that defies common sense. because it really is logical. nicotine is addictive. if you use an addictive substance a lot, there is a better chance you are going to become addicted to it. and if you use it for a long time, there is more exposures, the more chances you are going to become addicted to it. and, of course, we talked about the cigarette. all the cigarettes she smoked were between 1.19 and 1.45 milligrams of nicotine, smoked the reynolds with menthol and filter vents to facilitate deeper inhalation, and we know that inhalation leads to addiction. 300 hits of nicotine to the brain each day, three documented quit attempts, smoked compulsively despite harmful consequences. and during quit attempts, she suffered classic withdrawal symptoms. the clerk: counselor, 30 minutes. mr. bass: thank you. and so we have been talking about our witnesses and dr. samuel because that was really the main witness the defense brought you. and one instruction that i 4173 urge you to go in the back and look at is the instruction on the expert witness as the court read to you. you have heard opinion testimony from persons referred to as expert witnesses. you may accept such opinion testimony, reject it, or give it the weight you think it deserves considering the knowledge, skill, experience, training or education of the witness, the reasons given by the witness for the opinion expressed and all other evidence in the case. and so i urge you when considering the testimony to consider the source of the testimony and compare dr. burns, dr. cummings dr. difranza, folks that the surgeon general relies on to get accurate information to the public, compare those witnesses to what you heard and saw, and saw from dr. samuel. right, dr. samuel, never taught nicotine addiction, never published, never researched, never been asked to do anything for public health or surgeon general. what we know about him, in addition to chairing seminars on surviving cross-examination, is that he is been paid $800,000 by r.j. reynolds for his expert testimony since 2008. 4174 what else do we know about him? that it is his view that a woman who smoked upwards of 30 cigarettes a day for 35 years, exposed her brain millions of time to nicotine is not addicted. the age at which someone starts smoking does not matter; how long; how many cigarettes a day; the product does not matter. we know that last year alone he made in between 350 and $375,000 for r.j. reynolds which represents seventy percent last year of his forensic income for his forensic practice. we also know that since 2012, the first time he testified in any of these cases, he is not testified in court or deposition for anybody else other than r.j. reynolds. and what did he come here and do? he came here and really attempted to belittle nicotine addiction. he wants you all to think that it is the easiest thing in the world to overcome, that it is no big deal. it is just nicotine. it is a really weak behavioral reinforcer, things like that. remember some of those things he said? he comes in here and says, juanita thurston, even though she cried after she relapsed in 1976, she did not really want to quit smoking. 4175 you know why she did not want to quit? because quitting is just so easy, it is easy. if she really wanted to quit, she could have at any time. that is what he wants you to believe. but we know, we know that that is not what nicotine addiction is. we know that most people would like to stop. we know that from the defendant's own words. we know that many are not able to. and we know that while people are different, while everyone's different, we know that for many people, quitting smoking is not like snapping your fingers. it is not like waking up one morning and deciding that i'm going to have cheerios instead of oatmeal today or i'm going to go and hit some golf balls today rather than going to hit some tennis balls. it is not like that. they want you to think it is. they want you to think it is like deciding between pizza and a hamburger. those are three choices, right. those are things that you wake up in the morning and your brain is able to make those decisions free of any constraints. but addiction, addiction is not like that. they want you to think that it is, but it is not. and so really at the end of the day, 4176 according to dr. samuel, to be dependent or addicted under the dsm, you have to be a six-pack-a-day smoker who loses their job because of smoking; who has constant family fights because of smoking; who says, you know what, i'm not going to go to church anymore because i'm going to stay home and smoke rather than go to church. and, of course, like i said, we brought in dr. difranza whose credentials are as impressive as the other witnesses, burns and cummings. and his purpose was to say, look, if you are going to use the dsm-5, you got to use it right, for example, criteria four, craving, it tells you in the dsm-iv -- excuse me -- five, that craving, you find out if someone is craving by asking the patient what they are craving. well, guess what? he cannot do that, right. that does not mean that there are circumstances where the dsm-5 cannot be used. but to come into court and rely on it, he is got to have all the information. that is what dr. difranza was saying. he is also saying, well, you do not look at, you know, dr. samuels talked about, well, tolerance. well, to be tolerant, you got to be 4177 continue progressing. once you get to that pack a day, after a while if that is not enough, you have to go up to a pack and a half. and after a while, you go to two, two and a half, three. i mean, where does -- where does it ever end? but we know, we know that tolerance to nicotine does not develop like that. our witnesses told us that tolerance develops in the early stages. tolerance develops when you are a presmoker and you smoke that first cigarette and you does not need another cigarette for a week. then you smoke your second cigarette when you are 12, 13, 14, right. and then maybe you do that pattern for a month or two, and then you need two cigarettes a week and so on and so on until after a few years you become that pack, pack-and-a-half or two-pack-a-day smoker where you plateau and remain. that is why when you think about it and we use our common sense and experience is we know that when people describe maybe they had a parent who smoked or friends who smoked, well how much does your mom smoke; well, she is a two-pack-a-day smoker, we say that because we know that you plateau. once you get to that 4178 amount that your body needs, you plateau. that is tolerance to nicotine. you do not keep going up and up and up as dr. samuel wants to you believe. so those are just some of things that we brought in dr. difranza to discuss. we talked about how addiction causes disease. and if you recall, i'm going to use the flip chart here. i have not got to use it yet. i'm feeling kind of left out. let us see. remember miss barnes had dr. burns do this analysis, right? one pack a day, 39 years. that represents 284,700 cigarettes over her lifetime. pack and a half a day, which the medical records suggest juanita was smoking for at least 35 years, 427,050 cigarettes in the lifetime. doses at eight puffs, we know from dr. samuels that the average could be ten. we know from the witnesses that it is somewhere in between 8 and 12. so let us just say ten is the average. we conservatively used eight puffs. two -- at one pack a day, 2,277,600 hits of nicotine, an addictive drug, on the smoker's brain. 1 1/2 packs a day, 3,416,400 hits of nicotine on the smoker's brain every day. when 4179 you think about it, is there anything else you need to know than those numbers when thinking about whether juanita thurston was addicted to nicotine? we also brought you two of juanita thurston treating physicians, dr. winokur whose deposition was read. he was the thoracic surgeon who treated miss thurston on her initial presentation which ultimately led to lung cancer diagnosis. he also said, yep, you know, she had lung cancer, was caused by cigarettes and, yeah, i think she was addicted. and the way i look at it is i do not use the dsm. it is common sense to me, right. we brought you dr. koo, oncologist, who signed the death certificate. he testified and he told you, yep, she had lung cancer caused by smoking. yep, i signed her death certificate. i treated her at the end of her life, and she died of metastatic cancer of the lungs. and dr. burns -- i cannot remember if dr. koo explained it, but dr. burns certainly explained it, how that mechanism actually causes the person's death. and so, was juanita thurston addicted to 4180 nicotine contained in r.j. reynolds cigarettes? dr. koo, yes. dr. winokur, yes. dr. burns, yes. dr. cummings, yes. gwen odom, yes. and even defense witness, thaddeus hayes. recall, mr. hayes when asked if juanita thurston was addicted said, yeah, i believe she was addicted. recall mr. hayes, the defense witness, said, yeah, i've seen her light one cigarette from another often, right. that is a witness they brought. and, of course, dr. samuels, defense expert, says, no. was juanita thurston's lung cancer caused by smoking r.j. reynolds cigarettes containing nicotine? dr. koo, yes. dr. winokur, yes. dr. burns, yes. defense expert, none. no defense expert to challenge whether the cigarettes caused her lung cancer. and so was juanita thurston a class, an engle class member? remember, that is the first question. that is where we started. was she a class member? not what did she know and when did she know it? not whether she heard or did not hear the tobacco company lies. not whether when she heard those lies whether she believed it or she did not. not whether she smoked after the warnings, right. was she 4181 addicted, and was her addiction a legal cause? and remember our burden of proof, an ever-so-slight tipping of the scales. and so if you find that juanita thurston was a class member and check, yes, then the engle findings apply. but if you do not find that she is a class member, if you do not find that she was addicted, the case is over. the case is done. that is it. but if you do, the engle findings apply. remember the engle findings. smoking cigarettes causes lung cancer. nicotine in cigarettes is addictive. defendant, r.j. reynolds tobacco company, placed cigarettes on the market that were defective and unreasonably dangerous. defendant, r.j. reynolds, concealed or omitted material information not otherwise known or available knowing that the material was false or misleading or failed to disclose a material fact concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes or both. defendant, r.j. reynolds tobacco company, agreed with others to conceal or omit information regarding the health effects of cigarettes or their addictive nature with the intention that smokers and the public would rely on this 4182 information to their detriment, and then it lists the other co-conspirators. defendant, r.j. reynolds tobacco company, was negligent. and so you have heard that there were four claims in the case. there is what we call a product defect claim, a negligence claim and then the two intentional tort claims. a finding of class membership and then the engle findings kicking in means that plaintiff has prevailed on two of their claims, okay. so that is why you see in the verdict form all four claims are not spelled out. only the fraudulent concealment and the conspiracy claims, okay. because if you find for class membership and the engle findings kick in, then plaintiff prevails on two of the claims. and then -- hard to believe we have only been talking about question number one. question two, apportionment of fault. state the percentage of responsibility for juanita thurston's injury and/or death that you charge to juanita thurston, r.j. reynolds tobacco company. your answers must total 100 percent. of course, we know that r.j. reynolds believes that juanita thurston was a hundred 4183 percent responsible for her own death. the court read you the instruction, though. and -- but even starting before that, okay, we came into court and we admitted some responsibility. on behalf of her mother, gwen odom, from the start of the case has said, you know what, i think she bears some responsibility. she is been open, upfront and honest, and she has owned that. we owned that acknowledgment that there is some responsibility. but our admission is not an acknowledgment that she is one hundred percent at fault. because if that is what it was, then we -- why would we be here? we acknowledge that miss thurston had some responsibility. but it is a shared responsibility. and hopefully after you have seen all of the conduct evidence that we brought you, you all understand that, that when r.j. reynolds wants to put it all on her, you say, wait, wait a minute, wait a minute; you sure spent a lot of time talking about her, but you did not once show us a document that says, wait a minute, what plaintiffs are saying here about your conduct is not true. you did not once talk about yourself. why do not you want to talk about 4184 yourselves? plaintiffs are doing it. plaintiffs are owning their portion of it. ask yourselves why should not they too? because, as you have seen, this is not a simple straightforward black and white she smoked after the warning so she is all to blame. this is a shared responsibility because of the things you saw from r.j. reynolds tobacco company. and the instruction is going to be, among other things, that when discussing comparative fault, you have heard evidence regarding the smoking history and conduct of miss thurston and conduct of the defendant. and that is the analysis. that is the analysis. right. was she acting like a reasonable person when, in 1948 as a 14-year old, she started smoking? well, ask yourselves what was the smoking environment like back then? ask yourselves about the environment that she grew up into and how was that contributed to or created by the cigarette companies. ask yourselves how it is that kids start smoking. well, that is because r.j. reynolds deliberately studied and profited from kids smoking. you heard, we started dr. cummings' 4185 testimony walking through how in 1984 r.j. reynolds is looking back over a 50-year time referring to young smokers as replacement smokers. then we started back in time with 1927 and showed you letters sent from r.j. reynolds to their salespeople to go -- to go to the summer schools and line up the customers in the high schools. and then we showed you the systematic approach that r.j. reynolds took in targeting youth, designing their cigarettes to attract youth, and getting youth to smoke, and also the importance of youth as replacement smokers. but also you learned that in 1927 when r.j. reynolds is encouraging their salespeople to go out and boost up and sell their, get their products in use in high schools that a law went on the books. and so i expect defense is going to get up here -- in opening statement they showed this, and they said, well, that means since it was illegal for minors to smoke, that means it is been known for a long time that smoking is something that should not be done by kids or smoking is something that is bad. well, if r.j. reynolds wants you to treat 4186 them like a person, 1927, this goes on the books. and i think you saw evidence that shows they were directly or indirectly persuading, advising, counseling and compelling any child under age of majority to smoke. so if it is good for juanita thurston, it is certainly good for r.j. reynolds. they targeted -- teens were targeted to replace those dying and quitting. right. we talked about replacement smokers. and you all will remember the pt numbers. you will probably be hearing the letters "pt" in your sleep for the next year, but there are a lot of documents and evidence. and i encourage you to look through them all. of course, of course, as dr. cummings said, there is about 60 million pages of documents available now. we showed you a demonstrative about how he received documents. we -- obviously we just showed you the tip of the iceberg, but there is enough there that we brought you, we believe, to meet our burden of proof and for also to give you an idea of weighing responsibility. right. besides targeting youth, we heard about the 50-year conspiracy. we heard about the dip in 4187 sales. we heard -- we heard about that there was some epidemiological studies coming out in the 1950s, right. we heard about that. that information led to the dip in cigarette sales for the first time, you will recall, in a long time. and then on december 10th, 1953 there is a newspaper article that talks about tobacco stocks hitting the low for the year. and we know what happens after that point. so, really, if you know nothing else or thought nothing else or heard nothing else about why this conspiracy started, what prompted it, you could look no further than falling stocks, falling consumption. but here's the other thing i want you to think about. what if they really would have put the public health above all else? cigarette consumption was declining in 1953. what if they really would have not stood in the way of falling consumption? where would we be now? well, i'll tell you where we would not be. 20 million people would not have died from cigarette smoking related illnesses since 1964. that is where we would be. but what did they do? what did they do? 4188 when their stocks hit an all-time -- hit a yearly low, the western union telegraph goes out, and the history, the history of lung cancer, cigarette smoking and deaths is changed forever. here at the plaza hotel, nice swanky hotel in manhattan where in mid december and for the rest of december while folks like juanita thurston are getting ready for the holidays and christmas and a new year, these ceos and presidents of the companies are plotting what will ultimately lead to the death of 20 million americans over a 50-year span. and we know, you saw the forwarding memo. they got together -- they hire a pr firm, pr firm called knowlton, and they are all plotting and scheming together at the plaza hotel. and we showed you some of the acknowledgments that the scientific director to some of the company made, 1953, "it is fortunate for us cigarettes are a habit they cannot break. boy, would not it be wonderful if our company was first to produce a cancer-free cigarette." and so think about that, right. there was not a scientific consensus or medical consensus 4189 at that time about the cause of lung cancer or the relationship between cigarette smoking and lung cancer. and i know that as we sit here in 2014 that is a hard concept to think about. a time when there was actually confusion about whether cigarettes cause lung cancer, a time that there was actually confusion about lighting up a cigarette and smoking it in, inhaling it, okay. but there was. there was. and why was there? because at the turn of the century, 1900, the early 1900s, lung cancer was virtually unheard of. that is hard to believe. in fact, if i told you that out on the street, you would think i was nuts. you would say, there is no way; i do not believe you. but we brought you the evidence from those that have studied the history of cigarette consumption. and it was virtually unheard of. and so you know what lung cancer really is? it is a cigarette-manufacturer-made epidemic. we saw the cigarette consumption chart, and i think we are going to see it a little bit. we see that the rise in cigarettes starts around 1913 due to changes in the way the cigarettes are designed. and i expect you are going to hear 4190 possibly that there is nothing that cigarette manufacturers do to make cigarettes more addictive. i think you saw evidence of that. i think you saw plenty of evidence of that to know that the design changes, as basic as they were maybe in 1913, were far different than the roll-your-own cigarettes of the day. and how do we know that? because smoking rates sky rocketed. and then what happens? because we know cancer does not happen overnight. after smoking rates start to increase, 20, 25 years later, lung cancer starts to appear. and then you see how lung cancer increase basically charts the growth of smoking consumption increase as the years go by. and so what if rather than the coming out and conspiring and putting out the frank statement, what if they said to the public, you know what, public, these epidemiological studies they might be up to something. the clerk: counsel, 16 minutes. mr. bass: thank you. what if they would have done that? ask yourselves what if they would have done that. ask yourselves about, 4191 well, what else happened? filter fraud, right. filters went from less than three percent of the market to over ninety percent of the market. but we know that filters, filters do not do a thing. billions of dollars spent in advertising by reynolds during that time. 20,000 filter traps for that smoother taste. but internally there was no doubt or confusion that cigarettes caused cancer. cigarettes are found in practically every class of compounds in smoke. and then many many documents that talk about the fact that what they were doing worked, the message they were sending to people worked. they were congratulating themselves. 1957, there was almost a thank you letter from one head of the company to the other saying we would be in a deplorable position if it had not been for you. and then we know about all the other -- we know about the purpose was to create doubt, confusion and lie. we know that it worked. we know that they had -- you are going to have the videos in the back, but we know that they had every day from 19 -- from january 4th, 1954 until they finally came clean. every single day they had 4192 an opportunity to tell the truth. so when you are weighing the conduct of juanita thurston and the company, think about those things. think about the attacks on the public health community. think about how even today dr. samuel will not even admit that the surgeon general's report is authoritative. and that is what -- that is the chart that you saw how smoking starts, and it rises 20 years later, lung cancer follows. they had five decades of opportunities to tell the truth and save lives. because we know when information as -- we know in 2014 we have advanced a long way since 1953 or the early 1950s. but if cigarette sales were dipping at that time based upon a few simple studies, imagine if rather than spending $250 billion advertising over that period of time that money would have been spent by r.j. reynolds to inform the public. that is when it is really a true choice, when there is one voice, when there is one voice. and that is why on the r.j. reynolds' website today, they say you should rely on the surgeon general, right, because an unimpeded message does matter. it helps people make informed choices. 4193 now we have not had the chance yet to discuss what the evidence is on juanita thurston and her attempt to quit smoking, although i know you remember it well. but one thing i want you to think about is dr. samuels talked about and gave the opinion that without ever meeting juanita thurston, by the way, well, you know what, she was not really all that motivated to quit. and then he got down and he gave you that list, and he said, well, if someone is motivated, here's what they do. they make a plan to quit; they announce they are going to quit; they seek support; and they do all these other things. and so really what he is saying is that if you do not do those things, you are not motivated? so a smoker cannot wake up one morning, decide they really want to quit and not tell anybody, and that means they are not motivated? but under his definition of motivation, juanita thurston did those things, right. 1976, obviously she told gwen, she announced that she was going to try, right. she, dr. samuels says, well, you got to set a date. well, clearly she set a date because she tried, right. she went 4194 two weeks. and then she was so upset when she relapsed that she started to cry. if that is not somebody who is not motivated and who does not want to quit and who does not desire to quit and who does not -- and who wants to be a nonsmoker, then i do not know who is. dr. samuels also talked about, well, you need to seek out support. well, remember charles osborne. we read in his deposition. he talked about a group effort to quit. one of the things that, according to dr. samuels' shows motivation. all right. the bottom line is this, and you heard it from gwen, juanita thurston wanted to quit. she battled. she struggled and, like so many, learned how to quit. we do not know why it takes that many times to quit, but what the experts tell us is most people learn after repeated attempts how to quit. there is no magic answer why on the eleventh time you are successful, on the tenth time you are not. but we do know that you learn how to quit, and juanita thurston learned how to quit. and just because she quit on that time and that day does not mean she did not want to before. 4195 and so what is the percentage of fault that we should put on the parties? well, that is up to you all. i encourage you to, though, as the instruction says, compare juanita thurston to r.j. reynolds tobacco company and the conduct you heard. and i submit to you that if you do that, you should put no more than 25 percent of the responsibility on juanita thurston. that is just a suggestion. it is up to you all to deliberate and talk about those things. the other two claims in the case and the way we are going to do this is i'm going to talk only for a few more minutes, and then i'm going to pass the baton to miss barnes so she can talk about the damages aspect of the case. and then we are going to be finished for the time being, the defense is going to go, and then mr. garcia is going to talk to you in rebuttal, if i leave any time left for those two, that is. so the other two claims are the intentional tort claims for concealment and the conspiracy to conceal. and the analysis here is, well, let me back up. we know under the engle findings that these companies did those things. now even absent the engle findings we brought you all the 4196 evidence of that. and so the question is for these, which are separate questions than addiction and comparative fault, okay. this is a separate analysis, okay. the question here is did the things that we concealed or omit from our public statement, did those things have an impact on juanita thurston. all right. and so we have never come into court claiming that at some point in time juanita thurston knew -- strike that. we never came into court claiming that juanita thurston never knew that cigarettes were not bad for her. okay. of course she did. why else would she have tried to quit in 1976, right? okay. we do not know what she thought about them. we do not know what she believed. but there was a certain point in time that she thought, i should not be smoking anymore. she also thought, i do not want to be smoking anymore, and she tried to quit, but there was a point in time when she probably knew that cigarettes were not good for her. but that is only one portion of the concealment or omission analysis, okay. because you are going to be instructed that it is a 4197 concealment of the health effects or the addictive nature of smoking cigarettes or both, okay. so the question becomes and really back to the linchpin of the case is, the concealment of the addictive qualities of the cigarette. okay. that is why we spent so much time talking with you about the defendants' manipulation of nicotine and ph to make them more addictive. do you think that juanita thurston had any idea that the cigarette companies were doing those things to the cigarettes to make it harder for her to quit? we know now, right. we know now. and why do we know now? because the public has access to the internal company documents. juanita thurston never had access to the internal company documents. she never knew that nicotine was extracted during the manufacturing process and sprayed back in in uniform controlled amounts. we take that for granted now because the information is out there. but when -- juanita thurston could not have known the companies were doing that. she could not have known that they were sending letters amongst themselves telling themselves that the levels of 4198 nicotine are not obtained by accident. we can regulate fairly precisely the amount of nicotine. she did not know about smoke ph. i do not even know what smoke ph is. but the cigarette companies did and do. and they know how to manipulate it just so you get the perfect amount of nicotine. and they do it amongst different cigarettes. it is not like all brand extension and line extensions are the same ph and deliver the same nicotine. they are manipulating the nicotine levels and delivery levels amongst all their types of cigarettes. so ask yourselves could juanita thurston have known that? could she have known any of this information that came out that reynolds manipulated nicotine and added chemicals such as ammonia to increase the conversion of nicotine to freebase nicotine in the cigarettes she smoked; that reynolds genetically engineered tobacco to possess the exact amounts of nicotine to addict? could she have known about the physical design features and that they were intentionally engineered? we submit not. and so when you are looking at in the analysis here on the concealment or omissions, 4199 whether or not their conduct was a legal, a legal cause of her lung cancer and death, we submit that it was. and so after you hear all of the evidence, we think that you are going to answer yes to question one. you will then assign a percentage of fault. and then you will answer yes to questions two and three. but, remember, but, remember, these are separate questions and the analysis is different. when we are talking about addiction, the warning labels do not matter. what she knew or did not know does not matter. now i'm going to pass the baton over to miss barnes who is going to talk to you about damages in the case thank you very much. ms. baker-barnes: may it please the court, members of the jury, good morning. juror gamble: good morning. ms. baker-barnes: justice. justice is what we are here for today. justice is achieved when you give people everyday people the power to right a wrong, to right a wrong. and, jury, members of the jury, like each and every one of you, make a difference in this country. in this country we level the playing field. we give everyday citizens from all walks of life the power to put a stop to wrongful conduct, to say, no, we are not going to stand for that kind of conduct. and, members of the jury, each and every one 4203 of you has that power today. now you may have wondered three weeks ago why you were called to jury duty. how did my number get selected? how did i become one of the 266 people that were upstairs selected to decide this case? and now you know. because today you have the right to use that awesome power that our government that our courts gave each and every one of you to stand up for intentional and wrongful conduct that affects human life. and that is what we are talking about here today. that is what this case is all about. it is about a human life, a real person, not just a number, not at statistic, not a name on a piece of paper, but a real person, her mother who was taken away at the hands of the defendants in this case. not by an accident, not by something that happened by happenstance, but by their own intentional conduct that they told you about in their own words. and members of the jury, juanita thurston's death was a wrongful death. you heard from mr. bass all the reasons why. and you heard as a result of the defendant's own conduct, 20,000 people -- 20 million people died at the hands of 4204 the defendants, and juanita thurston was one of those people. now you heard evidence in this case about the kind of person she was. she was a good person. she was a good mother. you did not hear any witness who took the witness stand or who testified by deposition in this case say anything bad about juanita thurston. she was the kind of person that treated people with respect, with dignity and honor. she was the kind of mother that supported her daughter through thick and thin, through the good times, through the bad times, through the rough patches. every step along the way she was there. she was the kind of grandmother that even years after her death, her grandson cannot talk about her without breaking down in tears. that is what kind of person juanita thurston was. now you are going to get, you have gotten the jury instructions in this case. and so, baron, can we put up the elmo, please? what are we evaluating here? what are we looking at? and so you are looking at question number six, what is the total amount of damages 4205 sustained by gwen odom for the loss of parental companionship, instruction, guidance, pain, and suffering as a result of her mother's death? and, remember, that juanita thurston was 58-years old, 58-years old when she died. she had 25 more years of good life ahead of her that was taken away by the defendants in this case, taken away from her daughter, taken away from her friend. you know, one of the things we talked about upstairs is what is a mother? what does it mean when a child, not a young child but when an adult child loses her mother? and what you heard in this case from every witness was that juanita had gwen when she was 16-years-old. and from the day that gwen was born they had a bond that could not be broken. they had a bond that was more than just mother and daughter. they were friends. they had a bond that brought them through many rough times in life. but every step of the way they were there for each other. juanita was there for gwen. you heard gwen say, who supported me when i had this rough marriage and i did not know what to do? my mother. who supported me when i 4206 divorced my husband while i was pregnant because i had to get out of this bad relationship? my mother. who supported me every step of the way in my life, through good times, through bad? my mother. her loss was a significant loss. it was not just another name or another number on a piece of paper. it was the loss of the most important person in her life. and so what is it worth when you are evaluating? what is the total amount of damages sustained by gwen for the loss of parental companionship, instruction, guidance, mental pain and suffering for her mother's death? what is it worth? to lose the person that means everything to you? what is it worth to learn that that person after years and years of lies by the defendant now has lung cancer and is dying? what is it worth to, despite everything that you have going on in life, to go to her house every day, to be there every night stroking her head, holding her hand and then leaving so you do not cry in front of her? driving home by yourself crying all alone, because she knew deep down that her mother, her 4207 support was dying. what is it worth to know that the cancer that ravaged her body ate through ribs two, three, four, five; spread to her legs; spread to her knees; spread to her femur; took over her heart and finally stopped it. what is it worth to watch the one person that you could depend on in life slowly die? you know dr. koo had some medical records, and he told you that when he treats patients, he not only talks about his -- baron, can you help me out here? i'm trying to get to the bottom. there we go. -- that he not only talks about his physical examination and what he observes and what the findings were, but he also talks to the family. i was trying to discuss with the family that the patient has a terminal disease. that family that he is talking about, that is gwen, and that we should not code her anymore. you see, members of the jury, dr. koo was telling gwen that she needed to let her mother go. that was gwen. that the family has unrealistic expectations. and she wanted everything to be 4208 done. she, gwen, wanted everything to be done. she was not ready to let her go, not then and not now. even now to this day she picks up the phone and realizes, i cannot call mom anymore. she gets in the car and realizes, i cannot go see mom anymore. she experiences things in life that she wishes that she had mom here to share them. this bond was a special bond. her loss was a significant loss. and it was because of the conduct, the intentional conduct of the defendants. and so, members of the jury, when you are answering question six in this case, what is the total amount of damages sustained by gwen odom for the loss of her best friend, i submit that you award her $5 million, $5 million for the 25 years, 25 years that they took away from her and her mother. now i need to talk to you about punitive damages in this case. and you got an instruction on that, too, so we are going to talk about that just for a moment. and, baron, i want to switch from the elmo, if we could, to the slide that you have up there. mr. philipson: video or slide? 4209 ms. baker-barnes: the slide. i want to do the slide first, punitive damages are warranted. punitive damages are warranted as punishment of the defendants and as a deterrent to others. that is what you are going to decide today. that is what justice, righting a wrong, holding the defendants accountable and responsible for the things that they admitted to in their own documents, in their own words. why does our system of justice, why does our country, why do we have punitive damages? well, for two reasons. we have punitive damages for two reasons: to stand up and say, no, we are not going to accept this kind of conduct. it is not acceptable in the united states of america to lie and to cheat and to hide and to risk millions of lives, millions and millions of lives for money, for greed, for profits. today is the day, members of the jury, that you have the power, the awesome power to say, no, in this courtroom in palm beach county today we say, no, to this kind of conduct. so should punitive damages be awarded against the defendants? yes. one of the things that you are going to 4210 consider in this case when evaluating punitive damages is whether the defendants are guilty of intentional misconduct; whether they meant to do what they did; whether they intended to do what they did. and you saw that in their own documents. how many times did you hear from the other side the word "choice," what somebody chose to do, what somebody had a choice to do. how many times, how many documents did you see where the defendants chose to tell the truth, where they chose to be honest with the american public, when they chose to be honest with juanita thurston about the dangers of smoking, the health risks of smoking, the addictive nature of cigarettes; the fact that the filters that they were putting on these cigarettes were just illusions in their own words; the fact that every time you take a puff on one of these cigarettes you are risking your life? how many times did they choose to be honest about what they knew? zero. that is what you will see in the evidence. zero. was the conduct intentional? yes. did they intend to do it? yes. 4211 was there a high probability that it would cause injury to miss thurston? yes. and did it? yes, it did. she is not here today because of the conduct of the defendants. one piece of evidence that i think is telling in this case, and you will have it back in the room, you will be able to read the whole thing, you saw letters from children, from students to the defendants asking, why are you marketing your products to children? and you saw them in their own words write back and lie, not just to adults but to children, fifth-graders about the dangers of smoking. now i cannot think of any other conduct, of any other actions, of any other intentional wrongful act that could be more serious than that. is it clear and convincing evidence? yes, it is. punitive damages should be awarded in this case. we talked at the beginning about power. and each of you has that power today. you will have the power to look at every piece of evidence back there in that jury room today. and you will have the power to finally after the many many years give gwen odom and 4212 juanita thurston the justice that is overdue, the justice that they have been waiting for. you have the power today to level the playing field and to put a stop to this conduct, and we ask that you do. mr. garcia: thank you, your honor. good afternoon. on behalf of gwen odom as the personal representative of the estate of her mother and on behalf of herself, i am honored to sum up her case for you. three words, doubt, confusion and controversy. three words that you should keep in mind when you are analyzing everything that 4314 you have heard in the trial of this case. you heard evidence that the corporate philosophy of the tobacco industry, including rj reynolds, was that "doubt is our product." they knew that they were manufacturing a dangerous product. and they knew that the product was addictive and that it could cause lung cancer. rather than share that information with the public and get the information out in a proper manner, they engaged in a campaign of doubt, confusion and controversy. and in this case we have asked you to go back in time and try and distance yourself from what you know now, which is clear. now we know these things. we are talking about what people knew back then and comparing it to what the defendant knew back then. and the evidence is overwhelming that the defendant had better knowledge than the consumer. and rather than share the information, they engaged in a campaign of doubt, confusion and controversy. and that was just plain wrong. any way you slice it, whatever your moral compass is, whether it is based on religion or what you have learned as an adult, or your own -- 4315 mr. furr: objection, your honor. mr. garcia: -- measures of morality -- mr. furr: may we approach, your honor? the court: yeah, come on up. (the following discussion was held at sidebar:) the court: what is the objection? mr. furr: that is a completely improper argument. that is essentially urging the jury to use a religious or a moral compass as opposed to the rule of law to evaluate the defendant's conduct. not only does that have to be stricken, i move for a mistrial. the court: response. i do not know what you are objecting to. mr. furr: he is telling the jury to use a moral or religious compass not the instructions. the court: "whatever your moral compass is, whether it is based" -- okay. response. mr. garcia: i'm telling them that it is wrong. what they did is wrong under any measure. the court: all right. i'm going to ask you to leave religion out. 4316 motion for mistrial denied. i cannot even tell what you are objecting to. mr. furr: can we have that struck, your honor? the court: religion? mr. furr: yes. the court: all right. any objection to striking the comment about religion? mr. garcia: sure, none. (sidebar discussion was concluded, and the following proceedings were held in open court:) the court: all right, ladies and gentlemen, you are to disregard the argument which concerns religion. we do not get into that here. that is a higher court. all right. let us go ahead. mr. garcia: the suggestion that this is a simple case that should have taken a week to try is wrong. do me a favor and flip to page 6 of your instructions, i'll show you why. and if you would, please, give me the elmo so that i can explain this to the jury. the reason why we had to bring you all of the evidence that we had to bring to you in this 4317 case is because this defendant denied each and every claim that we made. you heard it as far back as jury selection when the defense elicited your commitment to hold us to our burden of proof. and then you heard mr. bass on opening say, we accept it, we embrace it and we will bring you the evidence. whether or not this case could have taken one week or the three weeks that we have been here was entirely in the control of the defendant in this case. they could have easily admitted the claims. mr. furr: objection, your honor -- mr. garcia: we would have -- mr. furr: -- may we approach? the court: yeah, come on up. [#deleted sidebar#] mr. garcia: thank you, your honor. the suggestion that we have done nothing but waste your time unnecessarily is just plain wrong. we have the burden of proof. and we had to bring the evidence to you to show what the defendant did in this case. you were told at the beginning of the case to keep your eye on the ball. that was brought up again today in closing. the evidence in this case has shown that the ball in this case was the body of information, the body of knowledge that was in the possession of the defendants and that they did everything in their power to hide the ball. in fact, when the information started to come out that cigarettes were addictive, that they could cause cancer, what did they do? they held onto that ball as tightly as they could. they did not want anybody else to see it. it has been suggested that we wasted a lot of time to prove our case. we had to do that. we have to bring these experts to you. we have to spend the money to do it. we have to bring you the defense's own documents in order to meet 4324 our burden of proof. the defense is not going to do that. that is not how the system of justice works. there has been a suggestion that addiction in this case was created for purposes of this lawsuit. and that is just plain wrong, especially when the body of evidence that we have brought to you has conclusively established that they knew their product was addictive and they knew that their product could cause lung cancer. any suggestion to the contrary is just plain wrong. just a few moments ago you heard that we tried to trivialize addiction, trivialize addiction. and then they get up here and they only show you a part of an interrogatory answer where ms. odom had to provide answers to written questions to them. rather than show you the whole answer where she says, "yes," to the question of addiction, they skip that and they try and turn it into something else. that, ladies and gentlemen, is called hiding the ball. and it is just plain wrong. it has no place in this courtroom. ask yourself, and i remind you again of 4325 those three words, doubt, confusion and controversy, which existed back then and whether it continues to exist today in addition with the evidence and the tactics that you have seen in this courtroom. they bring in an expert, dr. samuel, who tries to belittle the concept of addiction when they know that nicotine is addictive and they know that they are selling a product that their customers cannot do without. they try and belittle the plaintiff who comes in here admitting her mother's share of responsibility and all they want to do is belittle her. that is wrong. they go further, they go on to, for whatever reason, use the analogy of a heroin addict. ask yourself this question: if the evidence was that juanita thurston shot herself up with heroin 30 times a day, would there be any question about whether or not she was addicted? it is an improper analogy and it is just plain wrong in this case. dr. samuel, who under his standard of addiction would not be able to help a single soul because his bar is set so high, they want 4326 you to believe that he is the kind of guy that is in the trenches. and i think what we established is that the trenches, when it comes to dr. samuel, is the courtroom itself. under dr. samuel's definition no one who is addicted to cigarettes is going to get help. dr. samuels [sic] on the stand yesterday would not even admit that the surgeon general's report is authoritative. he tried to create a controversy with regard to addiction. ask yourself, is that something new, or is that more of the same doubt, confusion and controversy? what he got up here to say was just plain wrong. and the reason it was is that he has an interest in the outcome of the case. he came here and he provided you with his $50,000 opinion on behalf of the defendant. and he has made a commitment to work on these cases and cooperate with the tobacco industry with his definition of addiction. you were shown a slide and asked a question -- "why is juanita thurston different than the 40 million people who quit?" -- in an effort to trivialize and minimize her struggle with quitting. the more appropriate question 4327 should be: how is juanita thurston different than the 20 million people who died as a result of the doubt, confusion, controversy, concealment and omission of material facts by the defendant? what they did is just plain wrong. they want to talk about the things that she could have done to quit. ask yourself this question. over this entire period of time that the conspiracy was occurring where was rjr reynolds [sic] when she wanted to quit? what support were they providing to customers who wanted to quit? had they come clean when they knew back in the early '50s perhaps people like juanita thurston could have had a chance. instead, the tobacco companies, rjr reynolds [sic], made a choice, they made a choice to sabotage every opportunity that a smoker who wanted to quit would have if they wanted to do so. and that is wrong. they suggest she did not try hard enough. how hard would they have had to try to divulge the information that they knew to the public? how hard could it have been? it would have been 4328 very easy. what they chose to do instead was wrong. they went out of their way to make sure that information ever reached the public. you heard a lot of talk about motivation to quit. what was their motivation to keep that information within? it was money. they were putting their dollars ahead of public safety. and that is wrong. there was a lot of discussion about the statute of repose, which obviously relates to these questions about what juanita thurston knew and when she knew it. the questions number 3 and number 4 on your verdict form have that may 5, 1982 date. let me suggest to you that that date is a red herring. that is a get-out-of-jail-free card for the defendant -- mr. furr: objection, your honor. could we approach? the court: sure. (the following discussion was held at sidebar:) the court: let me read at the transcript. mr. garcia: sure. the court: okay, what is the objection? mr. furr: he is arguing jury nullification 4329 right now. he is urging this jury to ignore that date in the question. mr. garcia: i have not gotten to the argument yet, your honor. the court: what is the argument? mr. garcia: what is that? the court: what is the argument? mr. garcia: the argument is what i'm getting ready to explain to them is that there was still information that they withheld that they did not divulge until after that date that they continued to perpetuate the conspiracy, the lies, et cetera. the court: what is wrong with that? mr. furr: nothing's wrong with that, it is what he is already said that is problematic. he urged them that that date is a red herring, that is -- mr. garcia: but i have not had a chance to explain -- mr. furr: i'm not finished yet, sir. that is equivalent -- well that does not matter. the court: we better end this case today, because you guys are getting really grumpy. 4330 mr. furr: that is equivalent to urging them to disregard that date in the instructions and on the verdict form. the court: he gets to finish the argument. mr. furr: i know he can finish the argument, but i -- the court: so let him finish the argument. so overruled. (sidebar discussion was concluded, and the following proceedings were held in open court:) mr. garcia: ask yourself this question. did you learn something during the course of this trial about what the defendants knew that you did not know? as of 1982 you saw videos, you saw congressional testimony that even as far into the '90s representatives of the tobacco companies were going into congress and taking an oath to tell not just the truth, not just the whole truth, but nothing but the truth, and they were still withholding information from the public. they denied that nicotine was addictive and they were equivocal on whether or not cigarettes caused lung cancer. and being equivocal is the same as denying. they were 4331 still concealing the information. they were still concealing the information from juanita thurston after this may 5, 1982 date. and when they got up there and did that in front of congress, in front of everybody in this country, it was plain wrong. now, you heard a lot from the defense about the company documents that we had to bring to you, not the defense. we did not hear anything in their closing about their counterpropaganda machine and how it undermined the ability of smokers to quit. the testimony of juanita thurston through her daughter is, if i had known then what i know now, i would have quit. if she had known that smoking caused lung cancer, she would have quit sooner. to suggest that knowing that smoking is bad or harmful in a general sense without knowing the specific effects, when they knew that it could cause lung cancer does not cut the mustard. you will have in evidence the following document. it is a federal trade commission report dated may 1981 that gives you some sense of what the public knew. it states that "based 4332 upon an analysis of all the data reviewed in its entirety, the ftc staff has concluded that there appear to be such a significant gap in consumer knowledge that a substantial portion of the population does not know how dangerous smoking is, or whether the dangers of smoking apply to them." you will have that with you in your deliberation room, but there is more. this is a summary of the data. "projections nationwide indicate that some americans still do not even know that smoking is hazardous to your health. given that there are approximately 54 million smokers in this country, this data suggests that millions of americans who smoke still do not know that smoking is hazardous to your health." ask yourself this question. these documents are from the '80s. what did rjr reynolds [sic] know at that time that they were withholding from the public? you heard some discussion about the labels. and you will have this document in evidence, which indicates that "the majority of people do not think smoking is addictive." with regard to the adequacy of the labels, 4333 there was still a belief that the current warnings, the warnings even into the '80s, were ineffective. "there are two major objective indicia of the ineffectiveness of the current warning discussed in detail below. "first, as the staff's investigation of consumer knowledge has demonstrated, a substantial portion of the public remains uninformed about the hazards of smoking. "second, the tests conducted by the ftc indicate that the warning is neither noticed nor read by the vast majority of people." did these guys tell the public what they knew? you saw the video. did they do the right thing? most of the people who smoked wanted to stop, but were unable to do so. this is their -- the documents that you have in evidence. even into the '80s did the tobacco companies come clean? you saw a slide regarding awareness of events in juanita thurston's life and the many opportunities she had to learn of the information that the tobacco companies knew. you saw a slide that said that she had no doubt 4334 and no confusion about what she knew. how many awareness events were you provided with where rjr came clean and informed the public about what they knew? it is been argued to you that there is no evidence that she relied on any of their messages, and yet you know from the evidence that she smoked filtered cigarettes. and you learned in the evidence in this case that filtered cigarettes was a fiction created by the tobacco companies as a reassurance product to let people know that it was still safe to smoke, as a way to intercept people who tried to quit. you heard the defense talk about the impeachment of witnesses. and if you took notes and recall the testimony, you have to ask yourself this question: did the witnesses really testify inconsistently with their prior answers, or was this merely a courtroom tactic to generate a number of counts for the number of times a witness was shown a transcript? ask yourself -- mr. furr: objection, your honor. can we approach? the court: sure, come on up. 4335 (the following discussion was held at sidebar:) the court: what is the objection? mr. furr: objection, it is improper argument. it is no different than when mr. bass objected when i said a fast one was being pulled this morning. this is claiming that i did something improper with a technique in impeaching the witnesses. and i object to the attack on defense counsel who is defending the case. the court: what else you got? mr. furr: that is it. the court: overruled. (sidebar discussion was concluded, and the following proceedings were held in open court:) the court: objection overruled. mr. garcia: were the witnesses allowed to explain their answers fully, or were they intercepted at every turn? you heard about the grant process through the tirc and how it did all of this good work to generate books and published works. ask yourself this question, was that grant process legitimate, or was it a front? you will have 4336 documents that confirm that from within they knew that this contra-propaganda machine was nothing more than a tool that was set up in order to conceal the truth from the public and to manipulate the data and the research that was getting out to them. you will have this in evidence with regard to the scientists that were retained. and you remember dr. dimarco and his belief that the scientists that were retained were nothing more than people that were hired to pay lip service to the industry and agree and act as a defensive front for the industry. you also heard reference, once again, to this less carcinogenic product called premier that rjr spent a billion dollars to develop right at the same time as juanita thurston was trying to quit. ask yourself this question: what was rjr doing at the time that they were developing this less carcinogenic product? had they come clean with what they knew about cigarettes, or were they still withholding the information? and, lastly, who had to bring you that evidence? we did. 4337 i think you have heard a number of times the defense argue that with regard to the damages in this case that what we are asking you to do is to make gwen odom a very wealthy person. and nothing could be more offensive to her. what this process is designed to do is to even the score, level the playing field. so far the defendant and the tobacco industry have a score of 1. they took her mother from her. gwen odom's score is zero. and the purpose of this system is to even the score. even the score. and the way our justice system works is through a system of compensation. you have got the jury instructions before you. they tell you what is fair and reasonable, and that is what you should do in light of all of the evidence. but that argument about making her a wealthy person is simply designed to inflame you. it is not designed to allow you to fairly evaluate the case and it is just plain wrong. it is nothing more than a distraction. at the end of the day you have to ask yourself this question: in light of the fact that we had to bring you all of this evidence, what did the defense bring to you? did they 4338 bring evidence, or did they simply create more doubt, confusion -- mr. furr: objection, your honor. can we approach? mr. garcia: -- and controversy? the court: you can approach. (the following discussion was held at sidebar:) the court: you need a bathroom break? mr. furr: my objection is it is -- the court: oh, it is an objection? mr. furr: yeah, it is more of the same. the court: why? mr. furr: i'm objecting to him claiming that the way we have defended this case is improper. the court: what else you got? mr. furr: that is it. the court: overruled. (sidebar discussion was concluded, and the following proceedings were held in open court:) mr. garcia: shut the elmo off, whoever has got it. you will see the evidence consisting of all of the internal documents which we have brought to 4339 you. and you will have a chance to weigh it against what the defense brought. this is a case for wrongful death. what did the defense bring to you? they brought you a $50,000 witness who was brought here to belittle the concept of addiction. and they insisted that this object be put into evidence. her mother died from addiction to nicotine in cigarettes. and what did they bring to you? a picture of a skeleton smoking a cigarette. what does this have to do with the claims being asserted in this case? this is wrong. thank you.