mr. furr: yes, sir. good morning, ladies and gentlemen, counsel, and perhaps most importantly, robyn, are we ready? ms. hughes: yes. mr. furr: only one possible place to start, and that is to thank you for your patience. but you sure had to be patient in this case. this case has taken a lot longer to try than it should have. this case has taken about three weeks to try. it probably should have taken about one week to try. the very first thing i suggested to you 4213 during opening statement was that this is really a pretty simple case. this is a case about one smoker and one smoker only, juanita thurston. this is not the class action trial. that case has been tried. that is over and done with. this is not a case about other smokers. it is not a case about other smokers who have smoked over the years and developed smoking-related disease whom you know nothing about. it is not a case about cigarettes in general. it is not a case about company conduct in general. it is a case about one smoker and it is about -- really, it is miss odom's claim that she should be made -- we now know that she is requesting you to make her a very wealthy person because her mother smoked cigarettes, even though she knew that she was risking developing lung cancer while she did so and even though she had the ability to quit. well, she continued to do so because she enjoyed smoking and because she believed she had a right to make that choice, and she did. and now gwen is asking you to make her a very wealthy person. when you get to the verdict form again, you are going to see, and we will look at this 4214 today, every verdict form question except the very last one is about juanita thurston. and we suggested to you at the start of the case that as you listen to the evidence, if it is not about miss thurston, it is not going to be very helpful to you in deciding the issues in this case. yet, for most of the past two weeks, the plaintiffs have spent most of their time putting on evidence that had nothing to do with juanita thurston or the issues you have to decide. they spent most of their time reproving the engle findings. they spent a lot of this case showing you evidence that they said demonstrated that the defendant, that defendant, r.j. reynolds, concealed information about the dangers of smoking in the '50s, '60s, '70s. but when you see your verdict form, you are going to see that none of that matters whatsoever to the question before you. the only question before you about concealment is whether miss odom died because she did not know that smoking was dangerous or addictive because r.j. reynolds concealed that information from her after may 5th, 1982. that is the legal question before you. and that is why you are darn 4215 right i'm going to ask you to keep your eye on the ball, because we are here to decide specific legal questions using specific legal instructions. it is not some type of general referendum on whether you like tobacco companies or like them whether you approve of their conduct or do not approve. we are here to decide whether miss odom has met her burden of proof to prove specific legal claims that she is brought here. very little of the evidence that you heard during most of the trial actually dealt with proving miss odom's case. frankly, most of it was designed to distract you and to make you angry so that your anger and emotion would cloud your judgment and keep you from focusing on the specific legal claims that you have to decide. that is why it is going to be important to read very carefully those instructions and the verdict form and not allow you to be distracted from the real issues. and that distraction was done because as we walk through the evidence, i submit that you will see that there is been a complete failure by the plaintiffs to actually prove the legal 4216 claims in this case. however, they did make some serious claims, and they put a lot of evidence before you that i recognize could be distracting, so i'm going to spend a few minutes before i get started. even though this is what the case is about, ladies and gentlemen, i'm going to spend a few minutes before i get started talking to you about some of that conduct evidence in general and setting the record straight on what it was and what it was not and whether it had any relationship to miss odom so we can sort of clear the air and put that behind us and focus on the issues in this case. i'm sure most of you have heard the expression "red herring" and that you know what a red herring is. it is a figure of speech that is used to refer to information that is a distraction and diverts your attention from the actual issue before you. a red herring causes you to take your eye off the ball. i would suggest to you there have been a number of red herrings put in this courtroom and i want to start right there. first, this whole issue of addiction design. 4217 you have heard over and over, and you heard from mr. bass this morning that r.j. reynolds has done something to make its cigarettes as addictive as possible. but what has the actual evidence been? because what you saw throughout this trial is there would be allegations made, and then you would see on cross-examination those allegations actually meant nothing in the end. first, you know that cigarettes are dangerous and addictive by nature. dr. cummings told you nicotine occurs natural. it is in the plant as it grows. if you pick a leaf from the field, dry it, cure it so you can smoke it, inhale it, it will be addictive. nicotine occurs naturally, not because tobacco companies put it in. in fact, you have heard that during the manufacturing process, r.j. reynolds takes some of the nicotine out, so there is less nicotine in a cigarette than there would be in the same weight of tobacco. this, though, the third point, i believe, ladies and gentlemen, actually answers all of the design allegations that you have heard during this case. you have heard all 4218 kinds of claims that r.j. reynolds did this or failed to do that or added this or took this out, all kinds of claims that r.j. reynolds had done something to make cigarettes more addictive and dangerous than they should be. on cross-examination dr. cummings admitted to you that his own studies showed that roll-your-own cigarettes are more dangerous and addictive than manufactured cigarettes. if the addition of r.j. reynolds of ammonia or a filter, vent holes or any of those things made cigarettes more dangerous, how could this be? how could it be that roll-your-own cigarettes are more dangerous and addictive than manufactured cigarettes? it is simple. because r.j. reynolds has done nothing to make their cigarettes more dangerous and addictive. the second thing i think we should talk about, another red herring, if you will, is this attempt to turn a behavioral issue, the addictive use of a substance into a brain disease. it sounds ominous, it is designed to sound like that by the plaintiffs' witnesses in this case. you have been told that actually it is nothing more than the way our brain works 4219 in everything we do in life. the way we experience life is through the release of neurotransmitters in our brains and everything we do changes our brains. the witnesses even told you that by virtue of being here and meeting you all and testifying to you that their brains have been changed by this experience. what you know, though, is that nicotine addiction does not permanently change the brains. everybody agrees after three weeks, the receptors go back to normal, and perhaps more importantly for the real issues in this case, you know that it does not interfere with a smoker's ability to understand the dangers of smoking or to make the choice to quit smoking. and, finally, nicotine addiction does not prevent smokers from quitting permanently. although sometimes we had to drag it out of them by impeaching them with their prior testimony, you now know that every witness in this case ultimately admitted to you that any smoker can quit smoking. just like throughout the case, you heard a lot about youth marketing. it is a red herring. this is a case about juanita thurston. 4220 and, you know, mr. bass told you i was going to stand up here and say "not so fast," "not so fast." you are darn right i'm going to say not so fast when someone tries to pull a fast one on you. mr. bass: objection. improper argument. the court: come on up. sidebar conference: (the following proceedings were had before the court outside the presence of the jury:) the court: usually the comment "when someone tries to pull a fast one," "they are pulling a fast one" is not allowed. why are you using it? mr. furr: i thought it was -- the door was open to it by the -- by his argument. the court: no. mr. furr: okay. the court: it is not. and i'm going to have to tell the jury to disregard that. mr. furr: okay. i understand. end of sidebar conference (the following proceedings were had before the court and jury:) the court: ladies and gentlemen, you are to 4221 disregard the comment that somebody is pulling a fast one on somebody here. that is improper argument. mr. furr: let us talk about what we know about whether or not juanita thurston became a regular smoker as a youth. you know that the plaintiffs' witnesses admitted to you that juanita -- that the medical records indicate that juanita started smoking somewhere around the age of 18 after she would already had her daughter, gwen, and moved in with john stewart. you also know that the earliest that any witness actually saw her smoke was at age 23. how could she have been a regular smoker using cigarettes every day if no one ever saw her smoke before age 23? you know you were told that bobbie newsome, her sister, said that she was certain that juanita started at age 14. but when she was asked to tell us what the basis was for her certainty, she told us actually, i never saw her smoke until after she moved out of the house; she never told me that she smoked before after she moved out of the house. and, actually, i do not know what year she began smoking. i do not 4222 know why she began smoking. i do not know how she began smoking. you know when we asked bobbie to explain to us for certain, that is what she told us. in the end what dr. burns told you is that based upon his review, this is their witness. dr. burns, based upon his review of all the evidence, he concluded that juanita thurston began being a regular daily smoker at around age 23. there is just zero proof that she became a regular daily smoker as an underage youth. another issue that i want to talk about with respect to the plaintiffs' claim, evidence about the corporate conduct and cigarettes in this case. before we can get back to what we should be talking about is that i submit there are really three simple truths that respond to the whole misconduct claim that you have heard. first, you have heard lots of claims that the tobacco companies concealed that smoking was dangerous. but plaintiffs' witnesses admitted to you that everybody knew that smoking was dangerous in the 1950s. you have heard lots of discussion about addiction, but the plaintiffs' witness's 4223 admitted to you that anybody can quit. and you have heard lots of discussions about cigarette design, but the plaintiffs' witnesses told you that cigarettes can not be made safe. three simple truths: everybody knew; anybody can quit; and you cannot make them safe. that is the context in which our country has dealt with the issue of smoking. and our country determined that, in fact, the public policy of this country would be to allow the manufacture and sale and consumption of cigarettes to be legal. and our congress dictated what warnings would accompany those cigarettes. back to where we should be, miss thurston. now i want to begin by telling you that i think not only is it a simple case, there are five simple facts that really answer all the questions that you have to answer on your verdict form. and we looked at those in opening statement. robyn, could i have that first board? thanks. thank you. i was not sure how i was going to stand upside-down with this crutch. that would be quite the challenge. 4224 okay. here's what you know the evidence demonstrates unequivocally. juanita thurston was consistently warned about the dangers of smoking from the time she was a child. it is clear that juanita thurston knew that smoking was dangerous and addictive before may 5th, 1982. we suggested to you from the beginning of this case that you now see why when you heard the instructions read that may 5th, 1982 is the measure stick that you are required to use under the rule of law in this case to assess whether or not information was concealed from juanita that was a legal cause of her death. you know that she always had the ability to quit smoking and prevent her own death. gwen odom has admitted as much. the evidence demonstrates as true. we are going to walk through that, because you know that gwen has admitted that juanita is responsible for starting to smoke, continuing to smoke and not stopping sooner. that does not leave much left, does it? robyn, could we go to the verdict form question one, please? 4225 ms. hughes: okay. mr. furr: thank you. okay. you have saw this before. the way i'm going to structure the rest of my closing is i'm going to walk through the verdict form, because, again, this is not a general referendum about tobacco companies. it is not whether you like or dislike them. it is not whether you are angry. respectfully, it is not whether you feel sympathy for miss odom. we all do. of course we do. we all lose our parents. everybody feels bad about it. that is a natural human reaction, and there would be something wrong with us if we did not feel sympathy. but that is not what the case is about. the first issue for you as a jury to decide is was juanita thurston addicted to cigarettes in containing nicotine and, if so, was such addiction a legal cause of her lung cancer and death. there is more than one question embedded in that just like we talked about in opening statement. okay. could i go back to the computer? thank you, cliff. 4226 okay. as we talked about in opening statement, when you break that question down, there are really three things that plaintiff has to prove. the plaintiff has the burden to prove to you, and as the court told you, and if they do not prove this to you, then your verdict has to be for the defendant, and the case is over. they have to prove to you that juanita thurston died from lung cancer caused by smoking. you have heard the evidence. i'm not going to waste anybody's time talking about that issue anymore. they also have to prove that juanita thurston was addicted to nicotine. i am going to talk about that issue a lot. and, yes, you have heard that they also have to prove that addiction was a legal cause of juanita thurston's death. the important thing to understand, ladies and gentlemen, is they have to prove all three of those things. two out of three is not good enough. if they fail to prove any element of class membership, then you would be required to find that miss thurston is not a class member. and the case will be over. let us go to the first one. they have to 4227 prove to you that juanita thurston was addicted to nicotine. most of the time when plaintiffs were discussing addiction to nicotine, there was an effort being made to turn it into a trivial unimportant check the box type issue, something that they suggested to you was just ministerial to go through, that it was easy, that you did not have to know any medicine, you did not have to know any science, you did not have to know the dsm, it was just simple. but that is not what the evidence has been. in fact, when we met, when we asked miss thurston about her opinion before this case started -- excuse me, miss odom. i apologize. we served interrogatory on miss odom and asked her, "do you contend the decedent was addicted to cigarettes that contained nicotine?" her answer was, "addiction is a medical diagnosis. i'm not qualified to say whether the smoker was addicted or not." but then they come in here and miss odom testifies that she is addicted. mr. bass: judge, i'm sorry. that is not an accurate reflection of the interrogatory. it is missing, "yes, i do." 4228 the court: come on up here, and do not do any more speaking objection, you guys. you know better than that. mr. bass: sorry, judge. sidebar conference: (the following proceedings were had before the court outside the presence of the jury:) the court: okay. what is your objection? mr. bass: so the objection is this is not a complete rendition -- the court reporter #1: i cannot hear you. mr. bass: sorry. this is not a complete rendition of the interrogatory. the interrogatory response says, "yes, i do," period. and then it goes on to say what it says. the court: i do not know what it says. mr. furr: that is correct. but i do not have to put the entire document -- the court: if you are going to quote it, you do. mr. furr: okay. i'll clear that up. that was unintentional. end of sidebar conference (the following proceedings were had before the 4229 court and jury:) the court: the objection is sustained. mr. furr: the entire interrogatory read as follows: "yes, i do." period. "but then, "addiction is a medical diagnosis. i'm not qualified to say whether the smoker was addicted or not." in other words, yes, in this lawsuit miss odom was contending that her mother was addicted which she hoped to be proved with expert witnesses, but she was admitting that she was not qualified to provide to you an opinion regarding her medical diagnosis. so the question for you is: did gwen odom prove that juanita thurston was medically addicted? you have heard over and over that no one is going to tell you what addiction means. it is an odd thing under the law, but no one is going to tell you what addiction means as you answer this question. you get to decide what you think addiction means for purposes of this lawsuit when someone is asking you to award them $5 million because they were addicted. so you get to decide what the standard should be. here's what we know the evidence is. it is 4230 a medical diagnosis, and no medical record describes juanita thurston as being addicted. you have the medical records. you simply will not see that in there. during her lifetime, she never received medical treatment for nicotine addiction. and her treating doctors never diagnosed her as addicted while she was living. the fact of the matter is that the witnesses brought to you to tell you that they thought that she was addicted first diagnosed her as being addicted for purposes of this lawsuit. this was not a diagnosis she had during her life. it was created for purposes of this lawsuit more than 20 years after her death. those are just the facts. how did they try to prove to you that she was addicted? well, let me back up. so we did ask miss odom this question. we asked her now, "even though your mother knew that cigarettes could be addictive --" and you remember that testimony "-- she never told you that she thought she was addicted; is that correct?" answer, "she did not, no." miss thurston never believed she was 4231 addicted. her doctors during her life never believed that she was addicted, and, yet, they bring a couple of her treating physicians in here almost 20 years later to tell you that she was addicted. drs. winokur and koo -- do not have a picture of dr. winokur. he testified by deposition. dr. koo testified. but here's what we know. they did not really know anything about her smoking. they did not know when she became a regular smoker, how long she smoked, anything about her smoking habits. they did not know when she quit smoking. and in the end, both admitted during their cross-examination that they were not addiction experts. they were not addiction experts. that is not an opinion that is very helpful to you in reaching your decision. okay, cliff. what did i just do? thank you. cliff, save me. mr. gentle: it is not working. mr. furr: okay. we need a backup. okay. thank you. okay. so dr. difranza came in here yesterday afternoon. and the very last question and answer that he was asked in this trial 4232 provided to you all the information that you need in evaluating whether or not the plaintiffs have proven that juanita thurston was addicted. mr. garcia -- this is small so we will read it together. mr. garcia asked him, "tell the jury what it is like to be addicted. and dr. difranza painted for us a portrait of a tortured smoker. here's what he said. "so when a person needs a cigarette, it is like you really have to go to the bathroom really bad and you cannot concentrate on anything else 'til you are able to go. and you need that relief. and you just cannot function, you cannot concentrate, you cannot do anything until you take care of that need. and that is how smokers describe the need for a cigarette." as you evaluate the evidence about miss thurston's smoking behavior, use this standard, please. it is a standard from their witness. we agree it is a good test. ask yourself whether her smoking was so bad it is like she had to go to the bathroom all the time and could not concentrate on anything else and was not able to function and could not accomplish anything else until she took care of her 4233 smoking. we all know that there is absolutely no evidence that her cigarette smoking affected her in that way. nonetheless, dr. burns and dr. cummings came in here and talked about how tortured smokers are, how they become helplessly addicted, how they become locked in a cycle of addiction, how they dislike their smoking and want to quit but cannot break out and when they try to break out, they have excruciating withdrawal that causes them to begin smoking again and how they try over and over and over. dr. difranza told you sometimes smokers try every year for 20 years in a row to try to quit, and they are still not able to. who were they talking about? not juanita thurston. we brought you dr. samuel. and just like during this trial, dr. samuel was attacked in this scenario. so i'm going to spend some time talking about dr. samuel. dr. samuel does not spend his time writing papers. he does not spend his time lecturing to people. he does not spend his time running around the country testifying. what does he do? 4234 you saw dr. samuel. he is an intelligent compassionate man who spends his time taking care of people with serious psychiatric illnesses. he is down in his office in boca five days a week seeing patients who have serious illnesses, including serious substance abuse problems, and he uses the dsm to diagnose them so that he can recommend to them the appropriate ranges of treatment to try to help them overcome the agony that they are experiencing from their serious psychiatric illnesses. that is who dr. samuel is. and he gets attacked for that. i was not going to do this until i heard this attack this morning. i'm sure you have heard the expression, people who live in glass houses should not throw stones. dr. samuel was attacked because he is testified in three trials and made $800,000. let us think for just a moment about what the evidence was regarding dr. burns and dr. cummings. together they have been paid nearly $5 million for testifying in tobacco cases. together they have testified by deposition or trial approximately 200 times. miss odom's law firm, searcy denney, has paid them $700,000, 4235 from one law firm. they have testified together, if you add up both of their testimonies, over 40 times at the request of searcy denney. and they ask you to disregard dr. samuels' opinions because he is testified three times. what did dr. samuel do? as you know, he is the only expert who used the standard diagnostic tool for medical addiction, and he found that juanita thurston was not addicted. let us think about what he told us. he told us that the dsm indicates clear that fifty percent of daily smokers are addicted. so that means the task for you is to try to decide which side of that fifty percent was juanita thurston in. he took about two hours to lay out for you the 11 criteria of the dsm, and he marshalled all the facts applied the criteria to those facts and gave you his analysis of whether or not she met each cry criteria. no hiding the ball. he put his analysis right out there for you to assess, and he also explained to you that in addition to those criteria, a smoker has to have significant clinical impairment by their smoking before they would be classified as medically addicted. 4236 he explained to you that his assessment indicated that, in fact, miss thurston was able to control her smoking, and she would quit when she became determined to quit. and that is a word miss odom used to explain why her mother quit in 1987 because she became more determined to do so. and as mr. bass correctly predicted, i am going to remind you that he was not asked a single question about the testimony he gave over two-hour period regarding the dsm, not one question. instead, during that cross-examination, he was ridiculed, he was mocked. a chair was drug out so that they could sit down, ignore his testimony and suggest that you should disregard his testimony, the testimony of someone who is doing nothing more than coming here and explaining to you what he does all day every day. when someone walks in that office with a problem, he assesses them under the dsm. that is what he does. and for that, he does not get cross-examined about his analysis. he gets ridiculed and mocked disrespectfully. mr. bass: objection. improper argument. 4237 the court: overruled. mr. furr: you saw the cross-examination. you saw how he was treated. reach your own judgments about whether the way he was treated was a search for the truth or not. how did they -- you were told this morning, oh, well, we did not have to cross-examine him because we were bringing in dr. difranza to rebut his testimony. really? dr. difranza. let us think about what we know about dr. difranza. he was here to attack dr. samuel's use of the dsm. well, what do we know? he is not a psychiatrist, and he is never been trained in using the dsm. he admitted it is used by juries to decide legal issues. he admitted that addiction specialists all over the country use it every day. but then i think this was the most important admission. dr. difranza admitted to you that he had never used the dsm to diagnose one of his patients. it is all dr. samuels does all day long the past 30 years. and dr. difranza comes in here and says, no, he is doing it all wrong. not that i've ever done it, but i have come into litigation before 4238 and criticized the use of others and how they use them. that is testimony -- you were told to evaluate the credibility of witness, expert witnesses and that you could accept or reject their testimony if you chose to. that is testimony that should be rejected. let us get back to the facts. what do we really know about miss thurston's smoking behavior? gwen told us -- excuse me. miss odom told us that other than in 1976 and 1983 juanita thurston never tried to quit smoking, not even for one hour, not for one hour. now the picture that has been painted for you is of somebody who was tortured by their smoking and tries over and over and over to quit. that is someone else. that is not juanita thurston. in fact, not only has she never tried to quit other than those two occasions, she never said she was going to quit. she never said she was going to quit. and we know why. mr. hayes told us why, because juanita wanted to keep smoking. she did not want to quit. well, what happened when she got determined? miss odom told us that when her mother became determined in 1987 it was simple. 4239 she told us that it was fair to say that her mother threw her salem cigarettes away and never looked back. never looked back. and here's what ahmad and miss odom told us about what that experience was like for miss thurston. first ahmad told us even though he is with his grandmother all the time that he did not notice any behavior changes after she quit smoking, that she was not irritable or depressed at least as far as he could tell. he said there was no difference. she was the same person. miss odom told us that there were no physical signs of withdrawal when she quit smoking and that she felt good physically after she quit smoking but that she would never regretted smoking until she came down with lung cancer. prior to that she never expressed any regret for smoking. and we were told about how difficult -- let me say it another way -- how strong juanita was when she made up her mind to do something, because she quit smoking under circumstances that were about as difficult as it could possibly be to quit. remember those circumstances? her partner, 4240 mr. harden, lived in the same home and continued smoking her brand of cigarettes, salem cigarettes in the home. gwen told us that juanita never complained about his smoking, never to restrict his smoking. imagine, if you will, whether a heroin addict would be able to successfully quit using heroin if they lived in a home with a partner who was also a heroin addict who continued using it right in their presence all day every day tempting them and providing them those cues about what it felt like and how the experience they would have if they just picked it back up again. despite all that, miss thurston was able to resist that temptation. let us sum this up. of course smokers can be medically addicted. no one is disputing that. fifty percent of them are. but they have just got the wrong smoker in this case. juanita thurston was not the addict described by plaintiffs' experts. she was not a tortured smoker who was compelled to smoke against her will. she did not struggle continuously to stop smoking. she did not suffer excruciating withdrawal symptoms. as thaddeus hayes told us, she wanted to smoke, 4241 and now we know she quit when she made up her mind to quit. her withdrawal symptoms lasted about two and a half weeks, and then she felt good. and perhaps most importantly, for your assessment in this case, you know that she does not meet the medical diagnostic criteria for addiction, which is the only real measuring stick that you have been given that makes any sense for the purposes of evaluating this claim. could i have the elmo, please? so on this first question, "was juanita thurston addicted to cigarettes containing nicotine and, if so, was such addiction a legal cause of her lung cancer and death?" because they have not proven she was mentally addicted, that question should be answered, no. and then you will sign and date your verdict form and this case will be over. but even if they prove to you she was addicted, and obviously i have to go through the whole verdict form because i need to offer you a summary of what the evidence has shown on each question. so even though the case should end right there, i've got to keep going. even if they prove that she was addicted, though, that 4242 question is not over. because you know, back to the computer if i could, cliff. thanks. you know they have a second hurdle they have to cross to prove class membership. they have to prove that addiction was a legal cause of juanita thurston's death. what does that mean? you have got instructions, but i'm going to suggest to you a simple common sense way to think about whether or not addiction has been proven to be a legal cause. and that is this. was juanita thurston so powerfully addicted that she was compelled to smoke, she was unable to quit and prevent her death? if they have proven that, they have proven that addiction was a legal cause of her death. so let us back up for just a moment and ask ourselves what is the evidence with respect to whether smoking compels people to smoke and makes them unable to quit. here's what we know. 47, approximately 47 million -- there is a little overlap there so i cannot be sure what the number is. approximately 47 million people in the united states quit smoking while juanita thurston continued to smoke. by the year after the surgeon general's 4243 report came out in 1965, 17.6 million people, including over 5 million women, had quit since the early 1950s. between the time the surgeon general's report came out in 1964 and 1979, another 30 million people quit. and the plaintiffs' witnesses explained to us on cross-examination what was going on. they told you that among that 47 million that millions and millions were heavy smokers. they believed that ninety percent of them would have been addicted. but, nonetheless, 95 percent of those heavy -- heavily addicted smokers quit on their own. this was the part that took a little work. you all remember the deal about having to go get transcripts to remind people what their prior testimony is? that is called impeachment. we had to do that on this issue as well as many other issues i'll talk about and talk about perhaps what the inference is that you should draw from us having to impeach them so many times. but, anyway, all three witnesses, dr. burns, dr. cummings on cross-examination and dr. samuel on direct, of course, told you the following: nicotine addiction does not 4244 permanently change the brain; that the 40 million plus smokers who quit all had smoking-related brain changes; and that the brain changes do not prevent quitting. and perhaps, more importantly, any smoker can quit. mr. keehfus's cross-examination of dr. burns, question, "just because someone is addicted to nicotine, does --" "-- does that mean they can not stop smoking, correct?" excuse me. "-- to nicotine does not mean they can not stop smoking, correct, sir?" answer, "that is correct." question, "just because someone is addicted to nicotine does not mean they lose control of their behavior, correct, sir?" answer, "that is correct." here's what else they told you, addiction does not relieve smokers of responsibility. it remains the smoker's responsibility to quit. as dr. burns sort of colorfully put it, cigarettes do not light themselves and jump in your mouth. the smoker has to make a decision to stop picking up that package of cigarettes, lighting the cigarettes and putting the cigarette in their mouth. and both of the plaintiffs' 4245 witnesses admitted to you on cross-examination that all smokers, including addicted smokers, remain responsible for quitting. responsibility for quitting smoking always resides with the smoker. dr. cummings, although i had to, again, i had to get out his transcripts to remind him of what he said on his sworn testimony before, admitted that a smoker is fully responsible for making the choice to quit. not partially, not something less than one hundred percent, one hundred percent fully responsible for making the choice to quit. that is the plaintiffs' witness. let us zero in now on what we know about miss thurston's smoking behavior and whether she is proven that she was -- that her death was caused -- that addiction to nicotine was the legal cause of her death. again, let us focus this question in a way that will be helpful to evaluating the evidence. was juanita thurston so powerfully addicted that she was compelled to smoke so that she was unable to quit and prevent her death? or did she have the ability to quit and prevent her own death at any time she became determined to do 4246 so? you see, it is really an either/or question. now as your instructions indicate, the law recognizes that there can be more than one factor that can be a causal role -- that can have a causal role in causing an injury. the law anticipates that there could be circumstances under which that was the case. that does not mean there always is. it is up to you to decide whether under the facts in this case there was more than one cause or whether there was only one cause, which was miss thurston's choice to continue smoking despite knowing the risk. that is a factual question for you. that instruction means nothing with respect to whether there were more than one cause in this case. what do we know? as we discussed briefly before, miss odom told us she admitted, i should say, that her mother was a legal cause of her own death by starting to smoke, continuing to smoke, and not trying harder to quit. she was very forthright, told me those things on cross-examination. i did not have to impeach her. she admitted to all those things, too. i did not have to impeach her. 4247 and, again, i submit to you, ladies and gentlemen what does that leave for us? just think about it. you are allowed to draw inferences from the evidence. you heard about that in your instructions. think about what this admission means. starting, continuing and not trying harder to quit. i submit these are some inferences that you can draw from that. admissions really mean if you take them all together, this admission that she chose to start smoking and no one put a gun to her head and made her start smoking, it is an admission that she knew that smoking was dangerous and continued to smoke because would you ever admit that your mother was a cause of her own death if she was doing something that she did not know was dangerous? of course not. it means that she was not confused about the dangers or addictiveness of smoking, and it means that she was responsible for quitting. you would never admit that your mother was the cause of her own death if she had not been responsible for failing to quit. it also means she was able to quit earlier and prevent her own death, because the plaintiffs would never admit 4248 that miss thurston was a cause of her own death if she had been unable to quit and prevent her own death. the evidence demonstrates that miss thurston had the ability to quit smoking at a time that, in fact, would have prevented her death. we know that 40 million plus americans quit before 1979 or by 1979. what was different about them and their smoking than miss thurston's smoking? let us look at the evidence. were the cigarettes they smoked any more addictive than her cigarettes? no. there is no evidence of that. was her brain affected differently than the smokers who quit? no, no evidence of that. was she exposed to advertising different than the smokers that quit? no, no evidence of that. did she smoke more or longer than the smokers who quit? no evidence of that. the only difference -- excuse me. was she exposed to tobacco company statements different than the smokers who quit? no, no evidence of that. you know, there is no evidence that she ever heard a tobacco company's statement about 4249 the dangers of smoking. the only difference was those 40 million people made the decision to stop smoking and made the determined effort to quit smoking while she continued to smoke. what do we know about miss thurston? was she some type of weak addiction-prone individual who led an out-of-control life and was unable to control her own behavior? not any evidence of that whatsoever. instead, what we know from miss odom and mr. hayes is that she was intelligent. she was a curious woman. she did not have a lot of education, but that did not hold her back. she read. she listened to the news. she encouraged everyone around her to become more educated. she was informed. she was also strong-willed and decisive. and what we know that may be most important for this case is she simply enjoyed smoking her cigarettes. remember miss odom went through all her pictures trying to find pictures of her mother smoking and this is what she found. here she is with george harden and mr. osborne standing behind them smoking. what the evidence has demonstrated to you is that she enjoyed smoking 4250 with a beer, that she did not want to stop. she wanted to smoke. that is what mr. hayes told us. and that she did not want to quit. she liked smoking with a beer, with her coffee. she enjoyed it. and at that time in her life she did not want to quit. now i'll repeat this again. mr. hayes told us she did not stop -- she did not want to stop smoking. she wanted to smoke. ahmad came in and told us that his grandmother never said that she wanted to quit. mr. hayes told us the same thing, and that is important. that is important. as dr. burns told you, he was asked, "well, to quit a person has to decide they want to quit, correct?" answer, "yeah, that is correct, sure." "and after someone decides they want to quit, they have to make an effort to quit, do not they?" "yes, in general, that is correct." so, of course, a person has to make a choice to quit and take actions to quit. but, you know, that is not what she did. there are a lot of things that miss thurston could have done if she really wanted to quit 4251 smoking. she should -- she could have sought help with her family and friends. that was not done. she could have sought medical assistance. that was not done. she -- i think that chart is wrong. she did throw away her cigarettes. that should say "yes" there because my recollection is that she did do that. but she did not throw away her ashtrays or lighters. she did not go to cessation smoking clinics, and she did not go a single day without smoking. i'm sorry. that chart is correct. i was misreading it. we are now looking at the first 20 years of her smoking. the time prior to 1976 she had been smoking for about 20 years during this period of time when mr. hayes told us that she wanted to smoke, and she did not do any of these things. she did none of the things that someone would do for that 20-year period if they wanted to quit smoking. she simply never made up her mind to quit smoking. let us think about this. the claim being made here is that she did not quit smoking and the smoking -- excuse me -- that nicotine, addiction to nicotine was a legal cause of her death because despite persistent efforts, she 4252 was unable to quit and prevent her death. is that the evidence? can you imagine any other scenario where someone would claim they persistently tried to do something and when you asked them, well, tell me how often you tried to do it, they said, well, i tried to do it twice for two weeks over the past 30 years. i tried to do it twice for two weeks. miss thurston told you that her mother -- excuse me. miss odom told you that her mother never said she was going to stop smoking other than the three times she actually quit. and when we asked her, when we gave her the floor to tell us why did your mother succeed in 1987 when she failed in 1976 and 1983, and here's what miss odom told us. question, "ma'am, is not it true that based upon your personal observations of your mother that she was successful in '87 as opposed to the other two times because she was more determined in 1987?" her answer was a simple, "yes." the evidence is that miss thurston quit when she became determined to quit. she quit cold 4253 turkey, no cessation aids. no one helped her. she did not even ask anybody for help. she put her cigarettes down and never looked back. she never smoked another cigarette to anybody's knowledge even though she was sharing a home with a partner who smoked the exact cigarettes she had. the only difference was she became more determined. ladies and gentlemen, the evidence is overwhelming that it was miss thurston's choice to begin, to continue and not to quit sooner was the only legal cause of her death. but i want to go back to this portrait, this portrait of a tortured smoker for whom nicotine addiction was the legal cause of her death that dr. difranza, dr. cummings and dr. burns have painted for us, and i want to compare that to miss odom -- excuse me -- miss thurston. on the left i call this a possible class member, and then we compare that to miss thurston. a possible class member would be somebody tortured by smoking. miss thurston enjoyed her smoking. would be somebody that hates smoking. miss thurston wanted to smoke. 4254 it could be someone who smokes against her will. mr. hayes told us that she smoked because she wanted to. could have been someone who could not control her smoking. you now know that she could control her smoking when she needed to. could be somebody who claimed to be addicted. you know miss thurston never claimed to be addicted. it could be someone who tried 10 or 20 or 30 times over the decades to quit and just could not succeed. miss thurston tried four weeks in 30 years. less than one percent of that 30-year period was spent trying to quit smoking. an engle class member could be somebody who tried every available technique to try to quit smoking. the only thing we know miss thurston ever did was chew candy. someone whom was addicted whom addiction was the legal cause of her disease could demonstrate physical withdrawal symptoms. miss thurston did not. you know, the plaintiffs witnesses talked to you on several occasions about people who developed a smoking-related disease and 4255 continued smoking. they colorfully said someone was smoking to their grave. they talk about people developing lung cancer, copd or heart disease but not quitting, continuing to smoke even after a serious disease. that is not miss thurston. she quit before she had any serious smoking-related disease of any type whatsoever. could be somebody who simply was unable to quit despite their best efforts, despite accessing every way to quit could not do it. not miss thurston. she quit when she made up her mind. could be somebody that continues to crave cigarettes. you heard the witnesses tell you that some people say they crave cigarettes for years. years after they quit when they are around somebody smoking they smell it or see it or think about it. they crave a cigarette. not miss thurston. she felt good when she quit and never indicated that she wanted a cigarette again. could be, this was really important i think in this case, an engle class member would be somebody who needed to remove themselves from their environment. the doctors told you that 4256 one of the most successful things you can do to help yourself stop an addictive behavior is get out of that environment, go to a different environment, different friends, remove yourself from the locations and people that use that drug. not miss thurston. she put them down and never looked back even though mr. harden was smoking every day. the bottom line, ladies and gentlemen, is in this engle case you simply have the wrong smoker before you. the plaintiff failed to prove that juanita thurston was addicted under medical diagnostic criteria. in fact, they did not even try to. i mean, one of the things i skipped over, remember dr. difranza? despite coming in here and talking about the dsm, he never tried to apply the dsm to miss thurston. and, in fact, he never mentioned her name. never mentioned her name. here was her opportunity to show us how dr. samuels got it wrong and how he applied the criteria wrong. instead, dr. difranza comes in here and tries to say that dr. samuels does not know how to apply the dsm. even though he does it all day, dr. difranza never does it. 4257 but then dr. difranza does not try to apply it to miss thurston and never mentioned her name. search your memories. search your notes. their rebuttal witness never mentioned miss thurston's name. they simply failed to prove that addiction to nicotine was a legal cause of her death. instead, they spent two weeks reproving the engle findings, but they failed to prove that miss thurston was a class member. could i have the elmo again? so, ladies and gentlemen, i submit that even if you found miss thurston was addicted, there is a second independent reason, the reason of legal causation as to why this first question should be answered no. and you see below that if you answer this first question, "no," you sign and date your verdict form and this case is over. your honor, this would be a convenient breaking point if this works. [#deleted recess#] mr. furr: thank you, your honor. please the court. counsel. welcome back, ladies and gentlemen. i hope you did not overindulge in your lengthy gourmet lunch. when we finished, we had just looked at 4265 question number 1, class membership. as you know, if the answer to that question is no, you go no further. i'm going to go through the whole verdict form with you. i'm going to skip over question number 2 and i'm next going to talk about question 3 and question 4. and we will talk about those two questions together, because they ask you a very, very similar question for which the evidence and the answer to those questions is the same. here is question 3. "did juanita thurston justifiably rely to her detriment on any statement of material fact made by the defendant after may 5, 1982 that intentionally concealed or omitted material information concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes, and, if so, was such reliance a legal cause of her lung cancer and death?" and if we flip over to 4, you will see that 4 is a very similar type question. "did juanita thurston justifiably rely to her detriment on any statement of material fact made by the defendant or other tobacco companies after may 5, 1982 in furtherance of an agreement to 4266 intentionally conceal or omit information," et cetera, et cetera. in other words, 3 is the intentional concealment and 4 is an agreement to conceal. that is the only difference between those two. so i want to go back to 3 and let us look a little more closely at it and see if we can unpack this question a little bit, because there is a lot of legalese there, but there are some very important principles. number one, you will see that it has to have been an act by the defendant after may 5, 1982. the concealment cannot be based upon acts by the defendant before may 5, 1982, as you can see. secondly, you see that the information that was concealed had to be material. i submit to you that in this case what would be material would be the following: is smoking dangerous? can it cause serious diseases? and is smoking addictive? there is nothing in this question that suggests in any way that you are being asked about whether juanita thurston had information about exactly how cigarettes were designed, about exactly how much nicotine was put in cigarettes. and the reason it is not there, of 4267 course, is those things are not material. she would have made her decision, as anybody would, based on whether she knew that smoking was dangerous, could cause serious disease and whether it was addictive. these other questions that are being suggested to you simply would not have been material for her decision as to whether to take the risk of continuing to smoke. so, again, still a lot of legalese. let us try to unpack that a little bit and make it simple. could i have this computer, please. okay. plaintiff's concealment claim and agreement to conceal, questions 3 and 4, we will talk about them together. between may 5, 1982 and 1987. why do i stop at 1987? because that is when ms. thurston stopped smoking. so, of course, no act after 1987 could have caused her to smoke while confused about the dangers of smoking. so we have a five-year window here for which you need to examine the defendant's conduct and its effect on ms. thurston. ladies and gentlemen, the evidence is very clear that the plaintiff has completely failed 4268 to prove that any concealment between those years, or agreement to conceal between those years was the legal cause of ms. thurston's death. why? remember the simple test you can apply. you cannot conceal something from somebody who already knows it. if she already knows that it is dangerous, can cause serious disease and is addictive, then no act taken to conceal that information could have been a cause of her death. so let us apply that test as you look at the evidence. but i'll back up and be even more general. the first reasonable question for you to ask would be: were the dangers of smoking unknown to the public before may 5, 1982? so let us go through that evidence pretty quickly. you know that the dangers of smoking had been public knowledge for hundreds of years. we had a little fun with the van gogh picture, but it is actually very relevant to this. the van gogh picture and the discussion we had demonstrates that for centuries people have been talking about smoking being harmful and have 4269 known that it can be difficult to quit. and dr. burns and dr. cummings both told you that for at least 150 years people have talked about smoking being addictive and causing cancer. dr. burns and dr. cummings told you that in the 1950s the information available to the public exploded. there were human studies and animal studies and chemistry studies done by scientists, reported in the scientific literature, picked up by the lay media, published -- publicized to all the rest of us who are not scientists on radio, tv, newspapers, magazines, word of mouth. and, of course, you have heard that schools and churches and all kinds of other institutions in our society became involved in spreading that information. how do we know the message was getting through? we know because dr. burns told you that in the 1950s, as a result of media exposure, smokers began quitting in large numbers. and we have seen those quitting statistics from the surgeon general. and we know that, in fact, millions of people would 4270 have quit in the 1950s when this information was being publicized everywhere. dr. cummings made perhaps the single most important admission in this case on this issue. now, admittedly, i had to impeach him to get him to admit this, but he admitted that he had previously told me in the huish trial up in gainesville when i asked him this exact question, he told me that by 1954 virtually everyone heard and knew that smoking could cause disease. not just heard, heard and knew, heard and knew. the evidence is unequivocal. everyone knew that smoking was dangerous at around the time, or perhaps even before the time that juanita thurston was a -- became a daily smoker. as we know, dr. burns concluded she became a daily smoker at age 23, born in '34, that would have been 1957 or so. no one knows exactly whether it is '56 or '58 or '57. but in any event, it was known in society before she became a daily smoker. dr. cummings said on a couple of occasions that when the tobacco company documents came out it was a revelation; finally people knew that 4271 smoking was dangerous and finally people began quitting in large numbers. but let us look at what the evidence is. both dr. burns and dr. cummings told you that surgeon general leroy burney concluded in 1957 that cigarette smoking causes lung cancer. that was 30-plus years before the internal tobacco companies' documents came out. no one needed the company documents to know that smoking was dangerous. in 1957 there were congressional hearings where surgeon general burney and dr. heller from the national cancer institute both testified very similarly. they both testified that in their roles as public health officials their conclusion was that the dangers of smoking had -- excuse me -- that the public had been effectively informed about the dangers of smoking through press, radio and tv. exact ways we have been talking about information being spread in society. what do we know about ms. thurston? was she someone who lived in a shell; who was not interested in the world around her; who did not access information? no. we know she was the 4272 opposite of that. what we know about ms. thurston is that she watched the nightly news, she read the local paper every day. she read magazines. she instilled love for reading in gwen. we know that she was intellectually curious. and gwen odom told us that her mother wanted to know what was going on. and dr. burns told you the same thing. let us keep going forward. surgeon general in 1964. we heard a lot about that. it is a significant event because, again, we are not talking about smokers in general. we are talking about this family. the year 1964 is very significant because one thing is abundantly clear. this family knew in 1964 that smoking was dangerous. we are going to go through that. it is no coincidence this is the same time the surgeon general's report came out that concluded for the first time in a book like this that smoking causes lung cancer. you know that the next day and for days after that it was front-page news on the palm beach post. smoking, cancer linked. you know that the florida health notes, the leading 4273 public health publication by the state of florida back around that time, concluded that "nearly all floridians have heard about the surgeon general's report on smoking and health which was released in 1964." now, there was another specific question and answer that was asked of dr. burns that i think is very illuminating on this issue of whether people knew around this time. and here it is. mr. keehfus asked dr. burns the following question: "in fact, mr. hayes" -- of course that was ms. odom's husband -- "testified under oath that based on what he heard at the time, he thought it was common knowledge in florida in 1964 that smoking was harmful to health, right? "answer: i do not have a specific recall of what he thought was common knowledge from his deposition, but i would expect he would say something along those lines." he expected that someone reflecting on that era would say that because it was common knowledge at that time. dr. cummings told you the same thing. he testified that there was a very high level of public awareness about the dangers of smoking in 4274 1984 -- excuse me -- 1964. let us remind ourselves, why am i trying to go on this very brief and very condensed history of information about the dangers of smoking? because what we are doing is we are setting the stage for you to evaluate the claim that ms. thurston died because she did not know that smoking was dangerous and addictive between 1982 and 1987. so we are taking a look at the world she came through and what she was told so you can evaluate whether that claim could possibly be correct. we know that in 1966 the first warning label went on. "caution: cigarette smoking may be hazardous to your health," mandated by congress, drafted by congress. dr. daniel horn, who was in charge of the united states office of smoking and health, who was responsible for communicating the dangers of smoking to the public was quoted in 1968 as saying, "you could stand on a rooftop and shout 'smoking is dangerous' at the top of your lungs and you would not be telling anyone anything they did not already know." we know that there were public service 4275 announcements about the warnings. and in these public service announcements -- i'm going to play one of them again. please take a look at this. and what you are going to do is you are going to see that the public health service announcements were equating paying attention to the warning label as a life or death matter. (video clip was played and taken down to the best of the reporter's ability as follows:) voice: (sounds heard.) we receive many warnings in our life and sometimes they can save our life. (sounds heard.) voice: this message is brought to you by the american cancer society. (video clip concluded.) mr. furr: a clear, unequivocal, unambiguous message. paying attention to the label on the side of cigarette packages is something that can save your life. did people pay attention? did they respond? here's what dr. cummings told us: between 1966 and 1970 13 million americans quit smoking, the highest number of quitters in the united states history in any four-year period. 4276 remember we did the math with dr. cummings? that was about 5,000 smokers per day, 365 days a year for that four-year period after the warnings went on the side of the packages. and yet dr. cummings tried to convince you that it was a revelation when the tobacco company documents came out in 1998 and all of a sudden smokers now had the information that they needed to make decisions about quitting. the evidence is otherwise. the labels strengthened in 1970. "warning: the surgeon general has determined that cigarette smoking is dangerous to your health." that label stayed on packages of cigarettes between 1970 and 1985. do a little quick math. if ms. odom -- excuse me -- ms. thurston was smoking a pack and a half a day of cigarettes every day for those 15 years, she would have picked up a package of cigarettes over 160,000 times during that 15-year period with the warning on the side of the package. am i suggesting she saw it every time? of course not. that would be silly. is there any way she did not know about that warning and see it? of course not, that would also be silly. 4277 dr. burns, by 1975, more americans knew that cigarette smoking was dangerous than the name of the president of the united states. universal, common public knowledge about the dangers of smoking. and then we had another red herring during this trial where dr. cummings tried to make a distinction about the difference between hearing that smoking is dangerous, knowing that smoking is dangerous and internalizing that information to understand it to mean that smoking is dangerous for your health. what did dr. burns tell us? he told us by 1981 95 percent of people were thoroughly aware of the health dangers of smoking and ninety percent of them realized that their health could be affected, in other words, had internalized the message by 1981, obviously before our 1982 date. you also know that an additional set of rotating warnings went on the packages in 1985. because i want to be clear. even though i am spending some time talking with you about what ms. odom -- excuse me -- ms. thurston knew before 1982, the burden that plaintiffs have assumed in this case is to prove to you the 4278 concealment after 1982, but before 1987 was a legal cause of her disease. so we have two periods we are looking at for two different reasons. the rotating warnings went on in 1985. how did all this information we have been looking at affect smokers? it is pretty clear. smokers heard the message and they made their choices whether to continue smoking or stop smoking. and we know that millions of them quit. these flags are sort of the key awareness events we have just talked about. you actually heard during this trial that the first tobacco lawsuits were filed 60 years ago in 1954, because there was enough information available to bring these types of cases and that everyone knew that smoking causes disease. then we march forward. the other information that came out, the warning labels, the quotes from dr. burns and cummings, et cetera. and you see what happens as that information is coming out, millions and millions and millions of heavily addicted smokers are making 4279 their choices about whether to stop lighting up those cigarettes and put them in their mouth or whether to quit. now, there was another set of red herrings that i want to discuss. keep in mind that during this time frame dr. cummings told you that there was a campaign of doubt being conducted by the cigarette manufacturers. obviously it was not successful. 40-plus million people quit at the same time. you were told that the way the cigarette was being designed, the modern american cigarette, kept people from quitting. that started in 1913. obviously people were able to quit smoking the modern american cigarette. then finally you were told that advertising somehow undermined people's understandings of the dangers of smoking. and yet all of these people -- dr. cummings admitted that all of these people who quit in this era would have been exposed to the same advertising campaigns. went through that. robyn, could i have the final instruction 13? thank you. 4280 on final instruction 13, which you actually see on page 15 of the instructions you were given this morning, you will see this with respect to the fraudulent concealment issue: "on this claim the issue for your determination is whether juanita thurston justifiably relied on any statement of material fact made by the defendant after may 5, 1982 that intentionally concealed or omitted material information concerning the health effects or addictive nature of smoking cigarettes, and, if so, whether such reliance was a legal cause of ms. thurston's lung cancer and death." that is very, very similar to verdict form question 3 that takes that and turns it into a verdict form question for you. so how do you sort through all this? it actually is -- back to the computer. it is pretty simple. the real question you are being asked is to decide as a matter of fact whether juanita thurston died because the dangers of smoking were unknown to her between may 5, 1982 and 1987. so next i'm going to look at the evidence that you were presented with respect to what she 4281 knew prior to this time period and during this time period. robyn, could i have that second board. let us scoot that up just a bit. there is no good place to put this where someone is not blocked. what we have done is sort of tried to create a board that demonstrates what juanita thurston's information environment was like. and we start closest to her with her family members and we work our way around her. so what we are going to do is take a look at what ms. odom knew and mr. hayes and ahmad and her sisters, christine thurston and bobbie newsome and her friend and neighbor mr. osborne. we are even going to go back and look at what her parents told her. that is sort of all within the context of what the public health authorities and schools and churches and the federal and state governments will say and everybody else was saying. because, of course, that is how her family members were learning about this. what the evidence is going to demonstrate is that ms. thurston knew that smoking was dangerous and addictive in the 1960s, decades 4282 before the 1982 date, which is the test in this case. so let us look at what some of that evidence was specifically. ms. newsome's testimony. she was asked whether the parents allowed the children to smoke. she told you, no, we would have gotten punished at home if we smoked. she was asked whether smoking was allowed in school. she said no. so this world, i know it is hard for us to take ourselves back to 1934 when ms. thurston was born, but she was born into a family which already the -- smoking was treated as an adult custom that children were not allowed to smoke. let us look at what mr. hayes told us about his knowledge. he told us that in 1964 in delray in middle school he was taught the, quote, woes of smoking, about diseases being caused by smoking and why you should not smoke. and he told you that he knew the dangers of smoking by 1964. ms. thurston's sister bobbie newsome told us in her deposition that was read to you that she knew that smoking was dangerous in 1964 and that 4283 she warned her children about smoking starting when they were 10 years old in 1964 and that she told them, "do not smoke because it can kill you." now you heard that she was actually a sister who was very close to ms. thurston. during her cross-examination ms. odom told us this, that she knew that smoking was addictive in the early 1960s and that she learned that smoking was dangerous to your health in the 1960s. this family knew. the dangers of smoking were common knowledge to ms. thurston and her family in the 1960s. her friends and family members knew. here's what mr. hayes even told us, before the warnings went on the packages, mr. hayes told us, "well, back then they had not started putting warnings on the cigarette packs, but everybody was saying cigarettes cause cancer." cigarettes cause cancer. everyone in her circle of influence. and you know that ms. thurston quit in the 1970s, quit in the 1970s. everyone in her circle of influence knew that smoking was dangerous. and, as we are going to look in just 4284 a moment, we also know that juanita thurston knew. here's what dr. burns told us. "question: in fact, ms. odom would say, mom, you need to quit smoking, right?" of course he is talking about ms. thurston talking to juanita thurston. dr. burns said, "yes, there was substantial support from family members for her to quit smoking." her family knew. ms. odom on cross-examination admitted that she knew that cigarettes were addictive -- that her mother knew -- ms. odom admitted that her mother, juanita thurston, knew that cigarettes were addictive for 20 to 30 years before she passed. you know she passed in 1993, so that takes us back somewhere in the 1963 to 1973 time range. we asked ms. odom, "and in 197" -- this is cross-examination in this trial in front of you. "in 1976, she," referring to her mother, "knew that smoking was not healthy for her, correct? "answer: correct." she was asked, "and, in fact, ma'am, from 4285 that point on you and your mother had conversations about quitting smoking, in your words, all the time; is not that correct? "answer: pretty much." the message was being communicated to ms. thurston. one of the ways we know it is mr. hayes told us that what he would tell her, i bought your cigarettes, here they are, you know they are bad for you; she would call them cancer sticks. in 1974, juanita thurston was calling them cancer sticks. and ms. hayes [sic] told us that her mother knew that breathing cigarette smoke into her lungs might be dangerous to her health in the 1970s, to her health. mr. hayes told us more. he told us that when he heard her coughing he even warned her, that means you need to quit smoking. and when he would buy her cigarettes he would say, "here they are, you know these are not good for you." and mr. hayes told us that virtually every time they were together and her mother would light up a cigarette that ms. odom would tell her mother that she needed to quit smoking. 4286 this family had the information; they knew what it meant and they were urging ms. thurston to act upon it. and dr. burns told us that ms. thurston understood that cigarette smoking was not good for her when mr. hayes told her that she needed to quit. notwithstanding that, and not only did she understand it, she expressed no confusion about the health risks of smoking when repeatedly warned by thad hayes. there is absolutely no evidence in this case whatsoever that any mixed message that juanita thurston was getting detracted or undermined in any way her understanding about the dangers of smoking. there is no evidence of that. we have talked about a lot, about her quitting in 1976. the important thing is that ms. odom told us that ms. thurston quit for two weeks in 1976 because she knew, knew that smoking was bad for her health. dr. cummings has admitted, just like i just said, that there is no evidence, no evidence in this case that juanita thurston was ever aware that a tobacco company denied that smoking cigarettes is addictive or dangerous. there is 4287 no such evidence. so think about this. we are looking at whether she died because she did not know after 1982. i'm not going to go through all this again, but between the publicly available information from all kinds of different sources and between the things that her family was telling her, ms. thurston knew. i mean, the yellow boxes may be the key pieces of evidence for you. ms. odom told us that her mother knew that smoking was addictive between '63 and '73. and mr. hayes told us that ms. thurston knew that smoking was bad for her health when he met her in 1968 when he started dating ms. odom. there is no question the message got through to her. and you cannot conceal information from somebody if they already know it. it is a logical fallacy. the evidence is overwhelming that she knew before 1982. but remember, the plaintiffs have assumed more of a burden. the burden they have assumed is to prove to you that an act taken by the defendants -- excuse me -- by the defendant, rj reynolds, between 1982 and 1987 prevented 4288 ms. thurston from knowing about the dangers and addictive properties of smoking and caused her death. well, you know she had no doubt and confusion about the dangers of smoking in this time frame for which they have tried to make this claim. not only did she know coming in, you have heard that magazines, the surgeon general's report, tv, local news, warnings, antismoking commercials, all types of information continued to come at her. ms. odom told us that she warned her mother about the dangers of smoking always, continually talking about it. thaddeus told us that their son, thad and gwen's son ahmad began working -- warning ms. odom [sic] about the dangers of smoking when he was very young. interestingly, charles osborne was brought up, but you remember the evidence. it was not charles osborne encouraging juanita thurston to quit, it was the other way around. charles was their close friend and neighbor. he was the gentleman standing up in that picture we have shown you when she was smoking. you were read part of mr. osborne's deposition in which he said juanita thurston encouraged him and george 4289 to try to quit smoking. and they all made a joint quit attempt and that she lasted the longest. you were told that she tried to quit in 1983 because it was bad for her and, of course, she finally did quit in 1987. questions 3 and 4 on your verdict form really are not even close. the evidence is overwhelming that she knew that smoking was dangerous and addictive even before this period, much less within this period. now, what about this bit about their message having been undermined? let us remind ourself, lots of talk about ctr and tirc and ti. there is no evidence that she ever heard or relied on any statements from those entities. there is no evidence that she ever heard or relied on the frank statement. you know there is no evidence that she ever heard a statement by rj reynolds, or any other tobacco company, in making a decision about whether to smoke or not. we talked about advertisements for several hours, but you know there is no evidence in this case that she ever relied on advertisements either in making decisions about whether to smoke or not or in choosing a brand of 4290 cigarettes. there is none of that evidence. there is no evidence from anyone who actually knew ms. thurston about why she smoked or why she smoked certain brands. you know, there is been a lot of discussion of, well, but she followed the -- she followed the advertising campaigns from unfiltered to filtered to menthol, and, therefore, you can draw an inference that somehow she had a belief that that is what she should do and that prevented her from knowing the dangers. first of all, that does not even make any sense. those are two completely unrelated things. but let us look at what the evidence is. no one ever saw her smoke an unfiltered cigarette. no one ever saw her smoke an unfiltered cigarette. there is no evidence she smoked filtered cigarettes because she thought that filters were safer or less addictive. nobody testified to that. there is no evidence she smoked menthol cigarettes because she believed they were safer. you know, she started smoking menthol cigarettes when she was living with george harden, who also 4291 smoked menthol cigarettes. there is no evidence that she ever made any decision based on cigarette advertising. could i have the verdict form again, robyn. i've got question 3. ms. hughes: okay. mr. furr: before you leave, does anybody know where i'm at time-wise? the court: yeah, she does. the clerk: what is the question? the court: he wants to know how much more time he is got. the clerk: he is used an hour and 34 minutes. mr. furr: okay. thank you. the easiest questions on the verdict form, ladies and gentlemen, are questions 3 and 4. there is simply no evidence that she was injured because of any concealment of information between 1982 and 1987. all right. the next question -- cliff, could i have this again. the next question on this verdict form is question 2, "please state the percentage of any fault for juanita thurston's lung cancer and 4292 death that you charge to juanita thurston or to rj reynolds tobacco company." a couple of important legal principles to understand. first of all, this is not some type of basic comparison of tobacco company conduct to ms. thurston's conduct. it is a very specific question. it is a very specific question. it is a question about fault for lung cancer and death. so the conduct that you will be comparing here is conduct by rj reynolds and ms. thurston that was a legal cause of her death. i mean, you may not have liked some things the tobacco companies did, but unless it is related causally through her lung cancer and death, that conduct is not relevant to this comparison, because this is a very narrow, carefully crafted question by the court for you to focus on conduct that is causally related to her death; not conduct related to somebody else's death; not conduct unrelated to her death. second, i'll remind you of the preliminary instruction. robyn, could i have the preliminary 4293 instruction which -- oh, i may have it on a slide. in the preliminary instruction, i cannot remember, maybe it is number 3 in your stack. i cannot remember. they will tell me in a minute. here you see this, "gwen odom admits that juanita thurston bears some measure of fault, but less than one hundred percent of the applicable fault, for causing her smoking-related injury insofar as her acts or omissions relating to the frequency and duration of her efforts to quit smoking were a legal cause of her death." another way of stating admission. now, obviously, that admission goes on to also allege that the defendants were also a cause of her death, but that is for you to decide, that is for you all to decide, whether there is any conduct of the defendants that were a legal cause of her death. the point being that this admission has been made by the plaintiff. rj reynolds denies that it was at fault for causing her death. it was preliminary instruction number 5. thank you so much, robyn. rj reynolds denies they were at fault. the plaintiff has the burden to prove each and every 4294 percentage point of reynolds' fault. and the reason i point this out is there is sort of a natural human tendency to say, okay, let us start at 50/50, weigh the evidence and see how it comes out. that is not what this exercise is about. rj reynolds' fault starts at zero. there is no fault for rj reynolds. plaintiff has admitted fault; they say it is less than 100 percent. but that is the only fault in the case. it starts at one hundred percent for them and they are trying to transfer their fault over to rj reynolds. so you do not start out at 50/50. they have to prove, they have to prove that it is 1 percent or 2 percent or 3 percent and on up. they have to make that proof to you. this says juanita thurston's choices were the only cause of her death. now, i'm sure everybody can read that from where you are sitting, but what we are going to do is we are going to pull this out a little bit and think about all the things that you now know the evidence to demonstrate with respect to juanita thurston's fault. number one, you know she chose to smoke even though her parents -- even though her parents, 4295 church and school taught her not to smoke. you know she chose to smoke despite knowing that smoking is addictive somewhere between 1963 and 1973. you know that she chose to ignore constant warnings from the media and public health community; that she would have ignored somewhere in the range of 230,000 warnings if you take her whole smoking -- the whole time she smoked. you know she ignored mr. hayes' constant warnings; that she continued smoking when her sister christine quit. you know that she smoked for 20 years after she talked to ms. odom about the dangers; that she chose to smoke even though she was calling her own cigarettes cancer sticks; that she chose to smoke while millions and millions of smokers were quitting; that despite knowing the dangers she never asked anybody for help. mr. hayes told you, and this really sums up the whole case: she wanted to smoke; she did not want to quit. you know that the plaintiff's witnesses on cross-examination have admitted to you the decision to quit was one hundred percent in her control. 4296 you know that ms. odom has admitted that her mother is responsible for starting to smoke, continuing to smoke and not trying harder to quit. you know that ms. odom has admitted that her mother's actions were a legal cause of her own death. let us remind ourselves what dr. cummings and dr. burns told us. dr. cummings. in order to quit, smokers have to make up their mind to quit. the choice to quit is one hundred percent in control of the smoker. smokers are fully responsible for making the choice to quit. dr. burns. addicted smokers are responsible for quitting. addicted smokers do not lose control of their smoking behavior. and in order to quit, smokers have to stop lighting cigarettes and putting them in their mouth. ladies and gentlemen, the evidence is overwhelming that ms. odom's choice to begin, continue smoking and not stop smoking sooner, despite all of the knowledge that she had throughout all the years prior to may 5, 1982, is the only legal cause of her death. so if you get to this question, i submit, 4297 ladies and gentlemen, that this verdict form should be filled out as follows. the plaintiffs have not transferred any fault to rj reynolds. that is why i should have asked robyn. ms. odom starts at one hundred percent and remains at one hundred percent at fault if you get to this question. okay. the next verdict form question i want to talk about is the damage question. that is question 6. i just want to say a couple things about damages. first -- we can take that down, cliff. thank you. you will see in your instructions that any damages must be fair and just in light of the evidence, the evidence, not the rhetoric of the lawyers, not emotion, not sympathy, not what we all feel for someone who loses a parent, but the evidence that is been put before you. that is what damages have to be based upon. and you know that ms. odom is not seeking damages related to lost wages or financial support or medical expenses. and it is important to understand she is not seeking any damages related to ms. thurston's pain and suffering. 4298 none of those are items that she is asking you for money for. what she is asking you for money for is the following: her loss of companionship and protection, her pain and suffering from loss of her mother and funeral expenses. and then you have to ask yourself whether the plaintiffs have proven to you that she is incurred the 5 million dollars in damages that they are asking you for. because just like fault, the plaintiffs have the burden to prove to you each and every dollar of damages. they cannot just throw out large numbers and ask you to go there based on emotion and natural human sympathy. they have to prove the damages to you. well, they failed to prove that she is entitled to any money because they failed to prove that the defendant is liable to her, because her mother smoked despite knowing the dangers. i do want to talk to you about one other part of the instruction while we are here. could i have number 3, robyn. by the way, judge, she is told me do not get used to this, as soon as i get this knee fixed there is not going to be any more of this. 4299 believability of witnesses. this is a critical function that you, the finders of fact, have in this case. you have to evaluate which witnesses you believe in this case. you were given direction by the court, "in evaluating the believability of any witness and the weight you will give that testimony, you may properly consider, among other things, the frankness or lack of frankness of the witness and whether the witness has any interest in the outcome of the case." those are things that you are entitled to consider when evaluating the truthfulness of someone's testimony. i'm going to ask you a simple question. as you consider that, let me ask you this. could i have that. you are entitled to consider why ms. odom and her witnesses changed their testimony so much from their prior sworn testimony and evaluate how frankly you think they were testifying. you saw this process that the lawyers call impeachment. it was where a witness says one thing here that is inconsistent with prior sworn testimony that they have given somewhere else. 4300 and the reason that is important is, witnesses, they can change their testimony from case to case or from deposition to trial, but if they do it, if they change their testimony, they get confronted with the changes they made and they get a chance to explain why, and that did not happen. instead, what you saw is they changed their testimony over and over. we counted them up. dr. burns was shown his transcript 17 times during his examination, 24 times for dr. cummings, and 11 times for ms. odom. and i'm going to talk about just a few of those things that i submit you should consider as you are evaluating their believability and their credibility in whether damages have been proven in this case. you have heard about dr. burns and dr. cummings and how they have been paid 5 million dollars and how often they testify for searcy and how often they testify for tobacco. they clearly have an interest in this case. this is what they do. i want to talk to you about one specific instance where ms. thurston [sic] changed her testimony. and the only reason i'm 4301 picking this out is this change in testimony has resulted in there being a significant gap in the proof in this case. you heard ms. odom during her testimony tell you that her mother smoked lucky strike menthols during the 1970s. i asked her, "are you certain it was menthol?" and she said, "yes." the trouble is that you might remember when we got dr. cummings up here and got those maxwell reports out that dr. cummings admitted that lucky strike menthol filters were not even made during the 1970s. so ms. odom testified that her mother smoked throughout the decade of the '70s a cigarette that did not exist, a cigarette that did not exist. and this is an important inconsistency, because as a result of that inconsistency, we do not know what brand of cigarette that ms. thurston smoked in the '70s. we simply do not know that because the evidence before you was that she smoked a brand that did not exist. i want to talk to you about another inconsistency that you were confronted with 4302 during the testimony and that is a way in which dr. cummings changed his opinions. on direct examination in this case dr. cummings testified that african americans metabolize nicotine faster than caucasian smokers and that people who metabolize nicotine faster smoke more cigarettes. i then showed him his prior testimony in which he admitted that he had previously testified that african americans metabolize nicotine slower than caucasian smokers. he also admitted that the data indicated that this is not a race issue, it is not a race issue. african american women and caucasian women quit smoking at the same rates. dr. cummings told you that there is no difference. i'm not going to say any more about this. i will leave it to you to evaluate why you think he changes his testimony from one case to another. as you evaluate the evidence in this case, you know that ms. odom has additional family members. she has a husband randy odom, who did not testify. she has a sister moranda -- 4303 mr. bass: judge, can we approach? the court: sure. (the following discussion was held at sidebar:) mr. bass: judge, you cannot comment on not calling a witness that was equally available to both parties. mr. furr took all these depositions. it is not a failure to call when the witness is available to both parties. mr. furr: and i did not. i'm not commenting on their failure. i'm just saying there is gaps in proof. there is no evidence in this case from these witnesses. the court: that is the same thing. mr. furr: i'll move on then. (sidebar discussion was concluded, and the following proceedings were held in open court:) the court: objection sustained. mr. furr: take that down. i'm not going to say anything more about damages. if you get to that question, we simply leave it to your good judgment and common sense as to whether ms. odom should be made a very wealthy person at this stage of her life because her mother chose to smoke while knowing that 4304 cigarettes were dangerous and addictive and failed to quit even though she had the ability to do so. we leave that question to you. i want to go to the final verdict form question, number 7. how am i doing on time? the clerk: ten minutes left. mr. furr: oh, thank you. okay. question 7, "please state below whether you find by clear and convincing evidence that punitive damages are warranted against reynolds under the circumstances of this case." let me be clear, first of all, you only get to this question, and you will see the directions on your verdict form, you only get to this question if you answered "yes" to either question 3 or 4, that is the concealment claim and the conspiracy to conceal. if you answer "no" to those questions, you never get to this question. "if you answered 'yes' to questions 3 and 4, please proceed to question 7. if you did not answer 'yes' to 3 or 4, you should proceed no further except to sign and date your verdict 4305 form." a very important direction for you to follow so the court can get a verdict in its proper form. so if you said "yes" to either 3 or 4, you would get to this question. punitive damages. what are they? as your instructions tell you. "punitive damages are in addition to damages that would fully compensate ms. odom." you are being asked both to compensate her and to award additional damages above and beyond any damages that she suffered. you will see on your verdict form that they can only be awarded to ms. odom. they cannot be awarded to anybody else. and, again, you will see that they can only be awarded for concealment or agreement to conceal after may 5, 1982 that was a legal cause of ms. odom's death. so it is a very narrow question. these three things are extremely important to keep these legal principles in mind when you get to this question. the burden of proof -- let me back up. robyn, could i have number 19. thank you. the court: she is got them in her hand before you ask for them. 4306 mr. furr: thank you very much. question number 19 -- thanks, robyn -- important to understand. there is a completely separate and very different burden of proof for punitive damages. and that is this, "clear and convincing" -- see punitive damages burden of proof, "clear and convincing evidence differs from the greater weight of the evidence in that it is more compelling and persuasive. as i have already instructed you, 'greater weight of the evidence' means the more persuasive and convincing force and effect of the entire evidence in this case. in contrast, 'clear and convincing evidence' is evidence that is precise, explicit, lacking in confusion and of such weight that it produces a firm belief or conviction, without hesitation, about the matter at issue." when you get to this question, if you hesitate, based on the evidence, they have not proven their case. you see in the very early instruction about the engle findings, but the very last thing it tells you about the engle findings is that the engle findings themselves do not establish that 4307 juanita thurston and gwen odom are entitled to punitive damages. they have to do that through proof other than the engle findings. let us talk about a few of the things you heard about concealment and conspiracy to conceal. i'm not taking those issues on. they are engle findings. i cannot dispute them and i'm not going to try to dispute them, but you are entitled to consider the other side of the coin and things the tobacco companies did to try to get the message about the dangers of smoking to smokers. one of the things you know is how the tobacco companies funded, first, tirc and then ctr, the council for tobacco research. the plaintiff's witnesses told you that the tobacco companies provided more than $500,000,000 in funds, $300,000,000 of which was used in cancer research. remember the grant process where the sab would give grants, just like other scientific granting processes, and provide money to investigators to do their research. 300 million in cancer research. this funded research by the tirc, ctr, which itself had no money, it was 4308 simply using money provided by the tobacco companies, resulted in 6,000 publications, including over 600 that were cited by the surgeon general of the united states in his reports. so the ctr funded research nationwide and funded 10 scientists who went on to become nobel prize winners later in their careers. ctr did a lot of good work. dr. burns and dr. cummings do not really dispute that. dr. burns. "question: and you would agree that ctr funded research that was important to the issue of smoking and health? "answer: yes." dr. cummings. "and is not it true, sir, that when scientists received grants from the ctr and conducted research they were given complete independence as to whether or not they published articles about the research? "answer: yes." during dr. burns' examination you saw an article by a group of doctors, including dr. knapp, where you -- they published a paper funded -- about research funded by ctr in which 4309 in 1963, with tobacco-company money provided to ctr, dr. knapp did research from which he published this in the american journal of psychiatry. "nicotine is an active agent; it appears to have certain addictive qualities. heavy cigarette smokers thus appear to be true addicts. supported in part from grants from the ctr." yes, we know that the tobacco companies provided their opinion to the public over time as to whether they believed that smoking had been proven to be dangerous and addictive. but at the same time they were funding research that could be put out in the public domain that would allow other people to evaluate that research and reach their own conclusions. larson, haag and silvette, "the green monster," funded through the medical college of virginia in 1961 by the ctr using tobacco-company moneys. thousands of articles were abstracted. dr. cummings admitted they were abstracted perfectly accurately. it was given to the surgeon general. the surgeon general relied upon it for historical research and decided that smoking had been shown to be a 4310 cause of lung cancer. what happened? did the tobacco companies close ctr down, take their money and go home? i mean, this was not the result they hoped for; they hoped that the result would be different. notwithstanding that, they continued funding the production of larson, haag and silvette up through the mid 1970s, and you saw the red, blue and either gold or orange books. the clerk: counselor, you have two minutes left. mr. furr: thank you. may i have 5, your honor? the court: all right. both sides get an extra 3 minutes. mr. furr: thank you. okay. just a couple more things. as to whether defendants should be punished. dr. cummings told you that dr. rodgman, a scientist and chemist at reynolds that he respected a great deal, did hundreds of experiments in the 1950s to try to reduce carcinogens. he told you that in the 1980s dr. dimarco led a huge effort at reynolds to develop a heat-but-not-burn, less-mutagenic, 4311 less dangerous cigarette, that reynolds spent over a billion dollars trying to do it. and dr. cummings told you he thought it was safer and the right, responsible thing to do. then during dr. samuel's cross-examination you were shown this, the reynolds website from the day where reynolds voluntarily, voluntarily tells smokers to rely upon the surgeon general of the united states when you are making smoking decisions. "rj reynolds believes that individuals should rely on the conclusion of the u.s. surgeon general, the centers for disease control and other public health and medical officials when making decisions regarding smoking." could i have the verdict form, robyn? if you get to question 7, for all those reasons, including the plaintiff's burden of proof and the abundant evidence that you have seen of reynolds providing information to the public, the answer clearly should be "no" and the case will be over and we will be done in this trial. if you say "yes," we will then come back for another phase early next week. one more thing. i told you from the 4312 beginning this is a simple case. you cannot make them safe, everybody knows and everybody can quit. against that background this country has formulated public policy since the 1950s to allow adults to make their own decisions about whether to smoke or not. it is always been that way. i cannot say it any better than a couple of pieces of evidence that you saw during this case, including the early evidence from dr. hammond in 1955 on see it now. (video clip was played and taken down to the best of the reporter's ability as follows:) voice: in my opinion, people should be warned of the dangers and they are being warned. what they then want to do, whether they want to smoke or not, is their own business. (video clip concluded.) mr. furr: maybe the only person that could say it better would be harry reasoner on cbs in 1964. (video clip was played and taken down to the best of the reporter's ability as follows:) voice: in this kind of a country it comes down to you, whether you like it or not. no one is going to forbid an adult to smoke and it is 4313 now quite clear that no one is going to tell him it is good for him either. the decision is his, the decision and the health that may depend on it. (video clip concluded.) mr. furr: that is the way it is always been. that is the way it still is. thank you very much for your time and attention. i've enjoyed putting this case on before you and his honorable court. thank you very much.